Social Science
India and the Contemporary World - I
Textbook in History for Class IX
First Edition
March 2006
Phalguna 1927
Reprinted
February 2007
Magha 1928
December 2007
Pausa 1929
January 2009
Magha 1930
January 2010
Magha 1931
November 2010  Saka 1932
January 2012  Magha 1933
October 2012 Asvina 1934
November 2013 Kartika 1935
PD 480T MJ
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006
` 95.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division by
the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016
and printed at Amit Printing Press, D-12 &
13, Industrial Area, Site-A, Mathura (UP)
ISBN  81-7450-536-9
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
 This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,  re-
sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any form
of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
 The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
and should be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bangalore 560 085
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021
Phone :  0361-2674869
Publication Team
Head, Publication
: Ashok Srivastava
Division
Chief Production
: Shiv Kumar
Officer
Chief Business Manager
: Gautam Ganguly
Chief Editor
: Naresh Yadav
(Contractual Service)
Editorial Assistant
: Mathew John
Production Assistant
: Subodh Srivastava
Cover and Layout
Parthiv Shah assisted by Shraboni Roy
and Sashi Prabha Jha
Cartography
K Varghese
Foreword
The National Curriculum Framework, 2005, recommends that children’s
life at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle
marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to
shape our system and causes a gap between the school, home and community.
The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt
to implement this basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning
and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between different subject areas.
We hope these measures will take us significantly further in the direction of
a child-centred system of education outlined in the National Policy on
Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and
to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognize that, given
space, time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with
the information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook
as the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources
and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible
if we perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers
of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of teaching
days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and
evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making
children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or
boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of curricular
burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with
greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching.
The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavor by giving higher priority
and space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in
small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
NCERT appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development
committee responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of
the Advisory Group on Social Science, Professor Hari Vasudevan and the
Chief Advisor for this book, Professor Neeladri Bhattacharya for guiding
the  work of this committee. Several teachers contributed to the development
of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for making this
possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations, which
have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and
personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National
Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and
Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under
the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G. P.
Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. As an organisation
committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality
of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will
enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi
National Council of Educational
20 December 2005
Research and Training
As we live our life in the present and read about the happenings around the world in
newspapers, we do not usually pause to think about the longer history of these
events. We see change before our eyes, but do not always ask, why are things changing?
Very often we do not even notice that things were not the same in the past. History
is about tracking these changes, understanding how and why they are taking place,
how the present world in which we live has evolved.
The focus of the history books of Classes IX and X is on the emergence of the contemporary
world. In earlier classes (VI – VIII) you have read about the history of India. In the next
two years (Classes IX and X) you will see how the story of India’s pasts is related to the
larger history of the world. We cannot understand what was happening within India unless
we see this connection. This is particularly true about a world in which economies and
societies have become increasingly inter-connected. History cannot be always contained
within defined territorial boundaries.
In any case there is no reason to think of national territorial boundaries as the only valid unit
of our study. There are times when a focus on a small region - a locality, a village, an island,
a desert tract, a forest, a mountain - helps us understand the rich variety in people’s lives and
histories that make up the life of the nation. We cannot talk of the nation without the
people, nor the locality without the nation. Borrowing from the statement of a famous
French historian, Fernand Braudel, we may also say: it is not possible to talk of the nation
without the world.
The textbooks you will read in the next two years will combine these different levels of
focus. We move between a close focus on particular communities and regions to the
history of the nation; between the histories as they unfold in India and Europe to the
developments in Africa and Indonesia.  Our focus will shift according
to themes.
What are these themes and how are they organised? What is the logic behind the
choices of themes?
All too often in the past, the history of the modern world was associated with the
history of the west. It was as if change and progress happened only in the west. As if
the histories of other countries were frozen in time, they were motionless and static.
People in the west were seen as enterprising, innovative, scientific, industrious, efficient
and willing to change. People in the east - or in Africa and South America - were
considered traditional, lazy, superstitious, and resistant to change.
For many years now these notions have been questioned by historians. We know
now that every society has had its history of change. So in understanding the making
of the modern world we have to look at the way different societies experienced and
History and a Changing World
fashioned these changes. We have to see how the histories of these different countries
were inter-linked. Changes in one society shaped the other; developments in India and
other colonies impacted on Europe. The contemporary world was not shaped by the
west alone.
So the history of the contemporary world is not only about the growth of
industries and trade, technology and science, railways and roads. It is equally
about the forest dwellers and pastoralists, shifting cultivators and small peasants.
All these social groups in diverse ways have played their part in making the
contemporary world what it is. And it is this varied world which you will learn
about this year.
The textbooks of Classes IX and X have eight chapters each, divided into three
sections. We hope you will enjoy reading all the chapters. But you are requried
to read only five chapters: two each from Sections I and II, and one from
Section III.
Section I, in both books, focuses on some of the events and processes that are critical
to the understanding of the modern world. This year you will read about the French
Revolution, the Russian Revolution and Nazism in this section. Next year you will
know about nationalism and anti-colonial movements, in India and elsewhere.
Section II will move from dramatic events to the routines of people’s lives – their
economic activities and livelihood patterns. You will see what the contemporary
world has meant for forest people, pastoralists and peasants; and how they have
coped with and defined the nature of these changes. Next year you will read
more about the processes of industrialisation and urbanisation, capitalism
and colonialism.
Section III will introduce you to histories of everyday life. You will read about
the history of sport and clothing (Class IX) and about printing and reading, novels and
newspapers (Class X). Why should we study the history of sport and clothing, you
might ask. Do we not read about them every day in newspapers and magazines?
True, we read a lot about such issues. But what we read does not tell us about their
histories. They give us no idea of how things have evolved and why they change. Once
we learn to ask historical questions about all that is around us, history in fact acquires a
new meaning. It allows us to see everyday things from a different angle. We realise that
even seemingly ordinary things have a history that is important for us to know.
To know how the contemporary world has evolved we will therefore move from
India to Africa, from Europe to Indonesia. We will read both about the big events
and important ideas, as well as everyday life. In the process of these journeys you
will discover how history can be exciting, how it can help us understand the world
in which we live.
Neeladri Bhattacharya
Chief  Advisor - History
Monica Juneja, Professor, Maria-Goeppert-Mayer Guest Professor,
Historisches Seminar, University of Hanover, Germany (Chapter 1).
Vandana Joshi, Lecturer, Venkateswara College, University of Delhi,
New Delhi (Chapter 3).
Nandini Sundar, Professor, Department of Sociology, Delhi School of
Economics, University of Delhi, Delhi(Chapter 4).
Mukul Kesavan, Professor, Department of History, Jamia Millia Islamia,
New Delhi (Chapter 7).
Janaki Nair, Professor, Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Kolkata (Chapter 8).
Rekha Krishnan, Head of Senior School, Vasant Valley School, New Delhi
Rashmi Paliwal, Eklavya, Hoshangabad, Madhya Pradesh.
Ajay Dandekar, Visiting fellow, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai.
Pritish Acharya, Reader, Regional Institute of Education, Bhubaneswar,
Orissa.
Member–Coordinator
Kiran Devendra, Professor, Department of Elementary Education, NCERT,
New Delhi.
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SOCIAL SCIENCE FOR THE
SECONDARY STAGE
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, Calcutta University, Kolkata
(Chapter 2).
CHIEF ADVISOR
Neeladri Bhattacharya, Professor, Centre for Historical Studies, School of Social
Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi (Chapters 5 and 6).
Members
Textbook Development Committee
Acknowledgements
This book is the result of a collective effort of a large number of historians,
teachers, and educationalists. Each chapter has been written, discussed and
revised over many months. We would like to thank all those who have
participated in these discussions.
A large number of people have read individual chapters of the book. We
thank in particular the members of the Monitoring Committee who
commented on an earlier draft; Narayani Gupta and Kumkum Roy who
provided constant encouragement and support, and Richard Evans who read
the Chapter on Nazism. We have tried to incorporate most of the suggestions
that have been made on the manuscript.
Illustrating the book would have been impossible without the help of many
institutions and individuals. The Maasai Association, the North Dakota State
University Libraries, the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, the
UNESCO PARZOR project and the Centre for Women’s Development
Studies, New Delhi provided photographs and reproductions from their
archive at very short notice. Some of the pictures have been accessed from
the collections of the Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division,
the Jewish Historical Institute, Warsaw, Poland,  Rabindra Bhawan Photo
Archives, Viswabharati University, Shantiniketan. Sanjay Barnela, Mukul Mangalik,
and Vasant Saberwal allowed generous access to their large collection of
photographs of pastoralists and forest dwellers. We turned to Malvika Karlekar
for help in acquiring some of the pictures for the chapter on clothing, and to Ram
Guha for photographs on cricket. Anish Vanaik helped in our photo research.
Shalini Advani did several rounds of copy editing with care, and ensured that the
text was accessible to children. Shyama Warner has done more than proof reading.
We thank them both for meeting our impossible deadlines and being so involved
with the project.
We have made every effort to acknowledge credits at the end of the book;
but we apologise in advance for any omissions that may have inadvertently
taken place.
Foreword
History and a Changing World
Section I: Events and Processes
I. The French Revolution
II. Socialism in Europe and the Russian Revolution
III. Nazism and the Rise of Hitler
Section II: Livelihoods, Economies and Societies
75-138
IV. Forest Society and Colonialism
V. Pastoralists in the Modern World
VI. Peasants and Farmers
Section III: Everyday Life, Culture and Politics
139-178
VII. History and Sport: The Story of Cricket
VIII. Clothing: A Social History
CREDITS
Contents
T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n
In Section I, you will read about the French Revolution, the Russian Revolution,
and the rise of Nazism. In different ways all these events were important in the
making of the modern world.
Chapter I is on the French Revolution. Today we often take the ideas of liberty,
freedom and equality for granted. But we need to remind ourselves that these ideas
also have a history. By looking at the French Revolution you will read a small part
of that history. The French Revolution led to the end of monarchy in France. A
society based on privileges gave way to a new system of governance. The Declaration
of the Rights of Man during the revolution, announced the coming of a new time.
The idea that all individuals had rights and could claim equality became part of a
new language of politics. These notions of equality and freedom emerged as the central
ideas of a new age; but in different countries they were reinterpreted and rethought
in many different ways. The anti-colonial movements in India and China, Africa and
South America, produced ideas that were innovative and original, but they spoke in
a language that gained currency only from the late eighteenth century.
In Chapter II, you will read about the coming of socialism in Europe, and the dramatic
events that forced the ruling monarch, Tsar Nicholas II, to give up power. The Russian
Revolution sought to change society in a different way. It raised the question of
economic equality and the well-being of workers and peasants. The chapter will tell
you about the changes that were initiated by the new Soviet government, the problems
it faced and the measures it undertook. While Soviet Russia pushed ahead with
industrialisation and mechanisation of agriculture, it denied the rights of citizens
that were essential to the working of a democratic society. The ideals of socialism,
EVENTS AND PROCESSES
SECTION I
EVENTS AND PROCESSES
India and the Contemporary World
however, became part of the anti-colonial movements in different countries. Today
the Soviet Union has broken up and socialism is in crisis but through the twentieth
century it has been a powerful force in the shaping of the contemporary world.
Chapter III will take you to Germany. It will discuss the rise of Hitler and the
politics of Nazism. You will read about the children and women in Nazi Germany,
about schools and concentration camps. You will see how Nazism denied various
minorities a right to live, how it drew upon a long tradition of anti-Jewish feelings
to persecute the Jews, and how it waged a relentless battle against democracy and
socialism. But the story of Nazism’s rise is not only about a few specific events,
about massacres and killings. It is about the working of an elaborate and frightening
system which operated at different levels. Some in India were impressed with the
ideas of Hitler but most watched the rise of Nazism with horror.
The history of the modern world is not simply a story of the unfolding of freedom
and democracy. It has also been a story of violence and tyranny, death and destruction.
T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n
On the morning of 14 July 1789, the city of Paris was in a state of
alarm. The king had commanded troops to move into the city. Rumours
spread that he would soon order the army to open fire upon the citizens.
Some 7,000 men and women gathered in front of the town hall and
decided to form a peoples’ militia. They broke into a number of
government buildings in search of  arms.
Finally, a group of several hundred people marched towards the eastern
part of the city and stormed the fortress-prison, the Bastille, where they
hoped to find hoarded ammunition. In the armed fight that followed,
the commander of the Bastille was killed and the prisoners released –
though there were only seven of  them. Yet the Bastille was hated by all,
because it stood for the despotic power of  the king. The fortress was
demolished and its stone fragments were sold in the markets to all
those who wished to keep a souvenir of its destruction.
The days that followed saw more rioting both in Paris and the
countryside. Most people were protesting against the high price of bread.
Much later, when historians looked back upon this time, they saw it as
the beginning of a chain of events that ultimately led to the execution
of the king in France, though most people at the time did not anticipate
this outcome. How and why did this happen?
The French Revolution
The French Revolution
The French Revolution
The French Revolution
The French Revolution
T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n
Fig.1 – Storming of the Bastille.
Soon after the demolition of the Bastille,
artists made prints commemorating the event.
Chapter I
India and the Contemporary World
In 1774, Louis XVI of the Bourbon family of kings ascended the
throne of France. He was 20 years old and married to the Austrian
princess Marie Antoinette. Upon his accession the new king found
an empty treasury. Long years of war had drained the financial
resources of France. Added to this was the cost of maintaining an
extravagant court at the immense palace of Versailles. Under Louis
XVI, France helped the thirteen American colonies to gain their
independence from the common enemy, Britain. The war added more
than a billion livres to a debt that had already risen to more than 2
billion livres. Lenders who gave the state credit, now began to charge
10 per cent interest on loans. So the French government was obliged
to spend an increasing percentage of its budget on interest payments
alone. To meet its regular expenses, such as the cost of maintaining
an army, the court, running government offices or universities, the
state was forced to increase taxes. Yet even this measure would not
have sufficed. French society in the eighteenth century was divided
into three estates, and only members of the third estate paid taxes.
The society of estates was part of the feudal system that dated back to
the middle ages. The term Old Regime is usually used to describe the
society and institutions of France before 1789.
Fig. 2 shows how the system of  estates in French society was organised.
Peasants made up about 90 per cent of the population. However,
only a small number of them owned the land they cultivated. About
60 per cent of the land was owned by nobles, the Church and other
richer members of the third estate. The members of the first two
estates, that is, the clergy and the nobility, enjoyed certain privileges by
birth. The most important of these was exemption from paying taxes to
the state. The nobles further enjoyed feudal privileges. These included
feudal dues, which they extracted from the peasants. Peasants were obliged
to render services to the lord – to work in his house and fields – to serve
in the army or to participate in building roads.
The Church too extracted its share of taxes called tithes from the peasants,
and finally, all members of  the third estate had to pay taxes to the state.
These included a direct tax, called taille, and a number of indirect taxes
which were levied on articles of everyday consumption like salt or tobacco.
The burden of financing activities of the state through taxes was borne
by the third estate alone.
New words
Livre – Unit of currency in France,
discontinued in 1794
Clergy – Group of  persons invested with
special functions in the church
Tithe – A tax levied by the church, comprising
one-tenth of the agricultural produce
Taille – Tax to be paid directly to the state
1  French Society During the Late Eighteenth Century
Clergy
Nobility
Peasants and
artisans
Small peasants,
landless labour,
servants
Big businessmen,
merchants, court
officials, lawyers etc.
Fig.2 – A Society of Estates.
Note that within the Third Estate some were
rich and others poor.
1st estate
3rd estate
2nd estate
T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n
‘This poor fellow brings everything,
grain, fruits, money, salad. The fat lord
sits there, ready to accept it all. He does
not even care to grace him with a look.’
‘The nobleman is the spider,
the peasant the fly.’
Explain why the artist has portrayed the
nobleman as the spider and the peasant
as the fly.
Fig.3 – The Spider and the Fly.
An anonymous etching.
‘The more the devil has, the more he wants.’
Activity
1.1 The Struggle to Survive
The population of France rose from about 23 million in 1715 to 28
million in 1789. This led to a rapid increase in the demand for
foodgrains. Production of grains could not keep pace with the
demand. So the price of bread which was the staple diet of the majority
rose rapidly. Most workers were employed as labourers in workshops
whose owner fixed their wages. But wages did not keep pace with
the rise in prices. So the gap between the poor and the rich widened.
Things became worse whenever drought or hail reduced the harvest.
This led to a subsistence crisis, something that occurred frequently
in France during the Old Regime.
New words
Subsistence crisis – An extreme situation where
the basic means of livelihood are endangered
Anonymous – One whose name remains
unknown
India and the Contemporary World
Activity
1.2 How a Subsistence Crisis Happens
Fill in the blank boxes in Fig. 4 with
appropriate terms from among the following:
Food riots, scarcity of grain, increased
number of deaths, rising food prices,
weaker bodies.
1.3 A Growing Middle Class Envisages an End to Privileges
In the past, peasants and workers had participated in revolts against
increasing taxes and food scarcity. But they lacked the means and
programmes to carry out full-scale measures that would bring about
a change in the social and economic order. This was left to those
groups within the third estate who had become prosperous and had
access to education and new ideas.
The eighteenth century witnessed the emergence of social groups,
termed the middle class, who earned their wealth through an
expanding overseas trade and from the manufacture of goods such as
woollen and silk textiles that were either exported or bought by the
richer members of society. In addition to merchants and
manufacturers, the third estate included professions such as lawyers
or administrative officials. All of these were educated and believed
that no group in society should be privileged by birth. Rather, a
person’s social position must depend on his merit. These ideas
envisaging a society based on freedom and equal laws and
opportunities for all, were put forward by philosophers such as John
Locke and Jean Jacques Rousseau. In his Two Treatises of  Government,
Locke sought to refute the doctrine of the divine and absolute right
Fig.4 – The course of a subsistence crisis.
The poorest can no
longer buy bread
harvest
Disease
epidemics
T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n
Source A
Accounts of lived experiences in the Old Regime
1. Georges Danton, who later became active in revolutionary politics, wrote to a friend in
1793, looking back upon the time when he had just completed his studies:
‘I was educated in the residential college of Plessis. There I was in the company of
important men … Once my studies ended, I was left with nothing. I started looking for a
post. It was impossible to find one at the law courts in Paris. The choice of a career in the
army was not open to me as I was not a noble by birth, nor did I have a patron. The
church too could not offer me a refuge. I could not buy an office as I did not possess a
sou. My old friends turned their backs to me … the system had provided us with an
education without however offering a field where our talents could be utilised.’
2. An Englishman, Arthur Young, travelled through France during the years from 1787 to
1789 and wrote detailed descriptions of his journeys. He often commented on what he
‘He who decides to be served and waited upon by slaves, ill-treated slaves at that, must
be fully aware that by doing so he is placing his property and his life in a situation which is
very different from that he would be in, had he chosen the services of free and well-
treated men. And he who chooses to dine to the accompaniment of his victims’ groans,
should not complain if during a riot his daughter gets kidnapped or his son’s throat is slit.’
What message is Young trying to convey here? Whom does he mean when he speaks of‘ ‘slaves’?
Who is he criticising? What dangers does he sense in the situation of 1787?
Activity
of the monarch. Rousseau carried the idea forward, proposing a
form of government based on a social contract between people
and their representatives. In The Spirit of the Laws, Montesquieu
proposed a division of power within the government between
the legislative, the executive and the judiciary. This model of
government was put into force in the USA, after the thirteen
colonies declared their independence from Britain. The American
constitution and its guarantee of individual rights was an important
example for political thinkers in France.
The ideas of these philosophers were discussed intensively in salons
and coffee-houses and spread among people through books and
newspapers. These were frequently read aloud in groups for the
benefit of those who could not read and write. The news that
Louis XVI planned to impose further taxes to be able to meet the
expenses of the state generated anger and protest against the system
of privileges.
Source
India and the Contemporary World
Louis XVI had to increase taxes for reasons you have learnt in the
previous section. How do you think he could have gone about doing
this? In France of the Old Regime the monarch did not have the
power to impose taxes according to his will alone. Rather he had to
call a meeting of the Estates General which would then pass his
proposals for new taxes. The Estates General was a political body to
which the three estates sent their representatives. However, the
monarch alone could decide when to call a meeting of this body. The
last time it was done was in 1614.
On 5 May 1789, Louis XVI called together an assembly of the Estates
General to pass proposals for new taxes. A resplendent hall in
Versailles was prepared to host the delegates. The first and second
estates sent 300 representatives each, who were seated in rows facing
each other on two sides, while the 600 members of the third estate
had to stand at the back. The third estate was represented by its more
prosperous and educated members. Peasants, artisans and women
were denied entry to the assembly. However, their grievances and
demands were listed in some 40,000 letters which the representatives
had brought with them.
Voting in the Estates General in the past had been conducted according
to the principle that each estate had one vote. This time too Louis
XVI was determined to continue the same practice. But members of
the third estate demanded that voting now be conducted by the
assembly as a  whole, where each member would have one vote. This
was one of the democratic principles put forward by philosophers
like Rousseau in his book The Social Contract. When the king rejected
this proposal, members of the third estate walked out of the assembly
in protest.
The representatives of the third estate viewed themselves as spokesmen
for the whole French nation. On 20 June they assembled in the hall
of an indoor tennis court in the grounds of Versailles. They declared
themselves a National Assembly and swore not to disperse till they
had drafted a constitution for France that would limit the powers of
the monarch. They were led by Mirabeau and Abbé Sieyès. Mirabeau
was born in a noble family but was convinced of the need to do away
with a society of feudal privilege. He brought out a journal and
delivered powerful speeches to the crowds assembled at Versailles.
2  The Outbreak of the Revolution
Activity
Representatives of the Third Estate take the
oath raising their arms in the direction of
Bailly, the President of the Assembly,
standing on a table in the centre. Do you
think that during the actual event Bailly
would  have stood with his back to the
assembled deputies? What could have
been David’s intention in placing Bailly
(Fig.5) the way he has done?
Some important dates
Louis XVI becomes king of France, faces
empty treasury and growing discontent
within society of the Old Regime.
Convocation of Estates General, Third
Estate forms National Assembly, the
Bastille is stormed, peasant revolts in the
countryside.
A constitution is framed to limit the powers
of the king and to guarantee basic rights to
all human beings.
1792-93
France becomes a republic, the king is
beheaded.
Overthrow of the Jacobin republic, a
Directory rules France.
Napoleon becomes emperor of France,
annexes large parts of Europe.
Napoleon defeated at Waterloo.
T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n
Abbé Sieyès, originally a priest, wrote an influential pamphlet called
‘What is the Third Estate’?
While the National Assembly was busy at Versailles drafting a
constitution, the rest of France seethed with turmoil. A severe winter
had meant a bad harvest; the price of bread rose, often bakers exploited
the situation and hoarded supplies. After spending hours in long
queues at the bakery, crowds of angry women stormed into the
shops. At the same time, the king ordered troops to move into Paris.
On 14 July, the agitated crowd stormed and destroyed the Bastille.
In the countryside rumours spread from village to village that the
lords of the manor had hired bands of brigands who were on their
way to destroy the ripe crops. Caught in a frenzy of fear, peasants in
several districts seized hoes and pitchforks and attacked chateaux.
They looted hoarded grain and burnt down documents containing
records of manorial dues. A large number of nobles fled from their
homes, many of them migrating to neighbouring countries.
Faced with the power of his revolting subjects, Louis XVI finally
accorded recognition to the National Assembly and accepted the
principle that his powers would from now on be checked by a
constitution. On the night of 4 August 1789, the Assembly passed a
decree abolishing the feudal system of obligations and taxes. Members
of the clergy too were forced to give up their privileges. Tithes were
abolished and lands owned by the Church were confiscated. As a
result, the government acquired assets worth at least 2 billion livres.
New words
Chateau (pl. chateaux)  – Castle or stately
residence belonging to a king or a nobleman
Manor – An estate consisting of the lord’s
lands and his mansion
Fig.5 – The Tennis Court Oath.
Preparatory sketch for a large painting by Jacques-Louis David. The painting was intended to be hung in the National Assembly.
Fig.6 – The spread of the Great Fear.
The map shows how bands of peasants spread
from one point to another.
Regions not affected by the Great Fear
Areas of agrarian revolt early 1789
Epicentres of main panic movements
The spread of the Great Fear
India and the Contemporary World
2.1 France Becomes a Constitutional Monarchy
The National Assembly completed the draft of the constitution in
1791. Its main object was to limit the powers of the monarch. These
powers instead of being concentrated in the hands of one person,
were now separated and assigned to different institutions – the
legislature, executive and judiciary. This made France a constitutional
monarchy. Fig. 7 explains how the new political system worked.
The Constitution of 1791 vested the power to make laws in the
National Assembly, which was indirectly elected. That is, citizens
voted for a group of electors, who in turn chose the Assembly. Not
all citizens, however, had the right to vote. Only men above 25 years
of age who paid taxes equal to at least 3 days of a labourer’s wage
were given the status of active citizens, that is, they were entitled to
vote. The remaining men and all women were classed as passive
citizens. To qualify as an elector and then as a member of the Assembly,
a man had to belong to the highest bracket of taxpayers.
Fig.7 – The Political sytstem under the Constitution of 1791.
Judiciary
Executive
Legislature
Judge
National Assembly (745 members)
Electors (50,000 men)
Ministers
Active citizens: entitled to vote. About 4 million of a
population of 28 million
Passive citizens: no voting rights. About 3 million men
Women, children and youth below 25.
CONTROL
CONTROL
T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n
The Constitution began with a Declaration of the Rights of Man
and Citizen. Rights such as the right to life, freedom of speech,
freedom of opinion, equality before law, were established as ‘natural
and inalienable’ rights, that is, they belonged to each human being
by birth and could not be taken away. It was the duty of the state to
protect each citizen’s natural rights.
The revolutionary journalist Jean-Paul
Marat commented in his newspaper
L’Ami du peuple (The friend of the
people) on the Constitution drafted by
the National Assembly:
‘The task of representing the people
has been given to the rich … the lot of
the poor and oppressed will never be
improved by peaceful means alone. Here
we have absolute proof of how wealth
influences the law.  Yet laws will last only as long as the people
agree to obey them. And when they have managed to cast off
the yoke of the aristocrats, they will do the same to the other
owners of wealth.’
Source: An extract from the newspaper L’Ami du peuple.
Fig.8 – The Declaration of the Rights of Man
and Citizen, painted by the artist Le Barbier in
1790. The figure on the right represents France.
The figure on the left symbolises the law.
The Declaration of Rights of Man and
Citizen
1. Men are born and remain free and  equal
in rights.
2. The aim of every political association is
the preservation of the natural and
inalienable rights of man; these are liberty,
property, security and resistance to
oppression.
3. The source of all sovereignty resides in
the nation; no group or individual may
exercise authority that does not come
from the people.
4. Liberty consists of the power to do
whatever is not injurious to others.
5. The law has the right to forbid only
actions that are injurious to society.
6. Law is the expression of the general
will. All citizens have the right to participate
in its formation, personally or through their
representatives. All citizens are equal
before it.
7. No man may be accused, arrested or
detained, except in cases determined by
the law.
11. Every citizen may speak, write and print
freely; he must take responsibility for the
abuse of such liberty in cases determined
by the law.
12. For the maintenance of the public
force
expenses
administration a common tax is
indispensable; it must be assessed equally
on all citizens in proportion to their means.
17. Since property is a sacred and inviolable
right, no one may be deprived of it, unless
a legally established public necessity
requires it. In that case a just
compensation must be given in advance.
Source C
Source B
India and the Contemporary World
Box 1
Reading political symbols
The majority of men and women in the eighteenth century could not read or write. So images and symbols
were frequently used instead of printed words to communicate important ideas. The painting by Le Barbier
(Fig. 8) uses many such symbols to convey the content of the Declaration of Rights. Let us try to read
these symbols.
Snake biting its tail to form a ring: Symbol of
Eternity. A ring has neither beginning nor end.
Sceptre: Symbol of royal power.
The eye within a triangle radiating light: The all-
seeing eye stands for knowledge. The rays of the sun
will drive away the clouds of ignorance.
The bundle of rods or fasces: One rod
can be easily broken, but not an entire
bundle. Strength lies in unity.
The broken chain: Chains were used to fetter slaves.
A broken chain stands for the act of becoming free.
T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n
Activity
1. Identify the symbols in Box 1 which stand
for liberty, equality and fraternity.
2. Explain the meaning of the painting of the
Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen
(Fig. 8) by reading only the symbols.
3. Compare the political rights which the
Constitution of 1791 gave to the citizens
with Articles 1 and 6 of the Declaration
(Source C). Are the two documents
consistent? Do the two documents convey
the same idea?
4. Which groups of French society would have
gained from the Constitution of 1791?
Which groups would have had reason to
be dissatisfied? What developments does
Marat  (Source B) anticipate in the future?
5. Imagine the impact of the events in France
on neighbouring countries such as Prussia,
Austria-Hungary or Spain, all of which were
absolute monarchies. How would the kings,
traders, peasants, nobles or members of
the clergy here have reacted to the news of
what was happening in France?
Red Phrygian cap: Cap worn by a slave
upon becoming free.
Blue-white-red: The
national colours of France.
The winged woman:
Personification of the law.
The Law Tablet: The law is the same for all,
and all are equal before it.
India and the Contemporary World
The situation in France continued to be tense during the following years.
Although Louis XVI had signed the Constitution, he entered into secret
negotiations with the King of Prussia. Rulers of other neighbouring
countries too were worried by the developments in France and made
plans to send troops to put down the events that had been taking place
there since the summer of 1789. Before this could happen, the National
Assembly voted in April 1792 to declare war against Prussia and Austria.
Thousands of volunteers thronged from the provinces to join the army.
They saw this as a war of the people against kings and aristocracies all
over Europe. Among the patriotic songs they sang was the Marseillaise,
composed by the poet Roget de L’Isle. It was sung for the first time by
volunteers from Marseilles as they marched into Paris and so got its
name. The Marseillaise is now the national anthem of France.
The revolutionary wars brought losses and economic difficulties
to the people. While the men were away fighting at the front,
women were left to cope with the tasks of earning a living and
looking after their families. Large sections of the population were
convinced that the revolution had to be carried further, as the
Constitution of 1791 gave political rights only to the richer sections
of society. Political clubs became an important rallying point for
people who wished to discuss government policies and plan their
own forms of action. The most successful of these clubs was that of
the Jacobins, which got its name from the former convent of St
Jacob in Paris. Women too, who had been active throughout this
period, formed their own clubs. Section 4 of this chapter will tell
you more about their activities and demands.
The members of the Jacobin club belonged mainly to the less
prosperous sections of society. They included small shopkeepers,
artisans such as shoemakers, pastry cooks, watch-makers, printers,
as well as servants and daily-wage workers. Their leader was
Maximilian Robespierre. A large group among the Jacobins decided
to start wearing long striped trousers similar to those worn by
dock workers. This was to set themselves apart from the fashionable
sections of society, especially nobles, who wore knee breeches. It
3 France Abolishes Monarchy and Becomes a Republic
France Abolishes Monarchy and Becomes a Republic
France Abolishes Monarchy and Becomes a Republic
France Abolishes Monarchy and Becomes a Republic
France Abolishes Monarchy and Becomes a Republic
Fig.9 – A sans-culottes couple.
New words
Convent – Building belonging to a community devoted to a
religious life
T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n
Activity
Fig.10 – Nanine Vallain, Liberty.
This is one of the rare paintings by a woman artist.
The revolutionary events made it possible for
women to train with established painters and to
exhibit their works in the Salon, which was an
exhibition held every two years.
The painting is a female allegory of liberty – that
is, the female form symbolises the idea of freedom.
Look carefully at the painting and identify the
objects which are political symbols you saw in
Box 1 (broken chain, red cap, fasces, Charter
of the Declaration of Rights). The pyramid
stands for equality, often represented by a
triangle. Use the symbols to interpret the
painting. Describe your impressions of the
female figure of liberty.
was a way of proclaiming the end of the power wielded by the
wearers of knee breeches. These Jacobins came to be known as the
sans-culottes, literally meaning ‘those without knee breeches’. Sans-
culottes men wore in addition the red cap that symbolised liberty.
Women however were not allowed to do so.
In the summer of 1792 the Jacobins planned an insurrection of a
large number of Parisians who were angered by the short supplies
and high prices of food. On the morning of August 10 they stormed
the Palace of the Tuileries, massacred the king’s guards and held
the king himself as hostage for several hours. Later the Assembly
voted to imprison the royal family. Elections were held. From now
on all men of 21 years and above, regardless of wealth, got the right
to vote.
The newly elected assembly was called the Convention. On
21 September 1792 it abolished the monarchy and declared France
a republic. As you know, a republic is a form of government where
the people elect the government including the head of the
India and the Contemporary World
What is liberty? Two conflicting views:
The revolutionary journalist Camille
Desmoulins wrote the following in 1793. He
was executed shortly after, during the Reign
of Terror.
‘Some people believe that Liberty is like a
child, which needs to go through a phase of
being disciplined before it attains maturity.
Quite the opposite. Liberty is Happiness,
Reason, Equality, Justice, it is the Declaration
of Rights … You would like to finish off all
your enemies by guillotining them. Has
anyone heard of something more senseless?
Would it be possible to bring a single person
to the scaffold without making ten more
enemies among his relations and friends?’
On 7 February 1794,
Robespierre made a
speech
Convention, which was
then carried by the
newspaper Le  Moniteur
Universel. Here is an
extract from it:
‘To establish and consolidate democracy, to
achieve the peaceful rule of constitutional
laws, we must first finish the war of liberty
against tyranny …. We must annihilate the
enemies of the republic at home and abroad,
or else we shall perish. In time of Revolution
a democratic government may rely on terror.
Terror is nothing but justice, swift, severe
and inflexible; … and is used to meet the
most urgent needs of the fatherland. To curb
the enemies of Liberty through terror is the
right of the founder of the Republic.’
Activity
Compare the views of Desmoulins and Robespierre. How does
each one understand the use of state force? What does
Robespierre mean by ‘the war of liberty against tyranny’? How
does Desmoulins perceive liberty? Refer once more to Source C.
What did the constitutional laws on the rights of individuals lay
down? Discuss your views on the subject in class.
Source D
New words
Treason – Betrayal of  one’s country or
government
government. There is no hereditary monarchy. You can try and
find out about some other countries that are republics and investigate
when and how they became so.
Louis XVI was sentenced to death by a court on the charge of
treason. On 21 January 1793 he was executed publicly at the
Place de la Concorde. The queen Marie Antoinette met with the
same fate shortly after.
3.1 The Reign of Terror
The period from 1793 to 1794 is referred to as the Reign of
Terror. Robespierre followed a policy of severe control and
punishment. All those whom he saw as being ‘enemies’ of the
republic – ex-nobles and clergy, members of other political
parties, even members of his own party who did not agree with
his methods – were arrested, imprisoned and then tried by a
revolutionary tribunal. If the court found them ‘guilty’ they
were guillotined. The guillotine is a device consisting of two
poles and a blade with which a person is beheaded. It was named
after Dr Guillotin who invented it.
Robespierre’s government issued laws placing a maximum ceiling
on wages and prices. Meat and bread were rationed. Peasants
were forced to transport their grain to the cities and sell it at
prices fixed by the government. The use of more expensive white
flour was forbidden; all citizens were required to eat the pain
d’égalité (equality bread), a loaf made of wholewheat. Equality
was also sought to be practised through forms of speech and
address. Instead of the traditional Monsieur (Sir) and Madame
(Madam) all French men and women were henceforth Citoyen
and Citoyenne (Citizen). Churches were shut down and their
buildings converted into barracks or offices.
Robespierre pursued his policies so relentlessly that even his
supporters began to demand moderation. Finally, he was
convicted by a court in July 1794, arrested and on the next day
sent to the guillotine.
T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n
Fig.11 – The revolutionary government sought to mobilise the loyalty of its subjects through various means – one of
them was the staging of festivals like this one. Symbols from civilisations of ancient Greece and Rome were used to convey
the aura of a hallowed history. The pavilion on the raised platform in the middle carried by classical columns was made of
perishable material that could be dismantled. Describe the groups of people, their clothes, their roles and actions. What
impression of a revolutionary festival does this image convey?
3.2 A Directory Rules France
The fall of the Jacobin government allowed the wealthier middle
classes to seize power. A new constitution was introduced which
denied the vote to non-propertied sections of society. It provided
for two elected legislative councils. These then appointed a Directory,
an executive made up of five members. This was meant as a safeguard
against the concentration of power in a one-man executive as under
the Jacobins. However, the Directors often clashed with the legislative
councils, who then sought to dismiss them. The political instability
of the Directory paved the way for the rise of a military dictator,
Napoleon Bonaparte.
Through all these changes in the form of government, the ideals of
freedom, of equality before the law and of fraternity remained inspiring
ideals that motivated political movements in France and the rest of Europe
during the following century.
India and the Contemporary World
4 Did Women have a Revolution?
Did Women have a Revolution?
Did Women have a Revolution?
Did Women have a Revolution?
Did Women have a Revolution?
Fig.12 – Parisian women on their way to Versailles.
This print is one of the many pictorial representations of the events of 5 October 1789, when women marched to Versailles
and brought the king back with them to Paris.
From the very beginning women were active participants in the events
which brought about so many important changes in French society.
They hoped that their involvement would pressurise the revolutionary
government to introduce measures to improve their lives. Most
women of the third estate had to work for a living. They worked as
seamstresses or laundresses, sold flowers, fruits and vegetables at the
market, or were employed as domestic servants in the houses of
prosperous people. Most women did not have access to education or
job training. Only daughters of nobles or wealthier members of the
third estate could study at a convent, after which their families
arranged a marriage for them. Working women had also to care for
their families, that is, cook, fetch water, queue up for bread and
look after the children. Their wages were lower than those of men.
In order to discuss and voice their interests women started their own
political clubs and newspapers. About sixty women’s clubs came up
in different French cities. The Society of Revolutionary and
Republican Women was the most famous of them. One of their
Activity
Describe the persons represented in
Fig. 12 – their actions, their postures, the
objects they are carrying. Look carefully to
see whether all of them come from the
same social group. What symbols has the
artist included in the image? What do they
stand for? Do the actions of the women
reflect traditional ideas of how women
were expected to behave in public? What
do you think: does the artist sympathise
with the women’s activities or is he critical
of them? Discuss your views in the class.
T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n
main demands was that women enjoy the same political rights as
men. Women were disappointed that the Constitution of 1791 reduced
them to passive citizens. They demanded the right to vote, to be
elected to the Assembly and to hold political office. Only then, they
felt, would their interests be represented in the new government.
In the early years, the revolutionary government did introduce laws
that helped improve the lives of women. Together with the creation
of state schools, schooling was made compulsory for all girls. Their
fathers could no longer force them into marriage against their will.
Marriage was made into a contract entered into freely and registered
under civil law. Divorce was made legal, and could be applied for by
both women and men. Women could now train for jobs, could
become artists or run small businesses.
Women’s struggle for equal political rights, however, continued.
During the Reign of Terror, the new government issued laws ordering
closure of women’s clubs and banning their political activities. Many
prominent women were arrested and a number of them executed.
Women’s movements for voting rights and equal wages continued
through the next two hundred years in many countries of the world.
The fight for the vote was carried out through an international
suffrage movement during the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. The example of the political activities of French women
during the revolutionary years was kept alive as an inspiring memory.
It was finally in 1946 that women in France won the right to vote.
The life of a revolutionary woman – Olympe de Gouges
(1748-1793)
Olympe de Gouges was one of the most important of the politically
active women in revolutionary France. She protested against the
Constitution and the Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen as
they excluded women from basic rights that each human being was
entitled to. So, in 1791, she wrote a Declaration of the Rights of
Woman and Citizen, which she addressed to the Queen and to the
members of the National Assembly, demanding that they act upon
it. In 1793, Olympe de Gouges criticised the Jacobin government
for forcibly closing down women’s clubs. She was tried by the
National Convention, which charged her with treason. Soon after
this she was executed.
Source E
India and the Contemporary World
Activity
Source F
Some of the basic rights set forth in Olympe de Gouges’
Declaration.
1. Woman is born free and remains equal to man in rights.
2. The goal of all political associations is the preservation of the natural
rights of woman and man: These rights are liberty, property, security,
and above all resistance to oppression.
3. The source of all sovereignty resides in the nation, which is nothing
but the union of woman and man.
4. The law should be the expression of the general will; all female and
male citizens should have a say either personally or by their
representatives in its formulation; it should be the same for all. All
female and male citizens are equally entitled to all honours
and public employment according to their abilities and without any
other distinction than that of their talents.
5. No woman is an exception; she is accused, arrested, and detained in
cases determined by law. Women, like men, obey this rigorous law.
Compare the manifesto drafted by Olympe de
Gouges (Source F) with the Declaration of the
Rights of Man and Citizen (Source C).
In 1793, the Jacobin politician Chaumette
sought to justify the closure of women’s
clubs on the following grounds:
‘Has Nature entrusted domestic duties to
men? Has she given us breasts to nurture
babies?
She said to Man:
Be a man. Hunting, agriculture, political duties
… that is your kingdom.
She said to Woman:
Be a woman … the things of the household,
the sweet duties of motherhood – those
are your tasks.
Shameless are those women, who wish to
become men. Have not duties been fairly
distributed?’
Fig.13 – Women queuing up at a bakery.
Activity
Imagine yourself to be one of the women in Fig. 13. Formulate a
response to the arguments put forward by Chaumette (Source G).
Source G
T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n
Activity
5 The Abolition of Slavery
The Abolition of Slavery
The Abolition of Slavery
The Abolition of Slavery
The Abolition of Slavery
One of the most revolutionary social reforms of the Jacobin regime
was the abolition of slavery in the French colonies. The colonies in
the Caribbean – Martinique, Guadeloupe and San Domingo – were
important suppliers of commodities such as tobacco, indigo, sugar
and coffee. But the reluctance of Europeans to go and work in distant
and unfamiliar lands meant a shortage of labour on the plantations.
So this was met by a triangular slave trade between Europe, Africa
and the Americas. The slave trade began in the seventeenth century.
French merchants sailed from the ports of Bordeaux or Nantes to
the African coast, where they bought slaves from local chieftains.
Branded and shackled, the slaves were packed tightly into ships for
the three-month long voyage across the Atlantic to the Caribbean.
There they were sold to plantation owners. The exploitation of slave
labour made it possible to meet the growing demand in European
markets for sugar, coffee, and indigo. Port cities like Bordeaux and
Nantes owed their economic prosperity to the flourishing slave trade.
Throughout the eighteenth century there was little criticism of slavery
in France. The National Assembly held long debates about whether
the rights of man should be extended to all French subjects including
those in the colonies. But it did not pass any laws, fearing opposition
from businessmen whose incomes depended on the slave trade. It
was finally the Convention which in 1794 legislated to free all slaves
in the French overseas possessions. This, however, turned out to be
a short-term measure: ten years later, Napoleon reintroduced slavery.
Plantation owners understood their freedom as including the right
to enslave African Negroes in pursuit of their economic interests.
Slavery was finally abolished in French colonies in 1848.
Fig.14 – The emancipation of slaves.
This print of 1794 describes the emancipation
of slaves. The tricolour banner on top carries
the slogan: ‘The rights of man’. The
inscription below reads: ‘The freedom of the
unfree’. A French woman prepares to ‘civilise’
the African and American Indian slaves by
giving them European clothes to wear.
Record your impressions of this print
(Fig. 14). Describe the objects lying on the
ground. What do they symbolise? What
attitude does the picture express towards
non-European slaves?
New words
Negroes – A term used for the indigenous people of Africa
south of the Sahara. It is a derogatory term not in common use
any longer
Emancipation – The act of freeing
India and the Contemporary World
Activity
6 The Revolution and Everyday Life
The Revolution and Everyday Life
The Revolution and Everyday Life
The Revolution and Everyday Life
The Revolution and Everyday Life
Can politics change the clothes people wear, the language they speak
or the books they read? The years following 1789 in France saw many
such changes in the lives of men, women and children. The
revolutionary governments took it upon themselves to pass laws that
would translate the ideals of liberty and equality into everyday practice.
One important law that came into effect soon after the storming of
the Bastille in the summer of  1789 was the abolition of censorship. In
the Old Regime all written material and cultural activities – books,
newspapers, plays – could be published or performed only after they
had been approved by the censors of  the king. Now the Declaration
of the Rights of Man and Citizen proclaimed freedom of speech and
expression to be a natural right. Newspapers, pamphlets, books and
printed pictures flooded the towns of France from where they
travelled rapidly into the countryside. They all described and discussed
the events and changes taking place in France. Freedom of the press
also meant that opposing views of events could be expressed. Each
side sought to convince the others of its position through the medium
of print. Plays, songs and festive processions attracted large numbers
of people. This was one way they could grasp and identify with ideas
such as liberty or justice that political philosophers wrote about at
length in texts which only a handful of educated people could read.
Describe the picture in your own words. What
are the images that the artist has used to
communicate the following ideas: greed,
equality, justice, takeover by the state of the
assets of the church?
Fig.15 – The patriotic fat-reducing press.
This anonymous print of 1790 seeks to make the idea of justice tangible.
T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n
Fig.16 - Marat addressing the people. This is a painting by Louis-Leopold Boilly.
Recall what you have learnt about Marat in this chapter. Describe the scene around him. Account for his great popularity.
What kinds of reactions would a painting like this produce among viewers in the Salon?
Conclusion
In 1804, Napoleon Bonaparte crowned himself Emperor of France.
He set out to conquer neighbouring European countries, dispossessing
dynasties and creating kingdoms where he placed members of  his family.
Napoleon saw his role as a moderniser of Europe. He introduced many
laws such as the protection of  private property and a uniform system of
weights and measures provided by the decimal system. Initially, many
saw Napoleon as a liberator who would bring freedom for the people.
But soon the Napoleonic armies came to be viewed everywhere as an
invading force. He was finally defeated at Waterloo in 1815. Many of  his
measures that carried the revolutionary ideas of liberty and modern laws
to other parts of Europe had an impact on people long after Napoleon
had left.
The ideas of liberty and democratic rights were the most important
legacy of the French Revolution. These spread from France to the
rest of Europe during the nineteenth century, where feudal systems
Fig.17 – Napoleon crossing the Alps, painting
by David.
India and the Contemporary World
Box 2
Activities
Questions
1. Find out more about any one of the revolutionary figures you have read
about in this chapter. Write a short biography of this person.
2. The French Revolution saw the rise of newspapers describing the events of
each day and week. Collect information and pictures on any one event and
write a newspaper article. You could also conduct an imaginary interview
with important personages such as Mirabeau, Olympe de Gouges or
Robespierre. Work in groups of two or three. Each group could then put up
their articles on a board to produce a wallpaper on the French Revolution.
1. Describe the circumstances leading to the outbreak of revolutionary protest
in France.
2. Which groups of French society benefited from the revolution? Which
groups were forced to relinquish power? Which sections of society would
have been disappointed with the outcome of the revolution?
3. Describe the legacy of the French Revolution for the peoples of the world
during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
4. Draw up a list of democratic rights we enjoy today whose origins could be
traced to the French Revolution.
5. Would you agree with the view that the message of universal rights was
beset with contradictions? Explain.
6. How would you explain the rise of Napoleon?
were abolished. Colonised peoples reworked the idea of freedom from
bondage into their movements to create a sovereign nation state. Tipu
Sultan and Rammohan Roy are two examples of individuals who
responded to the ideas coming from revolutionary France.
Activities
Raja Rammohan Roy was one of those who
was inspired by new ideas that were spreading
through Europe at that time. The French
Revolution and later, the July Revolution excited
his imagination.
‘He could think and talk of nothing else when he
heard of the July Revolution in France in 1830.
On his way to England at Cape Town he insisted
on visiting frigates (warships) flying the
revolutionary tri-colour flag though he had been
temporarily lamed by an accident.’
Susobhan Sarkar, Notes on the Bengal Renaissance 1946.
Socialism in Europe and the Russian Revolution
Socialism in Europe and
Socialism in Europe and
Socialism in Europe and
Socialism in Europe and
Socialism in Europe and
the Russian Revolution
the Russian Revolution
the Russian Revolution
the Russian Revolution
the Russian Revolution
1  The Age of Social Change
In the previous chapter you read about the powerful ideas of freedom
and equality that circulated in Europe after the French Revolution.
The French Revolution opened up the possibility of creating a
dramatic change in the way in which society was structured. As you
have read, before the eighteenth century society was broadly divided
into estates and orders and it was the aristocracy and church which
controlled economic and social power. Suddenly, after the revolution,
it seemed possible to change this. In many parts of the world including
Europe and Asia, new ideas about individual rights and who
controlled social power began to be discussed. In India, Raja
Rammohan Roy and Derozio talked of the significance of the French
Revolution, and many others debated the ideas of post-revolutionary
Europe. The developments in the colonies, in turn, reshaped these
ideas of societal change.
Not everyone in Europe, however, wanted a complete transformation
of society. Responses varied from those who accepted that some
change was necessary but wished for a gradual shift, to those who
wanted to restructure society radically. Some were ‘conservatives’,
others were ‘liberals’ or ‘radicals’. What did these terms really mean
in the context of the time? What separated these strands of politics
and what linked them together? We must remember that these terms
do not mean the same thing in all contexts or at all times.
We will look briefly at some of the important political traditions of
the nineteenth century, and see how they influenced change. Then
we will focus on one historical event in which there was an attempt
at a radical transformation of society. Through the revolution in
Russia, socialism became one of the most significant and powerful
ideas to shape society in the twentieth century.
1.1 Liberals, Radicals and Conservatives
One of the groups which looked to change society were the liberals.
Liberals wanted a nation which tolerated all religions. We should
remember that at this time European states usually discriminated in
Socialism in Europe and the Russian Revolution
Chapter ll
India and the Contemporary World
favour of one religion or another (Britain favoured the Church of
England, Austria and Spain favoured the Catholic Church). Liberals
also opposed the uncontrolled power of dynastic rulers. They wanted
to safeguard the rights of individuals against governments. They
argued for a representative, elected parliamentary government, subject
to laws interpreted by a well-trained judiciary that was independent
of rulers and officials. However, they were not ‘democrats’. They
did not believe in universal adult franchise, that is, the right of every
citizen to vote. They felt men of property mainly should have the
vote. They also did not want the vote for women.
In contrast, radicals wanted a nation in which government was based
on the majority of a country’s population. Many supported women’s
suffragette movements. Unlike liberals, they opposed the privileges
of great landowners and wealthy factory owners. They were not
against the existence of private property but disliked concentration
of property in the hands of a few.
Conservatives were opposed to radicals and liberals. After the French
Revolution, however, even conservatives had opened their minds to
the need for change. Earlier, in the eighteenth century, conservatives
had been generally opposed to the idea of change. By the nineteenth
century, they accepted that some change was inevitable but believed
that the past had to be respected and change had to be brought about
through a slow process.
Such differing ideas about societal change clashed during the social
and political turmoil that followed the French Revolution. The
various attempts at revolution and national transformation in the
nineteenth century helped define both the limits and potential of
these political tendencies.
1.2 Industrial Society and Social Change
These political trends were signs of a new time. It was a time of
profound social and economic changes. It was a time when new cities
came up and new industrialised regions developed,  railways expanded
and the Industrial Revolution occurred.
Industrialisation brought men, women and children to factories.  Work
hours were often long and wages were poor. Unemployment was
common, particularly during times of low demand for industrial goods.
Housing and sanitation were problems since towns were growing
rapidly. Liberals and radicals searched for solutions to these issues.
New words
Suffragette movement – A movement to
give women the right to vote.
Socialism in Europe and the Russian Revolution
Almost all industries were the property of individuals.  Liberals and
radicals themselves were often property owners and employers.
Having made their wealth through trade or industrial ventures, they
felt that such effort should be encouraged – that its benefits would
be achieved if the workforce in the economy was healthy and citizens
were educated. Opposed to the privileges the old aristocracy had by
birth, they firmly believed in the value of individual effort, labour
and enterprise. If freedom of individuals was ensured, if the poor
could labour, and those with capital could operate without restraint,
they believed that societies would develop. Many working men and
women who wanted changes in the world rallied around liberal and
radical groups and parties in the early nineteenth century.
Some nationalists, liberals and radicals wanted revolutions to put an
end to the kind of governments established in Europe in 1815. In
France, Italy, Germany and Russia, they became revolutionaries and
worked to overthrow existing monarchs. Nationalists talked of
revolutions that would create ‘nations’ where all citizens would have
Fig.1 – The London poor in the mid-nineteenth century as seen by a
contemporary.
From: Henry Mayhew, London Labour and the London Poor, 1861.
India and the Contemporary World
Activity
equal rights. After 1815, Giuseppe Mazzini, an Italian nationalist, conspired
with others to achieve this in Italy. Nationalists elsewhere – including India
– read his writings.
1.3 The Coming of Socialism to Europe
Perhaps one of the most far-reaching visions of how society should be
structured was socialism. By the mid - nineteenth century in Europe, socialism
was a well-known body of ideas that attracted widespread attention.
Socialists were against private property, and saw it as the root of all social ills
of the time. Why? Individuals owned the property that gave employment
but the propertied were concerned only with  personal gain and not with
the welfare of those who made the property productive. So if society as a
whole rather than single individuals controlled property, more attention
would be paid to collective social interests. Socialists wanted this change and
campaigned for it.
How could a society without property operate? What would be the basis of
socialist society?
Socialists had different visions of the future. Some believed in the idea of
cooperatives. Robert Owen (1771-1858), a leading English manufacturer,
sought to build a cooperative community called New Harmony in Indiana
(USA). Other socialists felt that cooperatives could not be built on a wide
scale only through individual initiative: they demanded that governments
encourage cooperatives. In France, for instance, Louis Blanc (1813-1882)
wanted the government to encourage cooperatives and replace capitalist
enterprises. These cooperatives were to be associations of people who
produced goods together and divided the profits according to the work
done by members.
Karl Marx (1818-1883) and Friedrich Engels (1820-1895) added other ideas
to this body of arguments. Marx argued that industrial society was ‘capitalist’.
Capitalists owned the capital invested in factories, and the profit of capitalists
was produced by workers.  The conditions of workers could not improve
as long as this profit was accumulated by private capitalists. Workers had to
overthrow capitalism and the rule of private property. Marx believed that
to free themselves from capitalist exploitation, workers had to construct a
radically socialist society where all property was socially controlled. This
would be a communist society. He was convinced that workers would
triumph in their conflict with capitalists. A communist society was the natural
society of the future.
List two differences between the capitalist
and socialist ideas of private property.
Socialism in Europe and the Russian Revolution
Activity
1.4 Support for Socialism
By the 1870s, socialist ideas spread through Europe. To coordinate
their efforts, socialists formed an international body – namely, the
Second International.
Workers in England and Germany began forming associations to
fight for better living and working conditions. They set up funds to
help members in times of distress and demanded a reduction of working
hours and the right to vote. In Germany, these associations worked closely
with the Social Democratic Party (SPD) and helped it win parliamentary
seats. By 1905, socialists and trade unionists formed a Labour Party in
Britain and a Socialist Party in France. However, till 1914, socialists never
succeeded in forming a government in Europe. Represented by strong
figures in parliamentary politics, their ideas did shape legislation, but
governments continued to be run by conservatives, liberals and radicals.
Imagine that a meeting has been called in
your area to discuss the socialist idea of
doing away with private property and
introducing collective ownership. Write the
speech you would make at the meeting if you
! a poor labourer working in the fields
! a medium-level landowner
! a house owner
Fig.2 – This is a painting of the Paris Commune of 1871 (From Illustrated London News, 1871). It portrays a scene from the
popular uprising in Paris between March and May 1871. This was a period when the town council (commune) of Paris was
taken over by a ‘peoples’ government’ consisting of workers, ordinary people, professionals, political activists and others.
The uprising emerged against a background of growing discontent against the policies of the French state. The ‘Paris
Commune’ was ultimately crushed by government troops but it was celebrated by Socialists the world over as a prelude to a
socialist revolution.The Paris Commune  is also popularly remembered for two important legacies: one, for its association with
the workers’ red flag – that was the flag adopted by the communards ( revolutionaries) in Paris; two, for the ‘Marseillaise’,
originally written as a war song in 1792, it became a symbol of the Commune and of the struggle for liberty.
India and the Contemporary World
2  The Russian Revolution
In one of the least industrialised of European states this situation was
reversed. Socialists took over the government in Russia through the
October Revolution of 1917. The fall of monarchy in February 1917
and the events of October are normally called the Russian Revolution.
How did this come about? What were the social and political
conditions in Russia when the revolution occurred? To answer these
questions, let us look at Russia a few years before the revolution.
2.1 The Russian Empire in 1914
In 1914, Tsar Nicholas II ruled Russia and its empire. Besides the
territory around Moscow, the Russian empire included current-day
Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, parts of Poland, Ukraine and
Belarus. It stretched to the Pacific and comprised today’s Central
Asian states, as well as Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan. The majority
religion was Russian Orthodox Christianity – which had grown out
of the Greek Orthodox Church – but the empire also  included
Catholics, Protestants, Muslims and Buddhists.
Fig.3 – Tsar Nicholas II in the White
Hall of the Winter Palace,
St Petersburg, 1900.
Painted by Earnest Lipgart (1847-1932)
Fig.4 – Europe in 1914.
The map shows the Russian empire and the European countries at war during the First
World War.
Socialism in Europe and the Russian Revolution
2.2 Economy and Society
At the beginning of the twentieth century, the vast majority of
Russia’s people were agriculturists. About 85 per cent of the Russian
empire’s population earned their living from agriculture. This
proportion was higher than in most European countries. For instance,
in France and Germany the proportion was between 40 per cent and
50 per cent. In the empire, cultivators produced for the market as
well as for their own needs and Russia was a major exporter of grain.
Industry was found in pockets. Prominent industrial areas were
St Petersburg and Moscow. Craftsmen undertook much of the
production, but large factories existed alongside craft workshops.
Many factories were set up in the 1890s, when Russia’s railway
network was extended, and foreign investment in industry increased.
Coal production doubled and iron and steel output quadrupled. By
the 1900s, in some areas factory workers and craftsmen were almost
equal in number.
Most industry was the private property of industrialists. Government
supervised large factories to ensure minimum wages and limited hours
of work. But factory inspectors could not prevent rules being broken.
In craft units and small workshops, the working day was sometimes
15 hours, compared with 10 or 12 hours in factories. Accommodation
varied from rooms to dormitories.
Workers were a divided social group. Some had strong links with
the villages from which they came. Others had settled in cities
permanently. Workers were divided by skill. A metalworker of St.
Petersburg recalled, ‘Metalworkers considered themselves aristocrats
among other workers. Their occupations demanded more training
and skill . . . ’ Women made up 31 per cent of the factory labour
force by 1914, but they were paid less than men (between half and
three-quarters of a man’s wage). Divisions among workers showed
themselves in dress and manners too. Some workers formed
associations to help members in times of unemployment or financial
hardship but such associations were few.
Despite divisions, workers did unite to strike work (stop work) when
they disagreed with employers about dismissals or work conditions.
These strikes took place  frequently in the textile industry during
1896-1897, and in the metal industry during 1902.
In the countryside, peasants cultivated most of the land. But the
nobility, the crown and the Orthodox Church owned large
properties. Like workers, peasants too were divided. They were also
Fig.5 – Unemployed peasants in pre-war
St Petersburg.
Many survived by eating at charitable
kitchens and living in poorhouses.
Fig.6 – Workers sleeping in bunkers in a
dormitory in pre-revolutionary Russia.
They slept in shifts and could not keep their
families with them.
India and the Contemporary World
Source A
deeply religious. But except in a few cases they had no respect for the
nobility. Nobles got their power and position through their services
to the Tsar, not through local popularity. This was unlike France
where, during the French Revolution in Brittany, peasants respected
nobles and fought for them. In Russia, peasants wanted the land of
the nobles to be given to them. Frequently, they refused to pay rent
and even murdered landlords. In 1902, this occurred on a large scale
in south Russia. And in 1905,  such incidents took place all
over Russia.
Russian peasants were different from other European peasants in
another way. They pooled their land together periodically and their
commune (mir) divided it according to the needs of individual families.
2.3 Socialism in Russia
All political parties were illegal in Russia before 1914. The Russian
Social Democratic Workers Party was founded in 1898 by socialists
who respected Marx’s ideas. However, because of government
policing, it had to operate as an illegal organisation. It set up a
newspaper, mobilised workers and organised strikes.
Some Russian socialists felt that the Russian peasant custom of dividing
land periodically made them natural socialists. So peasants, not
workers, would be the main force of the revolution, and Russia could
become socialist more quickly than other countries. Socialists were
active in the countryside through the late nineteenth century.  They
formed the Socialist Revolutionary Party in 1900. This party struggled
for peasants’ rights and demanded that land belonging to nobles be
transferred to peasants. Social Democrats disagreed with Socialist
Revolutionaries about peasants. Lenin felt that peasants were not
one united group. Some were poor and others rich, some worked as
labourers while others were capitalists who employed workers. Given
this ‘differentiation’ within them, they could not all be part of a
socialist movement.
The party was divided over the strategy of organisation. Vladimir
Lenin (who led the Bolshevik group) thought that in a repressive
society like Tsarist Russia the party should be disciplined and should
control the number and quality of its members.  Others (Mensheviks)
thought that the party should be open to all (as in Germany).
2.4 A Turbulent Time: The 1905 Revolution
Russia was an autocracy. Unlike other European rulers, even at the
beginning of the twentieth century, the Tsar was not subject to
Alexander Shlyapnikov, a socialist
worker of the time, gives us a description
of how the meetings were organised:
‘Propaganda was done in the plants and
shops on an individual basis. There were
also discussion circles … Legal meetings
took place on matters concerning [official
issues], but this activity was skilfully
integrated into the general struggle for
the liberation of the working class. Illegal
meetings were … arranged on the spur
of the moment but in an organised way
during lunch, in evening break, in front
of the exit, in the yard or, in
establishments with several floors, on
the stairs. The most alert workers would
form a “plug” in the doorway, and the
whole mass piled up in the exit. An
agitator would get up right there on the
spot. Management would contact the
police on the telephone, but the
speeches would have already been
made and the necessary decision taken
by the time they arrived ...’
Alexander Shlyapnikov, On the Eve of
1917.
Reminiscences
Revolutionary Underground.
Socialism in Europe and the Russian Revolution
Activity
parliament. Liberals in Russia campaigned to end this state of affairs.
Together with the Social Democrats and Socialist Revolutionaries,
they worked with peasants and workers during the revolution of
1905 to demand a constitution. They were supported in the empire
by nationalists (in Poland for instance) and in Muslim-dominated
areas by jadidists who wanted modernised Islam to lead their societies.
The year 1904 was a particularly bad one for Russian workers. Prices
of essential goods rose so quickly that real wages declined by 20 per
cent. The membership of workers’ associations rose dramatically.
When four members of the Assembly of Russian Workers, which
had been formed in 1904, were dismissed at the Putilov Iron Works,
there was a call for industrial action. Over the next few days over
110,000 workers in St Petersburg went on strike demanding a
reduction in the working day to eight hours, an increase in wages
and improvement in working conditions.
When the procession of workers led by Father Gapon reached the
Winter Palace it was attacked by the police and the Cossacks. Over
100 workers were killed and about 300 wounded. The incident,
known as Bloody Sunday, started a series of events that became known
as the 1905 Revolution. Strikes took place all over the country and
universities closed down when student bodies staged walkouts,
complaining about the lack of civil liberties. Lawyers, doctors,
engineers and other middle-class workers established the Union of
Unions and demanded a constituent assembly.
During the 1905 Revolution, the Tsar allowed the creation of an
elected consultative Parliament or Duma. For a brief while during
the revolution, there existed a large number of trade unions and
factory committees made up of factory workers. After 1905, most
committees and unions worked unofficially, since they were declared
illegal. Severe restrictions were placed on political activity. The Tsar
dismissed the first Duma within 75 days and the re-elected second
Duma within three months. He did not want any questioning of his
authority or any reduction in his power. He changed the voting
laws and packed the third Duma with conservative politicians. Liberals
and revolutionaries were kept out.
2.5 The First World War and the Russian Empire
In 1914, war broke out between two European alliances – Germany,
Austria and Turkey (the Central powers) and France, Britain and
Russia  (later Italy and Romania). Each country had a global empire
New words
Jadidists – Muslim reformers within the
Russian empire
Real wage – Reflects the quantities of
goods which the wages will actually buy.
Why were there revolutionary disturbances in
Russia in 1905? What were the demands of
revolutionaries?
India and the Contemporary World
Activity
The year is 1916. You are a general in the
Tsar’s army on the eastern front. You are
writing a report for the government in
Moscow. In your report suggest what you
think the government should do to improve
the situation.
Fig.7 – Russian soldiers during the First
World War.
The Imperial Russian army came to be known
as the ‘Russian steam roller’. It was the
largest armed force in  the world. When this
army shifted its loyalty and began supporting
the revolutionaries, Tsarist power collapsed.
and the war was fought outside Europe as well as
in Europe. This was the First World War.
In Russia, the war was initially popular and people
rallied around Tsar Nicholas II. As the war
continued, though, the Tsar refused to consult the
main parties in the Duma. Support wore thin. Anti-
German sentiments ran high,  as can be seen in the
renaming of St Petersburg – a German name – as
Petrograd. The Tsarina Alexandra’s German
origins and poor advisers, especially a monk called
Rasputin, made the autocracy unpopular.
The First World War on the ‘eastern front’ differed
from that on the ‘western front’. In the west, armies
fought from trenches stretched along eastern
France. In the east, armies moved a good deal and
fought battles leaving large casualties. Defeats were
shocking and demoralising. Russia’s armies lost
badly in Germany and Austria  between 1914 and
1916. There were over 7 million casualties by 1917.
As they retreated, the Russian army destroyed
crops and buildings to prevent the enemy from
being able to live off the land. The destruction of
crops and buildings led to over 3 million refugees in Russia. The
situation discredited the government and the Tsar.  Soldiers did not
wish to fight such a war.
The war also had a severe impact on industry. Russia’s own industries
were few in number and  the country was cut off from other suppliers
of industrial goods by German control of the Baltic Sea. Industrial
equipment disintegrated more rapidly in Russia than elsewhere in
Europe. By 1916, railway lines began to break down. Able-bodied
men were called up to the war. As a result, there were labour shortages
and small workshops producing essentials were shut down. Large
supplies of grain were sent to feed the army. For the people in the
cities, bread and flour  became scarce. By the winter of 1916, riots at
bread shops were common.
Socialism in Europe and the Russian Revolution
In the winter of 1917, conditions in the capital, Petrograd, were grim.
The layout of the city seemed to emphasise the divisions among its
people. The workers’ quarters and factories were located on the right
bank of the River Neva. On the left bank were the fashionable areas,
the Winter Palace, and official buildings, including the palace where
the Duma met. In February 1917, food shortages were deeply felt in
the workers’ quarters. The winter was  very cold – there had been
exceptional frost and heavy snow. Parliamentarians wishing to
preserve elected government, were opposed to the Tsar’s  desire to dissolve
the Duma.
On 22 February, a lockout took place at a
factory on the right bank. The next day, workers
in fifty factories called a strike in sympathy.
In many factories, women led the way to strikes.
This came to be called the International Women’s
Day. Demonstrating workers crossed from the
factory quarters to the centre of the capital – the
Nevskii Prospekt. At this stage, no political party
was actively organising the movement. As the
fashionable quarters and official buildings were
surrounded by workers, the government imposed
a curfew. Demonstrators dispersed by the evening,
but they came back on the 24th and 25th. The
government called out the cavalry and police to
keep an eye on them.
On Sunday, 25 February, the government
suspended the Duma.   Politicians spoke out against
the measure. Demonstrators returned in force to
the streets of the left bank on the 26th. On the
27th, the Police Headquarters were ransacked. The
streets thronged with people raising slogans about
bread, wages, better hours and democracy. The
government tried to control the situation and
called out the cavalry once again. However, the
cavalry refused to fire on the demonstrators. An
officer was shot at the barracks of a regiment and
three other regiments mutinied, voting to join the
striking workers.  By that evening, soldiers and
3  The February Revolution in Petrograd
Fig.8 – The Petrograd Soviet meeting in the Duma, February 1917.
India and the Contemporary World
Box 1
Activity
striking workers had gathered to form a ‘soviet’ or ‘council’ in the
same building as the Duma met. This was the Petrograd Soviet.
The very next day, a delegation went to see the Tsar. Military
commanders advised him to abdicate. He followed their advice and
abdicated on 2 March. Soviet leaders and Duma leaders formed a
Provisional Government to run the country. Russia’s future would
be decided by a constituent assembly, elected on the basis of universal
adult suffrage. Petrograd had led the February Revolution that
brought down the monarchy in February 1917.
Women in the February Revolution
‘Women workers, often ... inspired their male co-workers … At the Lorenz telephone
factory, … Marfa Vasileva almost single handedly called a successful strike. Already that
morning, in celebration of Women’s Day, women workers had presented red bows to the
men … Then Marfa Vasileva, a milling machine operator stopped work and declared an
impromptu strike. The workers on the floor were ready to support her … The foreman
informed the management and sent her a loaf of bread.  She took the bread but refused to
go back to work. The administrator asked her again why she refused to work and she
replied, “I cannot be the only one who is satiated when others are hungry”.  Women
workers from another section of the factory gathered around Marfa in support and
gradually all the other women ceased working. Soon the men downed their tools as well
and the entire crowd rushed onto the street.’
From: Choi Chatterji, Celebrating Women (2002).
3.1 After February
Army officials, landowners and industrialists were influential in
the Provisional Government. But the liberals as well as socialists
among them worked towards an elected government. Restrictions
on public meetings and associations were removed. ‘Soviets’, like
the Petrograd Soviet, were set up everywhere, though no common
system of election was followed.
In April 1917, the Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin returned to
Russia from his exile. He and the Bolsheviks had opposed the war
since 1914. Now he felt it was time for soviets to take over power.
He declared that the war be brought to a close, land be transferred
to the peasants, and banks be nationalised. These three demands
were Lenin’s ‘April Theses’. He also argued that the Bolshevik Party
rename itself the Communist Party to indicate its new radical aims.
Most others in the Bolshevik Party were initially surprised by the
April Theses. They thought that the time was not yet ripe for a
Look again at Source A and Box 1.
! List five changes in the mood of the
workers.
! Place yourself in the position of a woman
who has seen both situations and write
an account of what has changed.
Socialism in Europe and the Russian Revolution
socialist revolution and the Provisional Government needed to be
supported. But the developments of the subsequent months changed
their attitude.
Through the summer the workers’ movement spread. In industrial
areas, factory committees were formed  which began questioning
the way industrialists ran their factories. Trade unions grew in
number. Soldiers’ committees were formed in the army. In June,
about 500 Soviets sent representatives to an All Russian Congress
of Soviets. As the Provisional Government saw its power reduce
and Bolshevik influence grow, it decided to take stern measures
against the spreading discontent. It resisted attempts by workers
to run factories and began arresting leaders. Popular
demonstrations staged by the Bolsheviks in July 1917 were sternly
repressed. Many Bolshevik leaders had to go into hiding or flee.
Meanwhile in the countryside, peasants and their Socialist
Revolutionary leaders pressed for a redistribution of land. Land
committees were formed to handle this. Encouraged by the
Socialist Revolutionaries, peasants seized land between July and
September 1917.
Fig.9 – A Bolshevik image of Lenin
addressing workers in April 1917.
Fig.10 – The July Days. A pro-Bolshevik demonstration on 17 July 1917 being fired upon by the army.
India and the Contemporary World
Box 2
3.2 The Revolution of October 1917
As the conflict between the Provisional Government and the
Bolsheviks grew, Lenin feared the Provisional Government would
set up a dictatorship. In September, he began discussions for an
uprising against the government. Bolshevik supporters in the army,
soviets and  factories were brought together.
On 16 October 1917, Lenin persuaded the Petrograd Soviet and
the Bolshevik Party to agree to a socialist seizure of power. A
Military Revolutionary Committee was appointed by the Soviet
under Leon Trotskii to organise the seizure. The date of the event
was kept a secret.
The uprising began on 24 October. Sensing trouble, Prime Minister
Kerenskii had left the city to summon troops. At dawn, military
men loyal to the government seized the buildings of two Bolshevik
newspapers. Pro-government troops were sent to take over telephone
and telegraph offices and protect the Winter Palace. In a swift
response, the Military Revolutionary Committee ordered its
supporters to seize government offices and arrest ministers. Late in
the day, the ship Aurora shelled the Winter Palace. Other vessels
sailed down the Neva and took over various military points. By
nightfall, the city was under the committee’s control and the
ministers had surrendered. At a meeting of the All Russian Congress
of Soviets in Petrograd, the majority approved the Bolshevik action.
Uprisings took place in other cities. There was heavy fighting –
especially in Moscow – but by December, the Bolsheviks controlled
the Moscow-Petrograd area.
Fig.11 – Lenin (left) and Trotskii (right) with
workers at Petrograd.
Date of the Russian Revolution
Russia followed the Julian calendar until
1 February 1918. The country then changed to
the Gregorian calendar, which is followed
everywhere today. The Gregorian dates are
13 days ahead of the Julian dates. So by our
calendar, the ‘February’ Revolution took place
on 12th March and the ‘October’ Revolution
took place on 7th November.
Some important dates
1850s -1880s
Debates over socialism in Russsia.
Formation of the Russian Social Democratic
Workers Party.
The Bloody Sunday and the Revolution of
1905.
2nd March - Abdication of the Tsar.
24th October - Bolshevik unprising in
Petrograd.
1918-20
The Civil War.
Formation of Comintern.
Beginning of Collectivisation.
Socialism in Europe and the Russian Revolution
4  What Changed after October?
The Bolsheviks were totally opposed to private property. Most
industry and banks were nationalised in November 1917. This meant
that the government took over ownership and management. Land
was declared social property and peasants were allowed to seize the
land of the nobility. In cities, Bolsheviks enforced the partition of
large houses according to family requirements. They banned the
use of the old titles of aristocracy. To assert the change, new
uniforms were designed for the army and officials, following a
clothing competition organised in 1918 – when the Soviet hat
(budeonovka) was chosen.
The Bolshevik Party was renamed the Russian Communist Party
(Bolshevik). In November 1917, the Bolsheviks conducted the
elections to the Constituent Assembly, but they failed to gain
majority support. In January 1918, the Assembly rejected Bolshevik
measures and Lenin dismissed the Assembly. He thought the All
Russian Congress of Soviets was more democratic than an assembly
elected in uncertain conditions. In March 1918, despite opposition
by their political allies, the Bolsheviks made peace with Germany
at Brest Litovsk. In the years that
followed, the Bolsheviks became
the only party to participate in the
elections to the All Russian
Congress of Soviets, which became
the Parliament of the country.
Russia became a one-party state.
Trade unions were kept under
party control. The secret police
(called the Cheka first, and later
OGPU and NKVD) punished
those
criticised
Bolsheviks. Many young writers
and artists rallied to the Party
because it stood for socialism and
for change. After October 1917,
this led to experiments in the arts
and architecture. But many became
disillusioned because of the
censorship the Party encouraged.
Fig.13 – May Day demonstration in Moscow in 1918.
Fig.12 – A soldier wearing the Soviet hat
(budeonovka).
India and the Contemporary World
Box 3
Activity
The October Revolution and the Russian Countryside: Two Views
‘News of the revolutionary uprising of October 25, 1917, reached the village the following day and
was greeted with enthusiasm; to the peasants it meant free land and an end to the war. ...The day
the news arrived, the landowner’s manor house  was looted, his stock farms were “requisitioned”
and his vast orchard was cut down and sold to the peasants for wood;  all his far buildings were
torn down and left in ruins while the land was distributed among the peasants who were prepared
to live the new Soviet life’.
From: Fedor Belov, The History of a Soviet Collective Farm
A member of a landowning family wrote to a relative about what happened at the estate:
‘The “coup” happened quite painlessly, quietly and peacefully. …The first days were unbearable..
Mikhail Mikhailovich [the estate owner] was calm...The girls also…I must say the chairman
behaves correctly and even politely. We were left two cows and two horses. The servants tell them
all the time not to bother us. “Let them live. We vouch for their safety and property. We want them
treated as humanely as possible….”
…There are rumours that several villages are trying to evict the committees and return the estate
to Mikhail Mikhailovich.  I don’t know if this will happen, or if it’s good for us. But we rejoice that
there is a conscience in our people...’
From: Serge Schmemann, Echoes of a Native Land. Two Centuries of a Russian Village (1997).
4.1 The Civil War
When the Bolsheviks ordered land redistribution, the Russian army
began to break up. Soldiers, mostly peasants, wished to go home for
the redistribution and deserted. Non-Bolshevik socialists, liberals and
supporters of autocracy condemned the Bolshevik uprising.  Their
leaders moved to south Russia and organised troops to fight the
Bolsheviks (the ‘reds’). During 1918 and 1919, the ‘greens’ (Socialist
Revolutionaries) and ‘whites’ (pro-Tsarists) controlled most of the
Russian empire. They were backed by French, American, British
and Japanese troops – all those forces who were worried at the growth
of socialism in Russia. As these troops and the Bolsheviks fought a
civil war, looting, banditry and famine became common.
Supporters of private property among ‘whites’ took harsh steps with
peasants who had seized land.  Such actions led to the loss of popular
support for the non-Bolsheviks. By January 1920, the Bolsheviks
controlled most of the former Russian empire. They succeeded due
Read the two views on the revolution in the
countryside. Imagine yourself to be a witness
to the events. Write a short account from the
standpoint of:
! an owner of an estate
! a small peasant
! a journalist
Socialism in Europe and the Russian Revolution
Activity
Source B
to cooperation with non-Russian nationalities and Muslim jadidists.
Cooperation did not work where Russian colonists themselves turned
Bolshevik. In Khiva, in Central Asia, Bolshevik colonists brutally
massacred local nationalists in the name of defending socialism. In
this situation, many were confused about what the Bolshevik
government represented.
Partly to remedy this, most non-Russian nationalities were given
political autonomy in the Soviet Union (USSR) – the state the
Bolsheviks created from the Russian empire in December 1922. But
since this was combined with unpopular policies that the Bolsheviks
forced the local government to follow – like the harsh discouragement
of nomadism – attempts to win over different nationalities were
only partly successful.
Central Asia of the October Revolution: Two Views
M.N.Roy was an Indian revolutionary, a founder of the Mexican Communist Party
and prominent Comintern leader in India, China and Europe.  He was in Central
Asia at the time of the civil war in the 1920s. He wrote:
‘The chieftain was a benevolent old man; his attendant … a youth who … spoke
Russian … He had heard of the Revolution, which had overthrown the Tsar and
driven away the Generals who conquered the homeland of the Kirgiz. So, the
Revolution meant that the Kirgiz were masters of their home again.  “Long Live the
Revolution” shouted the Kirgiz youth who seemed to be a born Bolshevik.  The
whole tribe joined.’
M.N.Roy, Memoirs (1964).
‘The Kirghiz welcomed the first revolution (ie February Revolution) with joy and the
second revolution with consternation and terror … [This] first revolution freed them
from the oppression of the Tsarist regime and strengthened their hope that …
autonomy would be realised. The second revolution (October Revolution) was
accompanied by violence, pillage, taxes and the establishment of dictatorial power
… Once a small group of Tsarist bureaucrats oppressed the Kirghiz. Now the same
group of people … perpetuate the same regime ...’
Kazakh leader in 1919, quoted in Alexander Bennigsen and Chantal Quelquejay,
Les Mouvements Nationaux chez les Musulmans de Russie, (1960).
Why did people in Central Asia  respond to the Russian Revolution in
different ways?
New words
Autonomy – The right to govern
themselves
Nomadism – Lifestyle of those who do
not live in one place but move from area
to area to earn their living
Source
India and the Contemporary World
Box 4
Socialist Cultivation in a Village in the Ukraine
‘A commune was set up using two [confiscated] farms as a base. The commune
consisted of thirteen families with a total of seventy persons … The farm tools taken
from the … farms were turned over to the commune …The members ate in a communal
dining hall and income was divided in accordance with the principles of  “cooperative
communism”. The entire proceeds of the members’ labor, as well as all dwellings and
facilities belonging to the commune were shared by the commune members.’
Fedor Belov, The History of a Soviet Collective Farm (1955).
Fig.14 – Factories came to be seen as a
symbol of socialism.
This poster states: ‘The smoke from the
chimneys is the breathing of Soviet Russia.’
4.2 Making a Socialist Society
During the civil war, the Bolsheviks kept industries and banks
nationalised. They  permitted peasants to cultivate the land that had
been socialised. Bolsheviks used confiscated land to demonstrate what
collective work could be.
A process of centralised planning was introduced. Officials assessed
how the economy could work and set targets for a five-year period.
On this basis they made the Five Year Plans. The government fixed
all prices to promote industrial growth during the first two ‘Plans’
(1927-1932 and 1933-1938). Centralised planning led to economic
growth. Industrial production increased (between 1929 and 1933 by
100 per cent in the case of oil, coal and steel). New factory cities
came into being.
However, rapid construction led to poor working conditions. In
the city of Magnitogorsk, the construction of a steel plant was achieved
in three years. Workers lived hard lives and the result was 550
stoppages of work in the first year alone. In living quarters, ‘in the
wintertime, at 40 degrees below, people had to climb down from the
fourth floor and dash across the street in order to go to the toilet’.
An extended schooling system developed, and arrangements were
made for factory workers and peasants to enter universities. Crèches
were established in factories for the children of women workers.
Cheap public health care was provided. Model living quarters were
set up for workers. The effect of all this was uneven, though, since
government resources were limited.
Socialism in Europe and the Russian Revolution
Source C
Dreams and Realities of a Soviet Childhood in 1933
Dear grandfather Kalinin …
My family is large, there are four children. We don’t have a father – he died, fighting
for the worker’s cause, and my mother … is ailing … I want to study very much, but
I cannot go to school. I had some old boots, but they are completely torn and no
one can mend them. My mother is sick, we have no money and no bread, but I want
to study very much. …there stands before us the task of studying, studying and
studying. That is what Vladimir Ilich Lenin said. But I have to stop going to school.
We have no relatives and there is no one to help us, so I have to go to work in a
factory, to prevent the family from starving. Dear grandfather, I am 13, I study well
and have no bad reports. I am in Class 5 …
Letter of 1933 from a 13-year-old worker to Kalinin, Soviet President
From: V. Sokolov (ed), Obshchestvo I Vlast, v 1930-ye gody (Moscow, 1997).
Fig.17 – Factory dining hall in the 1930s.
Fig.15 – Children at school in Soviet Russia in the
1930s.
They are studying the Soviet economy.
Fig.16 – A child in Magnitogorsk during the
First Five Year Plan.
He is working for Soviet Russia.
Source
India and the Contemporary World
4.3 Stalinism and Collectivisation
The period of the early Planned Economy was linked to
the disasters of the collectivisation of agriculture. By 1927-
1928, the towns in Soviet Russia were facing an acute
problem of grain supplies. The government fixed prices
at which grain must be sold, but the  peasants refused to sell their
grain to government buyers at these prices.
Stalin, who headed the party after the death of Lenin, introduced
firm emergency measures. He believed that rich peasants and traders
in the countryside were holding stocks in the hope of higher prices.
Speculation had to be stopped and supplies confiscated.
In 1928, Party members toured the grain-producing areas, supervising
enforced grain collections, and raiding ‘kulaks’ –  the name for well-
to-do peasants. As shortages continued, the decision was taken to
collectivise farms. It was argued that grain shortages were partly due
to the small size of holdings. After 1917, land had been  given over to
peasants. These small-sized peasant farms could not be modernised.
To develop modern farms, and run them along industrial lines with
machinery, it was necessary to ‘eliminate kulaks’, take away land
from peasants, and establish state-controlled large farms.
What followed was Stalin’s collectivisation programme. From 1929,
the Party forced all peasants to cultivate in collective farms (kolkhoz).
The bulk of land and implements were transferred to the ownership
of collective farms. Peasants worked on the land, and the kolkhoz
profit was shared. Enraged peasants resisted the authorities and
destroyed their livestock. Between 1929 and 1931, the number of
cattle fell by one-third. Those who resisted collectivisation were
severely punished. Many were deported and exiled. As they resisted
collectivisation, peasants argued that they were not rich and they
were not against socialism. They merely did not want to work in
collective farms for a variety of reasons. Stalin’s government allowed
some independent cultivation, but treated such cultivators
unsympathetically.
In spite of collectivisation, production did not increase immediately.
In fact, the bad harvests of 1930-1933 led to one of most devastating
famines in Soviet history when over 4 million died.
Fig.18 – A poster during collectivisation. It
states: ‘We shall strike at the kulak working for
the decrease in cultivation.’
Fig.19 – Peasant women being gathered to
work in the large collective farms.
New words
Deported – Forcibly removed from one’s own country.
Exiled – Forced to live away from one’s own country.
Socialism in Europe and the Russian Revolution
Source E
Official view of the opposition to collectivisation and the government response
‘From the second half of February of this year, in various regions of the Ukraine
… mass insurrections of the peasantry have taken place, caused by distortions
of the Party’s line by a section of the lower ranks of the Party and the Soviet
apparatus in the course of the introduction of collectivisation and preparatory
work for the spring harvest.
Within a short time, large scale activities from the above-mentioned regions
carried over into neighbouring areas – and the most aggressive insurrections
have taken place near the border.
The greater part of the peasant insurrections have been linked with outright
demands for the return of collectivised stocks of grain, livestock and tools …
Between 1st February and 15th March, 25,000 have been arrested … 656 have
been executed, 3673 have been imprisoned in labour camps and 5580 exiled …’
Report of K.M. Karlson, President of the State Police Administration of the Ukraine
to the Central Committee of the Communist Party, on 19 March 1930.
From: V. Sokolov (ed), Obshchestvo I Vlast, v 1930-ye gody
Source D
This is a letter written by a peasant who did not want to join the collective farm.
To the newspaper Krestianskaia Gazeta (Peasant Newspaper)
‘… I am a natural working peasant born in 1879 … there are 6 members in my
family, my wife was born in 1881, my son is 16, two daughters 19, all three go
to school, my sister is 71. From 1932, heavy taxes have been levied on me that
I have found impossible. From 1935, local authorities have increased the taxes
on me … and I was unable to handle them and all my property was registered:
my horse, cow, calf, sheep with lambs, all my implements, furniture and my
reserve of wood for repair of buildings and they sold the lot for the taxes. In
1936, they sold two of my buildings … the kolkhoz bought them. In 1937, of two
huts I had, one was sold and one was confiscated …’
Afanasii Dedorovich Frebenev, an independent cultivator.
From: V. Sokolov (ed), Obshchestvo I Vlast, v 1930-ye gody.
Many within the Party criticised the confusion in industrial
production under the Planned Economy and the consequences of
collectivisation. Stalin and his sympathisers charged these critics with
conspiracy against socialism. Accusations were made throughout the
country, and by 1939, over 2 million were in prisons or labour camps.
Most were innocent of the crimes, but no one spoke for them. A
large number were forced to make false confessions under torture
and were executed – several among them were talented professionals.
Source
Source
India and the Contemporary World
Box 5
Existing socialist parties in Europe did not wholly approve of the
way the Bolsheviks took power –  and kept it. However, the possibility
of a workers’ state fired people’s imagination across the world. In
many countries, communist parties were formed – like the
Communist Party of Great Britain. The Bolsheviks encouraged
colonial peoples to follow their experiment. Many non-Russians from
outside the USSR participated in the Conference of the Peoples of
the East (1920) and the Bolshevik-founded Comintern (an international
union of pro-Bolshevik socialist parties). Some received education in
the USSR’s Communist University of the Workers of the East. By
the time of the outbreak of the Second World War, the USSR had
given socialism a global face and world stature.
Yet by the 1950s it was acknowledged within the country that the
style of government in the USSR was not in keeping with the ideals
of the Russian Revolution. In the world socialist movement too it
was recognised that all was not well in the Soviet Union. A backward
country had become a great power. Its industries and agriculture
had developed and the poor were being fed. But it had denied the
essential freedoms to its citizens and carried out its developmental
projects through repressive policies. By the end of the twentieth
century, the international reputation of the USSR as a socialist
country had declined though it was recognised that socialist ideals
still enjoyed respect among its people. But in each country the ideas
of socialism were rethought in a variety of different ways.
5  The Global Influence of the Russian
Revolution and the USSR
Writing about the Russian Revolution in India
Among those the Russian Revolution inspired were many Indians. Several
attended the Communist University. By the mid-1920s the Communist Party was
formed in India. Its members kept in touch with the Soviet Communist Party.
Important Indian political and cultural figures took an interest in the Soviet
experiment and visited Russia, among them Jawaharlal Nehru and Rabindranath
Tagore, who wrote about Soviet Socialism. In India, writings gave impressions of
Soviet Russia. In Hindi, R.S. Avasthi wrote in 1920-21 Russian Revolution, Lenin,
His Life and His Thoughts, and later The Red Revolution . S.D. Vidyalankar
wrote The Rebirth of Russia and The Soviet State of Russia. There was much
that was written in Bengali, Marathi, Malayalam, Tamil and Telugu.
Fig.20 – Special Issue on
Lenin of the Indo-Soviet
Journal.
Indian communists
mobilised support for the
USSR during the Second
World War.
Socialism in Europe and the Russian Revolution
Source G
Source F
An Indian arrives in Soviet Russia in 1920
‘For the first time in our lives, we were seeing Europeans
mixing freely with Asians. On seeing the Russians mingling
freely with the rest of the people of the country we were
convinced that we had come to a land of real equality.
We saw freedom in its true light. In spite of their poverty,
imposed by the counter-revolutionaries and the imperialists,
the people were more jovial and satisfied than ever before.
The revolution had instilled confidence and fearlessness in
them. The real brotherhood of mankind would be seen here
among these people of fifty different nationalities. No
barriers of caste or religion hindered them from mixing freely
with one another.  Every soul was transformed into an orator.
One could see a worker, a peasant or a soldier haranguing
like a professional lecturer.’
Shaukat Usmani, Historic Trips of a Revolutionary.
Rabindranath Tagore wrote from Russia in 1930
‘Moscow appears much less clean than the other
European capitals. None of those hurrying along the
streets look smart. The whole place belongs to the
workers … Here the masses have not in the least been
put in the shade by the gentlemen … those who lived in
the background for ages have come forward in the open
today … I thought of the peasants and workers in my
own country. It all seemed like the work of the Genii in
the Arabian Nights. [here] only a decade ago they were
as illiterate, helpless and hungry as our own masses …
Who could be more astonished than an unfortunate Indian
like myself to see how they had removed the mountain of
ignorance and helplessness in these few years’.
Activity
Compare the passages written by Shaukat
Usmani and Rabindranath Tagore. Read
them in relation to Sources C, D and E.
! What did Indians find impressive about
the USSR ?
! What did the writers fail to notice?
India and the Contemporary World
Questions
What were the social, economic and political conditions in Russia before
1905?
In what ways was the working population in Russia different from other
countries in Europe, before 1917?
Why did the Tsarist autocracy collapse in 1917?
Make two lists: one with the main events and the effects of the February
Revolution and the other with the main events and effects of the October
Revolution. Write a paragraph on who was involved in each, who were the
leaders and what was the impact of each on Soviet history.
What were the main changes brought about by the Bolsheviks immediately
after the October Revolution?
Write a few lines to show what you know about:
kulaks
the Duma
women workers between 1900 and 1930
the Liberals
Stalin’s collectivisation programme.
Activities
Imagine that you are a striking worker in 1905 who is being tried in court
for your act of rebellion. Draft the speech you would make in your defence.
Act out your speech for your class.
Write the headline and a short news item about the uprising of 24 October
1917 for each of the following newspapers
! a Conservative paper in France
! a Radical newspaper in Britain
! a Bolshevik newspaper in Russia
Imagine that you are a middle-level wheat farmer in Russia after
collectivisation. You have decided to write a letter to Stalin
explaining your objections to collectivisation. What would you write about
the conditions of your life? What do you think would be Stalin’s response
to such a farmer?
Activities
Nazism and the Rise of Hitler
In the spring of 1945, a little eleven-year-old German boy called
Helmuth was lying in bed when he overheard his parents discussing
something in serious tones. His father, a prominent physician,
deliberated with his wife whether the time had come to kill the entire
family, or if he should commit suicide alone. His father spoke about
his fear of revenge, saying, ‘Now the Allies will do to us what we did to
the crippled and Jews.’ The next day, he took Helmuth to the woods,
where they spent their last happy time together, singing old children’s
songs. Later, Helmuth’s father shot himself in his office. Helmuth
remembers that he saw his father’s bloody uniform being burnt in the
family fireplace. So traumatised was he by what he had overheard and
what had happened, that he reacted by refusing to eat at home for the
following nine years! He was afraid that his mother might poison him.
Although Helmuth may not have realised all that it meant, his father
had been a Nazi and a supporter of Adolf Hitler. Many of you will
know something about the Nazis and Hitler. You probably know
of Hitler’s determination to make Germany into a mighty power
and his ambition of conquering all of Europe. You may have heard
that he killed Jews. But Nazism was not one or two isolated acts. It
was a system, a structure of ideas about the world and politics. Let
us try and understand what Nazism was all about. Let us see why
Helmuth’s father killed himself and what the basis of his fear was.
In May 1945, Germany surrendered to the Allies. Anticipating what
was coming, Hitler, his propaganda minister Goebbels and his entire
family committed suicide collectively in his Berlin bunker in April.
At the end of the war, an International Military Tribunal at
Nuremberg was set up to prosecute Nazi war criminals for Crimes
against Peace, for War Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity.
Germany’s conduct during the war, especially those actions which
Nazism and the Rise
Nazism and the Rise
Nazism and the Rise
Nazism and the Rise
Nazism and the Rise
of Hitler
of Hitler
of Hitler
of Hitler
of Hitler
Nazism and the Rise of Hitler
Fig.1 – Hitler (centre) and Goebbels (left)
leaving after an official meeting, 1932.
New words
Allies – The Allied Powers were initially led by the UK and France.
In 1941 they were joined by the USSR and USA. They fought
against the Axis Powers, namely Germany, Italy and Japan.
Chapter III
India and the Contemporary World
came to be called Crimes Against Humanity, raised serious moral
and ethical questions and invited worldwide condemnation. What
were these acts?
Under the shadow of the Second World War, Germany had waged
a genocidal war, which resulted in the mass murder of selected
groups of innocent civilians of Europe. The number of people killed
included 6 million Jews, 200,000 Gypsies, 1 million Polish civilians,
70,000 Germans who were considered mentally and physically
disabled, besides innumerable political opponents. Nazis devised
an unprecedented means of killing people, that is, by gassing them in
various killing centres like Auschwitz. The Nuremberg Tribunal
sentenced only eleven leading Nazis to death. Many others were
imprisoned for life. The retribution did come, yet the punishment
of the Nazis was far short of the brutality and extent of their crimes.
The Allies did not want to be as harsh on defeated Germany as
they had been after the First World War.
Everyone came to feel that the rise of Nazi Germany could be
partly traced back to the German experience at the end of  the
First World War.
What was this experinece?
New words
Genocidal – Killing on large scale leading
to destruction of large sections of people
Nazism and the Rise of Hitler
Germany, a powerful empire in the early years of the twentieth
century,  fought the First World War (1914-1918) alongside the
Austrian empire  and against the Allies (England, France and Russia.)
All joined the war enthusiastically hoping to gain from a quick
victory. Little did they realise that the war would stretch on,
eventually draining Europe of all its resources. Germany made initial
gains by occupying France and Belgium. However the Allies,
strengthened by the US entry in 1917, won , defeating Germany and the
Central Powers in November 1918.
The defeat of Imperial Germany and the abdication of  the emperor
gave an opportunity to parliamentary parties to recast German polity.
A National Assembly met at Weimar and established a democratic
constitution with a federal structure. Deputies were now elected to
the German Parliament or Reichstag, on the basis of equal and
universal votes cast by all adults including women.
This republic, however, was not received well by its own people
largely because of the terms it was forced to accept after Germany’s
defeat at the end of the First  World War. The peace treaty at
1  Birth of the Weimar Republic
Fig.2 – Germany after the
Versailles Treaty. You can see in
this map the parts of the
territory that Germany lost after
the treaty.
Germany 1914
Land taken from Germany
Land under League of Nations control
Demilitarised zone
India and the Contemporary World
1.1 The Effects of the War
The war had a devastating impact on the entire continent both
psychologically and financially. From a continent of creditors,
Europe turned into one of debtors. Unfortunately, the infant Weimar
Republic was being made to pay for the sins of the old empire. The
republic carried the burden of war guilt and national humiliation
and was financially crippled by being forced to pay compensation.
Those who supported the Weimar Republic, mainly Socialists, Catholics
and Democrats, became easy targets of  attack in the conservative
nationalist circles. They were mockingly called the ‘November criminals’.
This mindset had a major impact on the political developments of the
early 1930s, as we will soon see.
The First World War left a deep imprint on European society and
polity. Soldiers came to be placed above civilians. Politicians and
publicists laid great stress on the need for men to be aggressive, strong
and masculine. The media glorified trench life. The truth, however,
was that soldiers lived miserable lives in these trenches, trapped with
rats feeding on corpses. They faced poisonous gas and enemy shelling,
and witnessed their ranks reduce rapidly. Aggressive war propaganda
and national honour occupied centre stage in the public sphere, while
popular support grew for conservative dictatorships that had recently
come into being. Democracy was indeed a young and fragile idea,
which could not survive the instabilities of interwar Europe.
1.2 Political Radicalism and Economic Crises
The birth of the Weimar Republic coincided with the revolutionary
uprising of the Spartacist League on the pattern of the Bolshevik
Revolution in Russia. Soviets of workers and sailors were established
Versailles with the Allies was a harsh and humiliating peace. Germany lost
its overseas colonies, a tenth of its population, 13 per cent of its territories,
75 per cent of  its iron and 26 per cent of  its coal to France, Poland,
Denmark and Lithuania. The Allied Powers demilitarised Germany to
weaken its power. The War Guilt Clause held Germany responsible for
the war and  damages the Allied countries suffered. Germany was forced
to pay compensation amounting to £6 billion. The Allied armies also
occupied the resource-rich Rhineland for much of the 1920s. Many
Germans held the new Weimar Republic responsible for not only the
defeat in the war but the disgrace at Versailles.
Nazism and the Rise of Hitler
in many cities. The political atmosphere in Berlin was charged with
demands for Soviet-style governance. Those opposed to this – such
as the socialists, Democrats and Catholics – met in Weimar to give
shape to the democratic republic. The Weimar Republic crushed the
uprising with the help of a war veterans organisation called Free
Corps. The anguished Spartacists later founded the Communist Party of
Germany. Communists and Socialists henceforth became irreconcilable
enemies and could not make common cause against Hitler. Both
revolutionaries and militant nationalists craved for radical solutions.
Political radicalisation was only heightened by the economic crisis
of 1923. Germany had fought the war largely on loans and had to
pay war reparations in gold. This depleted gold reserves at a time
resources were scarce. In 1923 Germany refused to pay, and the
French occupied its leading industrial area, Ruhr, to claim their coal.
Germany retaliated with passive resistance and printed paper currency
recklessly. With too much  printed money in circulation, the value
of the German mark fell. In April the US dollar was equal to 24,000
marks, in July 353,000 marks, in August 4,621,000 marks  and  at
Fig.3 – This is a rally organised by the radical group known as the Spartacist League.
In the winter of 1918-1919 the streets of Berlin were taken over by the people. Political demonstrations became common.
Fig.4 – Baskets and carts being loaded at a
bank in Berlin with paper currency for wage
payment, 1923. The German mark had so
little value that vast amounts had to be used
even for small payments.
New words
Deplete – Reduce, empty out
Reparation – Make up for a wrong done
India and the Contemporary World
98,860,000 marks by December, the figure had run into trillions. As
the value of the mark collapsed, prices of goods soared. The image of
Germans carrying cartloads of currency notes to buy a loaf of bread
was widely publicised evoking worldwide sympathy. This crisis came
to be known as hyperinflation, a situation when prices rise
phenomenally high.
Eventually, the Americans intervened and bailed Germany out of
the crisis by introducing the Dawes Plan, which reworked the terms
of reparation to ease the financial burden on Germans.
1.3 The Years of Depression
The years between 1924 and 1928 saw some stability. Yet this was
built on sand. German investments and industrial recovery were
totally dependent on short-term loans, largely from the USA. This
support was withdrawn when the Wall Street Exchange crashed in
1929. Fearing a fall in prices, people made frantic efforts to sell their
shares. On one single day, 24 October, 13 million shares were sold.
This was the start of the Great Economic Depression. Over the next
three years, between 1929 and 1932, the national income of the USA
fell by half. Factories shut down, exports fell, farmers were badly hit
and speculators withdrew their money from the market. The effects
of this recession in the US economy were felt worldwide.
The German economy was the worst hit by the economic crisis. By
1932, industrial production was reduced to 40 per cent of the 1929
level. Workers lost their jobs or were paid reduced wages. The number
of unemployed touched an unprecedented 6 million. On the streets
of Germany you could see men with placards around their necks
saying, ‘Willing to do any work’. Unemployed youths played cards
or simply sat at street corners, or desperately queued up at the local
employment exchange. As jobs disappeared, the youth took to
criminal activities and total despair became  commonplace.
The economic crisis created deep anxieties and fears in people. The
middle classes, especially salaried employees and pensioners, saw
their savings diminish when the currency lost its value. Small
businessmen, the self-employed and retailers suffered as their
Fig.5 – Homeless men queuing up for a
night’s shelter, 1923.
Fig.6  – Sleeping on the line. During the Great
Depression the unemployed could not hope for
either wage or shelter. On winter nights when
they wanted a shelter over their head, they
had to pay to sleep like this.
New words
Wall Street Exchange – The name of the world’s biggest stock
exchange located in the USA.
Nazism and the Rise of Hitler
businesses got ruined. These sections of society were filled with the
fear of proletarianisation, an anxiety of being reduced to the ranks
of the working class, or worse still, the unemployed. Only organised
workers could manage to keep their heads above water, but
unemployment weakened their bargaining power. Big business was
in crisis. The large mass of peasantry was affected by a sharp fall in
agricultural prices and women, unable to fill their children’s
stomachs, were filled with a sense of deep despair.
Politically too the Weimar Republic was fragile. The Weimar
constitution had some inherent defects, which made it unstable
and vulnerable to dictatorship. One was proportional
representation. This made achieving a majority by any one party a
near impossible task, leading to a rule by coalitions. Another defect
was Article 48, which gave the President the powers to impose
emergency, suspend civil rights and rule by decree. Within its short
life, the Weimar Republic saw twenty different cabinets lasting on
an average 239 days, and a liberal use of Article 48. Yet the crisis
could not be managed. People lost confidence in the democratic
parliamentary system, which seemed to offer no solutions.
New words
Proletarianisation – To become impoverished to the level of
working classes.
India and the Contemporary World
This crisis in the economy, polity and society formed the background
to Hitler’s rise to power. Born in 1889 in Austria, Hitler spent his
youth in poverty. When the First World War broke out, he enrolled
for the army, acted as a messenger in the front, became a corporal, and
earned medals for bravery. The German defeat horrified him and the
Versailles Treaty made him furious. In 1919, he joined a small group
called the German Workers’ Party. He subsequently took over the
organisation and renamed it the National Socialist German Workers’
Party. This party came to be known as the Nazi Party.
In 1923, Hitler planned to seize control of Bavaria, march to Berlin
and capture power. He failed, was arrested, tried for treason, and
later released. The Nazis could not effectively mobilise popular
support till the early 1930s. It was during the Great Depression that
Nazism became a mass movement. As we have seen, after 1929, banks
collapsed and businesses shut down, workers lost their jobs and the
middle classes were threatened with destitution. In such a situation
Nazi propaganda stirred hopes of a better future. In 1928, the Nazi
Party got no more than 2. 6 per cent votes in the Reichstag – the
German parliament. By 1932, it had become the largest party with
37 per cent votes.
2  Hitler’s Rise to Power
Fig.7 – Hitler being greeted at the Party Congress in Nuremberg in 1938.
New words
Propaganda – Specific type of message
directly aimed at influencing the opinion
of people (through the use of posters, films,
speeches, etc.)
Nazism and the Rise of Hitler
Hitler was a powerful speaker. His passion and his words moved
people. He promised to build a strong nation, undo the injustice of
the Versailles Treaty and restore the dignity of the German people.
He promised employment for those looking for work, and a secure
future for the youth. He promised to weed out all foreign influences
and resist all foreign ‘conspiracies’ against Germany.
Hitler devised a new style of politics. He understood the significance
of rituals and spectacle in mass mobilisation. Nazis held massive rallies
and public meetings to demonstrate the support for Hitler and instil
a sense of unity among the people. The Red banners with the
Swastika, the Nazi salute, and the ritualised rounds of applause after
the speeches were all part of this spectacle of power.
Fig.9 — Hitler addressing SA and SS columns.
Notice the sweeping and straight columns of
people. Such photographs were intended to
show the grandeur and power of the Nazi
movement
Fig.8 – Nuremberg Rally, 1936.
Rallies like this were held every year. An
important aspect of these was the
demonstration of Nazi power as various
organisations paraded past Hitler, swore
loyalty and listened to his speeches.
India and the Contemporary World
Nazi propaganda skilfully projected Hitler as a messiah, a saviour, as
someone who had arrived to deliver people from their distress. It is
an image that captured the imagination of a people whose sense of
dignity and pride had been shattered, and who were living in a time
of acute economic and political crises.
2.1 The Destruction of Democracy
On 30 January 1933, President Hindenburg offered the
Chancellorship, the highest position in the cabinet of ministers, to
Hitler. By now the Nazis had  managed to rally the conservatives to
their cause. Having acquired power, Hitler set out to dismantle the
structures of democratic rule. A mysterious fire that broke out in
the German Parliament building in February facilitated his move.
The Fire Decree of 28 February 1933 indefinitely suspended civic
rights like freedom of speech, press and assembly that had been
guaranteed by the Weimar constitution. Then he turned on his arch-
enemies, the Communists, most of whom were hurriedly packed off
to the newly established concentration camps. The repression of
the Communists was severe. Out of the surviving 6,808 arrest files
of Duesseldorf, a small city of half a million population, 1,440 were
those of Communists alone. They were, however, only one among
the 52 types of victims persecuted by the Nazis across the country.
On 3 March 1933, the famous Enabling Act was passed. This Act
established dictatorship in Germany. It gave Hitler all powers to
sideline Parliament and rule by decree. All political parties and trade
unions were banned except for the Nazi Party and its affiliates. The
state established complete control over the economy, media, army
and judiciary.
Special surveillance and security forces were created to control and
order society in ways that the Nazis wanted.  Apart from the already
existing regular police in green uniform and the SA or the Storm
Troopers, these included the Gestapo (secret state police), the SS (the
protection squads), criminal police and the Security Service (SD). It
was the extra-constitutional powers of these newly organised forces
that gave the Nazi state its reputation as the most dreaded criminal
state. People could now be detained in Gestapo torture chambers,
rounded up and sent to concentration camps, deported at will or
arrested without any legal procedures. The police forces acquired
powers to rule with impunity.
New words
Concentration camp – A camp where people
were isolated and detained without due
process of law. Typically, it was surrounded
by electrified barbed wire fences.
Nazism and the Rise of Hitler
2.2 Reconstruction
Hitler assigned the responsibility of economic recovery to the
economist Hjalmar Schacht who aimed at full production and full
employment through a state-funded work-creation programme. This
project produced the famous German superhighways and the
people’s car, the Volkswagen.
In foreign policy also Hitler acquired quick successes. He pulled
out of the League of Nations in 1933, reoccupied the Rhineland in
1936, and integrated Austria and Germany in 1938 under the slogan,
One people, One empire, and One leader. He then went on to wrest German-
speaking Sudentenland from Czechoslovakia, and gobbled up the
entire country. In all of this he had the unspoken support of
England, which had considered the Versailles verdict too harsh.
These quick successes at home and abroad seemed to reverse the
destiny of the country.
Hitler did not stop here. Schacht had advised Hitler against investing
hugely in rearmament as the state still ran on deficit financing.
Cautious people, however, had no place in Nazi Germany. Schacht
had to leave. Hitler chose war as the way out of the approaching
Fig.10 – The poster announces: ‘Your
volkswagen’.
Such posters suggested that owning a car was
no longer just a dream for an ordinary worker.
Fig.11 – Expansion of Nazi power: Europe 1942.
India and the Contemporary World
economic crisis. Resources were to be accumulated through
expansion of territory.  In September 1939, Germany invaded
Poland. This started a war with France and England. In September
1940, a Tripartite Pact was signed between Germany, Italy and
Japan, strengthening Hitler’s claim to international power. Puppet
regimes, supportive of Nazi Germany, were installed in a large
part of Europe. By the end of 1940, Hitler was at the pinnacle of
his power.
Hitler now moved to achieve his long-term aim of conquering
Eastern Europe. He wanted to ensure food supplies and living space
for Germans.  He attacked the Soviet Union in June 1941. In this
historic blunder Hitler exposed the German western front to British
aerial bombing and the eastern front to the powerful Soviet armies.
The Soviet Red Army inflicted a crushing and humiliating defeat
on Germany at Stalingrad.  After this the Soviet Red Army
hounded out the retreating German soldiers until they reached the
heart of Berlin, establishing Soviet hegemony over the entire Eastern
Europe for half a century thereafter.
Meanwhile, the USA had resisted involvement in the war. It was
unwilling to once again face all the economic problems that the
First World War had caused. But it could not stay out of the war
for long. Japan was expanding its power in the east. It had occupied
French Indo-China and was planning attacks on US naval bases in
the Pacific. When Japan extended its support to Hitler and bombed
the US base at Pearl Harbor, the US entered the Second World
War. The war ended in May 1945 with Hitler’s defeat and the US
dropping of the atom bomb on Hiroshima in Japan.
From this brief account of what happened in the Second World
War, we now return to Helmuth and his father’s story, a story of
Nazi criminality during the war.
Fig.12 – Newspapers in India track the
developments in Germany.
Nazism and the Rise of Hitler
Activity
The crimes that Nazis committed were linked to a system of belief
and a set of practices.
Nazi ideology was synonymous with Hitler’s worldview. According
to this there was no equality between people, but only a racial
hierarchy. In this view blond, blue-eyed, Nordic German Aryans
were at the top, while Jews were located at the lowest rung. They
came to be regarded as an anti-race, the arch-enemies of the Aryans.
All other coloured people were placed in between depending upon
their external features. Hitler’s racism borrowed from thinkers like
Charles Darwin and Herbert Spencer. Darwin was a natural scientist
who tried to explain the creation of plants and animals through the
concept of evolution and natural selection. Herbert Spencer later
added the idea of survival of the fittest. According to this idea, only
those species survived on earth that could adapt themselves to
changing climatic conditions. We should bear in mind that Darwin
never advocated human intervention in what he thought was a purely
natural process of selection. However, his ideas were used by racist
thinkers and politicians to justify imperial rule over conquered
peoples. The Nazi argument was simple: the strongest race would
survive and the weak ones would perish. The Aryan race was the
finest. It had to retain its purity, become stronger and dominate the
world.
The other aspect of Hitler’s ideology related to the geopolitical
concept of Lebensraum, or living space. He believed that new territories
had to be acquired for settlement. This would enhance the area of
the mother country, while enabling the settlers on new lands to retain
an intimate link with the place of their origin. It would also enhance
the material resources and power of the German nation.
Hitler intended to extend German boundaries by moving eastwards,
to concentrate all Germans geographically in one place. Poland became
the laboratory for this experimentation.
3.1 Establishment of the Racial State
Once in power, the Nazis quickly began to implement their dream
of creating an exclusive racial community of pure Germans by
physically eliminating all those who were seen as  ‘undesirable’ in the
3  The Nazi Worldview
Source A
‘For this earth is not allotted to anyone
nor is it presented to anyone as a gift. It
is awarded by providence to people who
in their hearts have the courage to
conquer it, the strength to preserve it,
and the industry to put it to the plough…
The primary right of this world is the right
to life, so far as one possesses the
strength for this. Hence on the basis of
this right a vigorous nation will always
find ways of adapting its territory to its
population size.’
Hitler, Secret Book, ed. Telford Taylor.
Read Sources A and B
! What do they tell you about Hitler’s
imperial ambition?
! What do you think Mahatma Gandhi would
have said to Hitler about these ideas?
Source B
‘In an era when the earth is gradually
being divided up among states, some of
which embrace almost entire continents,
we cannot speak of a world power in
connection with a formation whose
political mother country is limited to the
absurd area of five hundred kilometers.’
Hitler, Mein Kampf, p. 644.
New words
Nordic German Aryans – One branch of
those classified as Aryans. They lived in
north European countries and had German
or related origin.
India and the Contemporary World
extended empire. Nazis wanted only a society of ‘pure and healthy
Nordic Aryans’. They alone were considered ‘desirable’. Only they
were seen as worthy of prospering and multiplying against all others
who were classed as ‘undesirable’. This meant that even those Germans
who were seen as impure or abnormal had no right to exist. Under
the Euthanasia Programme, Helmuth’s father along with other Nazi
officials had condemned to death many Germans who were considered
mentally or physically unfit.
Jews were not the only community classified as ‘undesirable’. There
were others. Many Gypsies and blacks living in Nazi Germany were
considered as racial ‘inferiors’ who threatened the biological purity
of the ‘superior Aryan’ race. They were widely persecuted. Even
Russians and Poles were considered subhuman, and hence undeserving
of any humanity. When Germany occupied Poland and parts of
Russia, captured civilians were forced to work as slave labour. Many
of them died simply through hard work and starvation.
Jews remained the worst sufferers in Nazi Germany. Nazi hatred  of
Jews had a precursor in the traditional Christian hostility towards
Jews. They had been stereotyped as killers of Christ and
usurers.Until medieval times  Jews were barred from owning land.
They survived mainly through trade and moneylending. They lived
in separately marked areas called ghettos. They were often persecuted
through periodic organised violence, and expulsion from the land.
However, Hitler’s hatred of Jews was based on pseudoscientific
theories of race, which held that conversion was no solution to
‘the Jewish problem’. It could be solved only through their
total elimination.
From 1933 to 1938 the Nazis terrorised, pauperised and segregated
the Jews, compelling them to leave the country. The next phase,
1939-1945, aimed at concentrating them in certain areas and eventually
killing them in gas chambers in Poland.
3.2 The Racial Utopia
Under the shadow of war, the Nazis proceeded to realise their
murderous, racial ideal. Genocide and war became two sides of the
same coin. Occupied Poland was divided up. Much of north-western
Poland was annexed to Germany. Poles were forced to leave their
homes and properties behind to be occupied by ethnic Germans
brought in from occupied Europe. Poles were then herded like
New words
Gypsy – The groups that were classified as
‘gypsy’ had their own community identity.
Sinti and Roma were two such communities.
Many of them traced their origin to India.
Pauperised – Reduce to absolute poverty
Persecution – Systematic, organised
punishment of those belonging to a group
or religion
Usurers – Moneylenders charging excessive
interest; often used as a term of abuse
Fig.13 – Police escorting gypsies who are
being deported to Auschwitz, 1943-1944.
Nazism and the Rise of Hitler
Activity
See the next two pages and write briefly:
! What does citizenship mean to you? Look at
Chapters I and 3 and write 200 words on how
the French Revolution and Nazism defined
citizenship.
! What did the Nuremberg Laws mean to the
‘undesirables’ in Nazi Germany? What other
legal measures were taken against them to
make them feel unwanted?
Fig.14 – This is one of the freight cars used to deport Jews to the death chambers.
cattle in the other part called the General Government, the
destination of all ‘undesirables’ of the empire. Members of the Polish
intelligentsia were murdered in large numbers in order to keep the
entire people intellectually and spiritually servile. Polish children
who looked like Aryans were forcibly snatched from their mothers
and examined by ‘race experts’. If they passed the race tests they
were raised in German families and if not, they were deposited in
orphanages where most perished. With some of the largest ghettos
and gas chambers, the General Government also served as the killing
fields for the Jews.
India and the Contemporary World
STEPS TO DEATH
Stage 2: Ghettoisation 1940 - 1944
YOU HAVE NO RIGHT TO LIVE AMONG US
From September 1941, all Jews had to wear a yellow Star of David on their breasts. This identity mark was stamped on their passport,
all legal documents and houses. They were kept in Jewish houses in Germany, and in ghettos like Lodz and Warsaw in the east. These
became sites of extreme misery and poverty. Jews had to surrender all their wealth before they entered a ghetto. Soon the ghettos
were brimming with hunger, starvation and disease due to deprivation and poor hygiene.
Fig.15 – The sign declares that
this North Sea bathing resort is
free of Jews.
Fig.16 – Park bench announces: ‘FOR ARYANS ONLY’
Fig.17 – ‘This is all I have to sell’.
Men and women were left with nothing to survive
in the ghettos.
New words
Synagogues – Place of worship for people
of Jewish faith
Stage 1: Exclusion 1933-1939
YOU HAVE NO RIGHT TO LIVE AMONG US AS CITIZENS
The Nuremberg Laws of citizenship of September 1935:
1. Only Persons of German or related blood would henceforth be German
citizens enjoying the protection of the German empire.
2. Marriages between Jews and Germans were forbidden.
3. Extramarital relations between Jews and Germans became a crime.
4. Jews were forbidden to fly the national flag.
Other legal measures included:
Boycott of Jewish businesses
Expulsion from government services
Forced selling and confiscation of their properties
Besides, Jewish properties were vandalised and looted, houses attacked,
synagogues burnt and men arrested in a pogrom in November. 1938,
remembered as ‘the night of broken glass’
Nazism and the Rise of Hitler
Jews from Jewish houses, concentration camps and ghettos from different parts of Europe were brought to death factories by
goods trains. In Poland and elsewhere in the east, most notably Belzek,  Auschwitz, Sobibor, Treblinka, Chelmno and Majdanek,
they were charred in gas chambers. Mass killings took place within minutes with  scientific precision.
Fig.18 – Killed while trying to escape. The
concentration camps were enclosed with live wires.
Fig.19 – Piles of clothes outside the gas chamber.
Fig.21 – A concentration camp.
A camera can make a death
camp look beautiful.
Stage 3: Annihilation 1941 onwards:
YOU HAVE NO RIGHT TO LIVE
Fig.22 – Shoes taken away from prisoners before
the ‘Final Solution’.
Fig.20 – A Concentration Camp.
India and the Contemporary World
Activity
Hitler was fanatically interested in the youth of the country. He felt
that a strong Nazi society could be established only by teaching children
Nazi ideology. This required a control over the child both inside and
outside school.
What happened in schools under Nazism? All schools were ‘cleansed’
and ‘purified’. This meant that teachers who were Jews or seen as
‘politically unreliable’ were dismissed. Children were first segregated:
Germans and Jews could not sit together or play together.
Subsequently, ‘undesirable children’ – Jews,  the physically handicapped,
Gypsies – were thrown out of schools. And finally in the 1940s, they
were taken to the gas chambers.
‘Good German’ children were subjected to a process of Nazi schooling,
a prolonged period of ideological training. School textbooks were
rewritten. Racial science was introduced to justify Nazi ideas of race.
Stereotypes about Jews were popularised even through maths classes.
Children were taught to be loyal and submissive, hate Jews, and worship
Hitler. Even the function of sports was to nurture a spirit of violence
and aggression among children. Hitler believed that boxing could make
children iron hearted, strong and masculine.
Youth organisations were made responsible for educating German
youth in the ‘the spirit of National Socialism’. Ten-year-olds had to
enter Jungvolk.  At 14, all boys had to join the Nazi youth organisation
– Hitler Youth – where they learnt to worship war, glorify aggression
and violence, condemn democracy, and hate Jews, communists, Gypsies
and all those categorised as ‘undesirable’. After a period of rigorous
ideological and physical training they joined the Labour Service, usually
at the age of 18. Then they had to serve in the armed forces and enter
one of the Nazi organisations.
The Youth League of the Nazis was founded in 1922. Four years later
it was renamed Hitler Youth. To unify the youth movement under
Nazi control, all other youth organisations were systematically dissolved
and finally banned.
4  Youth in Nazi Germany
If you were a student sitting in one of these
classes, how would you have felt towards
Jews?
Have you ever thought of the stereotypes of
other communities that people around you
believe in? How have they acquired them?
Fig.23 – Classroom scene depicting a lesson
on racial anti-Semitism.
From Der Giftpilz (The Poison Mushroom) by
Ernst Hiemer (Nuremberg: der Sturmer, 1938),
p.7. Caption reads: ‘The Jewish nose is bent at
its point. It looks like the number six.’
Fig.24 – Jewish teacher and Jewish pupils
expelled from school under the jeers of
classmates.
From Trau keinem jud auf gruner Heid: Ein
Bilderbuch fur Gross und Keom (Trust No
Jew on the Green Heath: a Picture Book for
Big and Little), By Elvira Bauer (Nuremberg:
Der Sturmer, 1936).
New words
Jungvolk – Nazi youth groups for children below 14 years of age.
Nazism and the Rise of Hitler
4.1 The Nazi Cult of Motherhood
Children in Nazi Germany were repeatedly told that women were
radically different from men. The fight for equal rights for men
and women that had become part of democratic struggles everywhere
was wrong and it would destroy society. While boys were taught
to be aggressive, masculine and steel hearted, girls were told that
they had to become good mothers and rear pure-blooded Aryan
children. Girls had to maintain the purity of the race, distance
Source: D
Robert Lay, head of the German Labour Front, said:
‘We start when the child is three years old. As soon as he even
starts to think, he is given a little flag to wave. Then comes
school, the Hitler Youth, military service. But when all this is
over, we don’t let go of anyone. The labour front takes hold of
them, and keeps hold until they go to the grave, whether they
like it or not.’
Source: C
All boys between the ages of six and ten went through a
preliminary training in Nazi ideology. At the end of the training
they had to take the following oath of loyalty to Hitler:
‘In the presence of this blood banner which represents our
Fuhrer I swear to devote all my energies and my strength to
the saviour of our country, Adolf Hitler. I am willing and ready to
give up my life for him, so help me God.’
From W. Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich
Fig.25 – ‘Desirable’ children that
Hitler wanted to see multiplied.
Fig.26 – A German-blooded
infant with his mother being
brought from occupied Europe
to Annexed Poland for
settlement.
Fig.27 – Jewish children arriving at a death
factory to be gassed
Activity
Look at Figs. 23, 24, and 27. Imagine yourself
to be a Jew or a Pole in Nazi Germany. It is
September 1941, and the law forcing Jews to
wear the Star of David has just been declared.
Write an account of one day in your life.
India and the Contemporary World
In an address to women at the
Nuremberg Party Rally, 8 September
1934, Hitler said:
We do not consider it correct for the
woman to interfere in the world of the
man, in his main sphere. We consider it
natural that these two worlds remain
distinct…What the man gives in courage
on the battlefield, the woman gives in
eternal self-sacrifice, in eternal pain and
suffering. Every child that women bring
to the world is a battle, a battle waged
for the existence of her people.
Source E
themselves from Jews, look after the home, and teach their
children Nazi values. They had to be the bearers of the Aryan
culture and race.
In 1933 Hitler said: ‘In my state the mother is the most important
citizen.’ But in Nazi Germany all mothers were not treated equally.
Women who bore racially undesirable children were punished
and those who produced racially desirable children were awarded.
They were given favoured treatment in hospitals and were also
entitled to concessions in shops and on theatre tickets and railway
fares. To encourage women to produce many children, Honour
Crosses were awarded. A bronze cross was given for four children,
silver for six and gold for eight or more.
All ‘Aryan’ women who deviated from the prescribed code of
conduct were publicly condemned, and severely punished. Those
who maintained contact with Jews, Poles and Russians were
paraded through the town with shaved heads, blackened faces and
placards hanging around their necks announcing ‘I have sullied
the honour of the nation’. Many received jail sentences and lost
civic honour as well as their husbands and families for this
‘criminal offence’.
4.2. The Art of Propaganda
The Nazi regime used language and media with care, and often to
great effect. The terms they coined to describe their various
practices are not only deceptive. They are chilling. Nazis never
used the words ‘kill’ or ‘murder’ in their official communications.
Mass killings were termed special treatment, final solution (for the Jews),
euthanasia (for the disabled), selection and disinfections. ‘Evacuation’
meant deporting people to gas chambers. Do you know what the
gas chambers were called? They were labelled ‘disinfection-areas’,
and looked like bathrooms equipped with fake showerheads.
Media was carefully used to win support for the regime and
popularise its worldview. Nazi ideas were spread through visual
images, films, radio, posters, catchy slogans and leaflets. In posters,
groups identified as the ‘enemies’ of Germans were stereotyped,
mocked, abused and described as evil. Socialists and liberals were
represented as weak and degenerate. They were attacked as
malicious foreign agents. Propaganda films were made to create
hatred for Jews. The most infamous film was The Eternal Jew.
Orthodox Jews were stereotyped and marked. They were shown
Nazism and the Rise of Hitler
Activity
Activity
What do you think this poster is trying to depict?
Fig.28 – A Nazi poster attacking Jews.
Caption above reads: ‘Money is the God of Jews. In order to earn
money he commits the greatest crimes. He does not rest, until he can
sit on a big sack of money, until he has become the king of money.’
with flowing beards wearing kaftans, whereas in reality it was
difficult to distinguish German Jews by their outward appearance
because they were a highly assimilated community. They were
referred to as vermin, rats and pests. Their movements were compared
to those of rodents. Nazism worked on the minds of the people,
tapped their emotions, and turned their hatred and anger at those
marked as ‘undesirable’.
The Nazis made equal efforts to appeal to all the different sections of
the population. They sought to win their support by suggesting that
Nazis alone could solve all their problems.
How would you have reacted to Hilter’s ideas
if you were:
! A Jewish woman
! A non-Jewish German woman
Source F
Hitler at the  Nuremberg Party Rally, 8 September 1934, also
said:
‘The woman is the most stable element in the preservation
of a folk…she has the most unerring sense of everything that
is important to not let a race disappear because it is her
children who would be affected by all this suffering in the
first place…That is why we have integrated the woman in
the struggle of the racial community just as nature and
providence have determined so.’
India and the Contemporary World
GERMAN FARMER
YOU BELONG TO HITLER!
The German farmer stands in between two great dangers
today:
The one danger American economic system –
Big Capitalism!
The other is the Marxist economic system of Bolshevism.
Big Capitalism and Bolshevism work hand in hand:
they are born of Jewish thought
and serve the master plan of world Jewery.
Who alone can rescue the farmer from these dangers?
NATIONAL SOCIALISM.
From: a Nazi leaflet, 1932.
Activity
Look at Figs. 29 and 30 and answer the following:
What do they tell us about Nazi propaganda? How are the Nazis
trying to mobilise different sections of the population?
Fig.30 – A Nazi party poster of the 1920s. It
asks workers to vote for Hitler, the frontline
soldier.
Fig.29 – The leaflet shows how the Nazis appealed to the peasants.
Some important dates
August 1, 1914
First World War begins.
November 9, 1918
Germany capitulates, ending the war.
November 9, 1918
Proclamation of the Weimar Republic.
June 28, 1919
Treaty of Versailles.
January 30, 1933
Hitler becomes Chancellor of Germany.
September 1, 1939
Germany invades Poland. Beginning of the
Second World War.
June 22, 1941
Germany invades the USSR.
June 23,1941
Mass murder of the Jews begins.
December 8 1941
The United States joins Second World War.
January 27,1945
Soviet troops liberate Auschwitz.
May 8, 1945
Allied victory in Europe.
Nazism and the Rise of Hitler
Box 1
How did the common people react to Nazism?
Many saw the world through Nazi eyes, and spoke their mind in
Nazi language. They felt hatred and anger surge inside them when
they saw someone who looked like a Jew. They marked the houses
of Jews and reported suspicious neighbours. They genuinely believed
Nazism would bring prosperity  and improve general well-being.
But not every German was a Nazi. Many organised active resistance
to Nazism, braving police repression and death. The large majority
of Germans, however, were passive onlookers and apathetic witnesses.
They were too scared to act, to differ, to protest. They preferred to
look  away. Pastor Niemoeller, a resistance fighter, observed an
absence of protest, an uncanny silence, amongst ordinary Germans
in the face of brutal and organised crimes committed against people
in the Nazi empire. He wrote movingly about this silence:
‘First they came for the Communists,
Well, I was not a Communist –
So I said nothing.
Then they came for the Social Democrats,
Well, I was not a Social Democrat
So I did nothing,
Then they came for the trade unionists,
But I was not a trade unionist.
And then they came for the Jews,
But I was not a Jew – so I did little.
Then when they came for me,
There was no one left who could stand up for me.’
Was the lack of concern for Nazi victims only
because of the Terror? No, says Lawrence
Rees who interviewed people from diverse
backgrounds for his recent documentary,
‘The Nazis: A Warning from History’.
Erna Kranz, an ordinary German teenager in
the1930s and a grandmother now,  said to
Rees:
‘1930s offered a glimmer of hope, not just for
the unemployed but for everybody for we all
felt downtrodden. From my own experience I
could say salaries increased and Germany
seemed to have regained its sense of
purpose. I could only say for myself, I thought
it was a good time. I liked it.’
5  Ordinary People and the Crimes Against Humanity
Activity
Why does Erna Kranz say, ‘I could only say for myself’? How do you
view her opinion?
India and the Contemporary World
What Jews felt in Nazi Germany is a different story altogether.
Charlotte Beradt secretly recorded people’s dreams in her diary and
later published them in a highly disconcerting book called the Third
Reich of Dreams. She describes how Jews themselves began believing in
the Nazi stereotypes about them. They dreamt of their hooked noses,
black hair and eyes, Jewish looks and body movements. The
stereotypical images publicised in the Nazi press haunted the Jews.
They troubled them even in their dreams. Jews died many deaths
even before they reached the gas chamber.
5.1 Knowledge about the Holocaust
Information about Nazi practices had trickled out of Germany
during the last years of the regime. But it was only after the war
ended and Germany was defeated that the world came to realise the
horrors of  what had happened. While the Germans were preoccupied
with their own plight as a defeated nation emerging out of the rubble,
the Jews wanted the world to remember the atrocities and sufferings
they had endured during the Nazi killing operations – also called the
Holocaust. At its height, a ghetto inhabitant had said to another that
he wanted to outlive the war just for half an hour. Presumably he
meant that he wanted to be able to tell the world about what had
happened in Nazi Germany. This indomitable spirit to bear witness
and to preserve the documents can be seen in many ghetto and camp
inhabitants who wrote diaries, kept notebooks, and created archives.
On the other hand when the war seemed lost, the Nazi leadership
distributed petrol to its functionaries to destroy all incriminating
evidence available in offices.
Yet the history and the memory of the Holocaust live on in memoirs,
fiction, documentaries, poetry, memorials and museums in many
parts of the world today. These are a tribute to those who resisted it,
an embarrassing reminder to those who collaborated, and a warning
to those who watched in silence.
Fig.31 – Inhabitants of the Warsaw ghetto
collected documents and placed them in three
milk cans along with other containers. As
destruction seemed imminent, these containers
were buried in the cellars of buildings in 1943.
This can was discovered in 1950.
Fig.32 – Denmark secretly rescued their Jews
from Germany. This is one of the boats used
for the purpose.
Nazism and the Rise of Hitler
Box 2
We have found in non-violence a force which, if organised, can without
doubt match itself against a combination of all the most violent forces in
the world. In non-violent technique, as I have said, there is no such thing
as defeat. It is all ‘do or die’ without killing or hurting. It can be used
practically without money and obviously without the aid of science of
destruction which you have brought to such perfection. It is a marvel to
me that you do not see that it is nobody’s monopoly. If not the British,
some other power will certainly improve upon your method and beat you
with your own weapon. You are leaving no legacy to your people of
which they would feel proud. They cannot take pride in a recital of cruel
deed, however skilfully planned. I, therefore, appeal to you in the name
of humanity to stop the war….
I am,
Your sincere friend,
M. K. GANDHI
LETTER TO ADOLF HITLER
WARDHA,
December 24, 1940
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
VOL. 79.
HERR HITLER
BERLIN
GERMANY
DEAR FRIEND,
Friends have been urging me to write to you for the sake of
humanity. But I have resisted their request, because of the feeling that
any letter from me would be an impertinence. Something tells me that
I must not calculate and that I must make my appeal for whatever it
may be worth.
It is quite clear that you are today the one person in the world
who can prevent a war which may reduce humanity to the savage
state.
Must you pay that price for an object however worthy it may appear
to you to be? Will you listen to the appeal of one who has deliberately
shunned the method of war not without considerable success?
Anyway
I anticipate your forgiveness, if I have erred in writing to you.
I remain,
Your sincere friend,
M. K. GANDHI
LETTER TO ADOLF HITLER
AS AT WARDHA, C. P., INDIA,
July 23, 1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
VOL. 76.
Mahatma Gandhi writes to Hitler
India and the Contemporary World
Questions
Activities
1. Write a one page history of Germany
as a schoolchild in Nazi Germany
as a Jewish survivor of a concentration camp
as a political opponent of the Nazi regime
2. Imagine that you are Helmuth. You have had many Jewish friends in school
and do not believe that Jews are bad. Write a paragraph on what you would
say to your father.
1. Describe the problems faced by the Weimar Republic.
2. Discuss why Nazism became popular in Germany by 1930.
3. What are the peculiar features of Nazi thinking?
4. Explain why Nazi propaganda was effective in creating a hatred for Jews.
5. Explain what role women had in Nazi society. Return to Chapter 1 on the
French Revolution. Write a paragraph comparing and contrasting the role of
women in the two periods.
6.  In what ways did the Nazi state seek to establish total control over its people ?
Activities
Forest Society and Colonialism
In Section II we will shift our focus to the study of livelihoods and economies. We
will look at how the lives of forest dwellers, pastoralists and peasants changed in the
modern world and how they played a part in shaping these changes.
All too often in looking at the emergence of the modern world, we only focus on
factories and cities, on the industrial and agricultural sectors which supply the market.
But we forget that there are other economies outside these sectors, other people too
who matter to the nation. To modern eyes, the lives of pastoralists and forest dwellers,
the shifting cultivators and food gatherers often seem to be stuck in the past. It is as
if their lives are not important when we study the emergence of the contemporary
world. The chapters in Section II will suggest that we need to know about their
lives, see how they organise their world and operate their economies. These
communities are very much part of the modern world we live in today. They are
not simply survivors from a bygone era.
Chapter IV will take you into the forest and tell you about the variety of ways the
forests were used by communities living within them. It will show how in the
nineteenth century the growth of industries and urban centres,  ships and railways,
created a new demand on the forests for timber and other forest products. New
demands led to new rules of forest use, new ways of organising the forest. You will
see how colonial control was established over the forests, how forest areas were
mapped, trees were classified, and plantations were developed. All these developments
affected the lives of those local communities who used forest resources. They were
forced to operate within new systems and reorganise their lives. But they also rebelled
against the rules and persuaded the state to change its policies. The chapter will give
you an idea of the history of such developments in India and Indonesia.
SECTION II
LIVELIHOODS, ECONOMIES AND SOCIETIES
LIVELIHOODS, ECONOMIES AND SOCIETIES
India and the Contemporary World
Chapter V will track the movements of the pastoralists in the mountains and deserts,
in the plains and plateaus of India and Africa. Pastoral communities in both these
areas form an important segment of the population. Yet we rarely study their lives.
Their histories do not enter the pages of textbooks.  Chapter V will show how their
lives were affected by the controls established over the forest, the expansion of agri-
culture, and the decline of grazing fields. It will tell you about the patterns of their
movements, their relationships to other communities, and the way they adjust to
changing situations.
In Chapter VI we will read about the changes in the lives of peasants and farmers. We
will discuss the developments in India, England and the USA. Over the last two
centuries there have been major changes in the way agriculture is organised. New
technology and new demands, new rules and laws, new ideas of property have
radically changed the rural world. The growth of capitalism and colonialism have
altered rural lives. Chapter VI will introduce you to these changes, and show how
different groups of people – the poor and rich, men and women, adults and children
– were affected in different ways.
We cannot understand the making of the contemporary world unless we begin to see
the changes in the lives of diverse communities and people. We also cannot understand
the problems of modernisation unless we look at its impact on the environment.
Forest Society and Colonialism
Take a quick look around your school and home and identify all
the things that come from forests: the paper in the book you are
reading, desks and tables, doors and windows, the dyes that colour
your clothes, spices in your food, the cellophane wrapper of your
toffee, tendu leaf in bidis, gum, honey, coffee, tea and rubber. Do
not miss out the oil in chocolates, which comes from sal seeds, the
tannin used to convert skins and hides into leather, or the herbs
and roots used for medicinal purposes. Forests also provide bamboo,
wood for fuel, grass, charcoal, packaging, fruits, flowers, animals,
birds and many other things. In the Amazon forests or in the
Western Ghats, it is possible to find as many as 500 different plant
species in one forest patch.
A lot of this diversity is fast disappearing. Between 1700 and 1995,
the period of industrialisation, 13.9 million sq km of forest or 9.3
per cent of the world’s total area was cleared for industrial uses,
cultivation, pastures and fuelwood.
Forest Society and Colonialism
Forest Society and
Forest Society and
Forest Society and
Forest Society and
Forest Society and
Colonialism
Colonialism
Colonialism
Colonialism
Colonialism
Fig.1 – A sal forest in Chhattisgarh.
Look at the different heights of the trees and plants in this
picture, and the variety of species. This is a dense forest,
so very little sunlight falls on the forest floor.
Chapter IV
India and the Contemporary World
The disappearance of forests is referred to as deforestation.
Deforestation is not a recent problem. The process began many
centuries ago; but under colonial rule it became more systematic and
extensive.  Let us look at some of the causes of deforestation in India.
1.1 Land to be Improved
In 1600, approximately one-sixth of India’s landmass was under
cultivation. Now that figure has gone up to about half. As population
increased over the centuries and the demand for food went up,
peasants extended the boundaries of cultivation, clearing forests and
breaking new land. In the colonial period, cultivation expanded
rapidly for a variety of reasons. First, the British directly encouraged
1  Why Deforestation?
Fig.2 – When the valleys were full. Painting by John Dawson.
Native Americans like the Lakota tribe who lived in the Great North American Plains had a diversified economy. They
cultivated maize, foraged for wild plants and hunted bison. Keeping vast areas open for the bison to range in was seen by
the English settlers as wasteful. After the 1860s the bisons were killed in large numbers.
Forest Society and Colonialism
Source A
The idea that uncultivated land had to
be taken over and improved was popular
with colonisers everywhere in the world.
It was an argument that justified
conquest.
In 1896 the American writer, Richard
Harding, wrote on the Honduras in
Central America:
‘There is no more interesting question of
the present day than that of what is to
be done with the world’s land which is
lying unimproved; whether it shall go to
the great power that is willing to turn it
to account, or remain with its original
owner, who fails to understand its value.
The Central Americans are like a gang of
semi-barbarians in a beautifully furnished
house, of which they can understand
neither its possibilities of comfort nor its
use.’
Three years later the American-owned
United Fruit Company was founded, and
grew bananas on an industrial scale in
Central America.  The company acquired
such power over the governments of
these countries that they came to be
known as Banana Republics.
Quoted in David Spurr, The Rhetoric of
Empire, (1993).
the production of commercial crops like jute, sugar, wheat and
cotton. The demand for these crops increased in nineteenth-century
Europe where foodgrains were needed to feed the growing urban
population and raw materials were required for industrial
production. Second,  in the early nineteenth century, the colonial
state thought that forests were unproductive. They were considered
to be wilderness that had to be brought under cultivation so that
the land could yield agricultural products and revenue, and enhance
the income of the state. So between 1880 and 1920, cultivated area
rose by 6.7 million hectares.
We always see the expansion of cultivation as a sign of progress.
But we should not forget that for land to be brought under the
plough, forests have to be cleared.
1.2 Sleepers on the Tracks
Box 1
The absence of cultivation in a place does not mean the land was
uninhabited. In Australia, when the white settlers landed, they
claimed that the continent was empty or terra nullius. In fact, they
were guided through the landscape by aboriginal tracks, and led
by aboriginal guides. The different aboriginal communities in
Australia had clearly demarcated territories. The Ngarrindjeri
people of Australia plotted their land along the symbolic body of
the first ancestor, Ngurunderi. This land included five different
environments: salt water, riverine tracts, lakes, bush and desert
plains, which satisfied different socio-economic needs.
Fig.3 – Converting sal logs into sleepers in the Singhbhum forests, Chhotanagpur, May 1897.
Adivasis were hired by the forest department to cut trees, and make smooth planks which would serve as sleepers for the
railways. At the same time, they were not allowed to cut these trees to build their own houses.
New words
Sleepers – Wooden planks laid across railway
tracks; they hold the tracks in position
India and the Contemporary World
By the early nineteenth century, oak forests in England were
disappearing. This created a problem of timber supply for the Royal
Navy. How could English ships be built without a regular supply of
strong and durable timber? How could imperial power be protected
and maintained without ships?  By the 1820s, search parties were
sent to explore the forest resources of India.  Within a decade, trees
were being felled on a massive scale and vast quantities of timber
were being exported from India.
The spread of railways from the 1850s created a new demand.
Railways were essential for colonial trade and for the movement of
imperial troops. To run locomotives, wood was needed as fuel, and
to lay railway lines sleepers were essential to hold the tracks together.
Each mile of railway track required between 1,760 and 2,000 sleepers.
From the 1860s, the railway network expanded rapidly. By 1890,
about 25,500 km of track had been laid. In 1946, the length of the
tracks had increased to over 765,000 km.  As the railway tracks spread
through India, a larger and larger number of trees were felled. As
early as the 1850s, in the Madras Presidency alone, 35,000 trees were
being cut annually for sleepers. The government gave out contracts
to individuals to supply the required quantities. These contractors
began cutting trees indiscriminately. Forests around the railway tracks
fast started disappearing.
Fig.5 – Elephants piling squares of timber at a timber yard in Rangoon.
In the colonial period elephants were frequently used to lift heavy timber both in the
forests and at the timber yards.
Fig.4 – Bamboo rafts being floated down the
Kassalong river, Chittagong Hill Tracts.
Forest Society and Colonialism
Activity
Source B
‘The new line to be constructed was the Indus Valley Railway
between Multan and Sukkur, a distance of nearly 300 miles. At
the rate of 2000 sleepers per mile this would require 600,000
sleepers 10 feet by 10 inches by 5 inches (or 3.5 cubic feet
apiece), being upwards of 2,000,000 cubic feet. The
locomotives would use wood fuel. At the rate of one train daily
either way and at one maund per train-mile an annual supply
of 219,000 maunds would be demanded. In addition a large
supply of fuel for brick-burning would be required. The sleepers
would have to come mainly from the Sind Forests. The fuel
from the tamarisk and Jhand forests of Sind and the Punjab.
The other new line was the Northern State Railway from Lahore
to Multan. It was estimated that 2,200,000 sleepers would be
required for its construction.’
E.P. Stebbing, The Forests of India, Vol. II (1923).
Each mile of railway track required between
1,760 and 2,000 sleepers. If one average-
sized tree yields 3 to 5 sleepers for a 3 metre
wide broad gauge track, calculate
approximately how many trees would have to
be cut to lay one mile of track.
Fig.7 - Truck carrying logs
When the forest department decided to take up
an area for logging, one of the first things it did
was to build wide roads so that trucks could
enter. Compare this to the forest tracks along
which people walk to collect fuelwood and
other minor forest produce. Many such trucks
of wood go from forest areas to big cities.
Fig.6 - Women returning home after collecting
fuelwood.
India and the Contemporary World
1.3 Plantations
Large areas of natural forests were also cleared to make way for
tea, coffee and rubber plantations to meet Europe’s growing need
for these commodities. The colonial government took over the
forests, and gave vast areas to European planters at cheap rates.
These areas were enclosed and cleared of forests, and planted with
tea or coffee.
Fig.8 – Pleasure Brand Tea.
Forest Society and Colonialism
In the previous section we have seen that the British needed forests
in order to build ships and railways. The British were worried that
the use of forests by local people and the reckless felling of trees by
traders would destroy forests. So they decided to invite a German
expert, Dietrich Brandis, for advice, and made him the first Inspector
General of Forests in India.
Brandis realised that a proper system had to be introduced to manage
the forests and people had to be trained in the science of conservation.
This system would need legal sanction. Rules about the use of forest
resources had to be framed. Felling of trees and grazing had to be
restricted so that forests could be preserved for timber production.
Anybody who cut trees without following the system had to be
2  The Rise of Commercial Forestry
Fig.9 – One aisle of a managed poplar forest
in Tuscany, Italy.
Poplar forests are good mainly for timber.
They are not used for leaves, fruit or other
products. Look at the straight lines of trees,
all of a uniform height. This is the model that
‘scientific’ forestry has promoted.
Activity
If you were the Government of India in 1862
and responsible for supplying the railways
with sleepers and fuel on such a large scale,
what were the steps you would have taken?
India and the Contemporary World
New words
Scientific forestry – A system of cutting
trees controlled by the forest department,
in which old trees are cut and new ones
planted
punished. So Brandis set up the Indian Forest Service in 1864 and
helped formulate the Indian Forest Act of 1865. The Imperial Forest
Research Institute was set up at Dehradun in 1906. The system they
taught here was called ‘scientific forestry’. Many people now,
including ecologists, feel that this system is not scientific at all.
In scientific forestry, natural forests which had lots of different types
of trees were cut down. In their place, one type of tree was planted
in straight rows. This is called a plantation. Forest officials surveyed
the forests, estimated the area under different types of trees, and
made working plans for forest management. They planned how much
of the  plantation area to cut every year. The area  cut was then to be
replanted so that it was ready to be cut again in some years.
After the Forest Act was enacted in 1865, it was amended twice,
once in 1878 and then in 1927. The 1878 Act divided forests into
three categories: reserved, protected and village forests. The best
forests were called ‘reserved forests’. Villagers could not take anything
from these forests, even for their own use. For house building or
fuel, they could take wood from protected or village forests.
2.1 How were the Lives of People Affected?
Foresters and villagers had very different ideas of what a good forest
should look like. Villagers wanted forests with a mixture of species
to satisfy different needs – fuel, fodder, leaves. The forest department
on the other hand wanted trees which were suitable for building
Fig.10 – A deodar plantation in Kangra, 1933.
From Indian Forest Records, Vol. XV.
Fig.11 – The Imperial Forest School,
Dehra Dun, India.
The first forestry school to be inaugurated in
the British Empire.
From: Indian Forester, Vol. XXXI
Forest Society and Colonialism
ships or railways. They  needed trees that could provide hard wood,
and were tall and straight. So particular species like teak and sal were
promoted and others were cut.
In forest areas, people use forest products – roots, leaves, fruits, and
tubers – for many things. Fruits and tubers are nutritious to eat,
especially during the monsoons before the harvest has come in. Herbs
are used for medicine, wood for agricultural implements like yokes
and ploughs, bamboo makes excellent fences and is also used to make
baskets and umbrellas. A dried scooped-out gourd can be used as a
portable water bottle. Almost everything is available in the forest –
leaves can be stitched together to make  disposable plates and cups,
the siadi (Bauhinia vahlii) creeper can be used to make ropes, and the
thorny bark of the semur (silk-cotton) tree is used to grate vegetables.
Oil for cooking and to light lamps can be pressed from the fruit of
the mahua tree.
The Forest Act meant severe hardship for villagers across the country.
After the Act, all their everyday practices – cutting wood for their
Fig.12 – Collecting mahua ( Madhuca indica) from the forests.
Villagers wake up before dawn and go to the forest to collect the mahua flowers which have fallen on the forest floor. Mahua
trees are precious. Mahua flowers can be eaten or used to make alcohol. The seeds can be used to make oil.
Fig.13 – Drying tendu leaves.
The sale of tendu leaves is a major source of
income for many people living in forests. Each
bundle contains approximately 50 leaves, and if a
person works very hard they can perhaps collect
as many as 100 bundles in a day. Women,
children and old men are the main collectors.
India and the Contemporary World
houses, grazing their cattle, collecting fruits and roots, hunting and
fishing  –  became illegal. People were now forced to steal wood
from the forests, and if they were caught, they were at the mercy of
the forest guards who would take bribes from them. Women who
collected fuelwood were especially worried. It was also common for
police constables and forest guards to harass people by demanding
free food from them.
2.2 How did Forest Rules Affect Cultivation?
One of the major impacts of European colonialism was on the practice
of shifting cultivation or swidden agriculture. This is a  traditional
agricultural practice in many parts of Asia, Africa and South America. It
has many local names such as lading in Southeast Asia, milpa in Central
America, chitemene or tavy  in Africa, and chena in Sri Lanka.  In
India, dhya, penda, bewar, nevad, jhum, podu, khandad and  kumri
are some of the local terms for swidden agriculture.
In shifting cultivation, parts of the forest are cut and burnt in rotation.
Seeds are sown in the ashes after the first monsoon rains, and the crop is
harvested by October-November. Such plots are cultivated for a couple
of years and then left fallow for 12 to 18 years for the forest to grow
back. A mixture of crops is grown on these plots. In central India
and Africa it could be millets, in Brazil manioc, and in other parts of
Latin America maize and beans.
European foresters regarded this practice as harmful for the forests. They
felt that land which was used for cultivation every few years could not
grow trees for railway timber. When a forest was burnt, there was
the added danger of the flames spreading and burning valuable timber.
Activity
Children living around forest areas can often
identify hundreds of species of trees and plants.
How many species of trees can you name?
Fig.14 – Bringing grain from the threshing
grounds to the field.
The men are carrying grain in baskets from the
threshing fields. Men carry the baskets slung
on a pole across their shoulders, while women
carry the baskets on their heads.
Fig.15 – Taungya cultivation was a system in
which local farmers were allowed to cultivate
temporarily within a plantation. In this photo
taken in Tharrawaddy division in Burma in
1921 the cultivators are sowing paddy. The
men make holes in the soil using long bamboo
poles with  iron tips. The women sow paddy
in each hole.
Forest Society and Colonialism
Shifting cultivation also made it harder for the government to calculate
taxes. Therefore, the government decided to ban shifting cultivation.
As a result, many communities were forcibly displaced from their
homes in the forests. Some had to change occupations, while some
resisted through large and small rebellions.
2.3 Who could Hunt?
The new forest laws changed the lives of forest dwellers in yet another
way. Before the forest laws, many people who lived in or near forests
had survived by hunting deer, partridges and a variety of small
animals. This customary practice was prohibited by the forest laws.
Those who were caught hunting were now punished for poaching.
While the forest laws deprived people of their customary rights to
hunt, hunting of big game became a sport. In India, hunting of tigers
and other animals had been part of the culture of the court and
nobility for centuries. Many Mughal paintings show princes and
emperors enjoying a hunt. But under colonial rule the scale of hunting
increased to such an extent that various species became almost extinct.
The British saw large animals as signs of a wild, primitive and savage
society. They believed that by killing dangerous animals the British
Fig.17 – The little fisherman.
Children accompany their parents to the forest
and learn early how to fish, collect forest
produce and cultivate. The bamboo trap which
the boy is holding in his right hand is kept at
the mouth of a stream – the fish flow into it.
Fig.16 – Burning the forest penda or podu plot.
In shifting cultivation, a clearing is made in the forest, usually on the slopes of hills.
After the trees have been cut, they are burnt to provide ashes. The seeds are then
scattered in the area, and left to be irrigated by the rain.
India and the Contemporary World
would civilise India. They gave rewards for the killing of tigers, wolves
and other large animals on the grounds that they posed a threat to
cultivators. 0ver 80,000 tigers, 150,000 leopards and 200,000 wolves
were killed for reward in the period 1875-1925. Gradually, the tiger
came to be seen as a sporting trophy. The Maharaja of Sarguja alone
shot 1,157 tigers and 2,000 leopards up to 1957. A British
administrator, George Yule, killed 400 tigers. Initially certain areas
of forests were reserved for hunting. Only much later did
environmentalists and conservators begin to argue that all these species
of animals needed to be protected, and not killed.
2.4 New Trades, New Employments and New Services
While people lost out in many ways after the forest department
took control of the forests, some people benefited from the new
opportunities that had opened up in trade. Many communities left
their traditional occupations and started trading in forest products.
This happened not only in India but across the world. For example,
Fig.18 – Lord Reading hunting in Nepal.
Count the dead tigers in the photo. When British colonial officials and Rajas went hunting they were accompanied by a
whole retinue of servants. Usually, the tracking was done by skilled village hunters, and the Sahib simply fired the shot.
Source C
Baigas are a forest community of
Central India. In 1892, after their
shifting cultivation was stopped, they
petitioned to the government:
‘We daily starve, having had no
foodgrain in our possession. The only
wealth we possess is our axe. We
have no clothes to cover our body with,
but we pass cold nights by the
fireside. We are now dying for want of
food. We cannot go elsewhere. What
fault have we done that the
government does not take care of us?
Prisoners are supplied with ample food
in jail. A cultivator of the grass is not
deprived of his holding, but the
government does not give us our right
who have lived here for generations
past.’
Verrier Elwin (1939), cited in Madhav
Gadgil and Ramachandra Guha, This
Fissured Land: An Ecological History of
India.
Forest Society and Colonialism
Source D
Rubber extraction in the Putumayo
‘Everywhere in the world, conditions of
work in plantations were horrific.
The extraction of rubber in the Putumayo
region of the Amazon, by the Peruvian
Rubber Company (with British and
Peruvian interests) was dependent on
the forced labour of the local Indians,
called Huitotos. From 1900-1912, the
Putumayo output of 4000 tons of rubber
was associated with a decrease of some
30,000 among the Indian population due
to torture, disease and flight. A letter
by an employee of a rubber company
describes how the rubber was collected.
The manager summoned hundreds of
Indians to the station:
He grasped his carbine and machete
and began the slaughter of these
defenceless Indians, leaving the ground
covered with 150 corpses, among them,
men, women and children. Bathed in
blood and appealing for mercy, the
survivors were heaped with the dead
and burned to death, while the manager
shouted, “I want to exterminate all the
Indians who do not obey my orders
about the rubber that I require them to
bring in.” ’
Michael Taussig, ‘Culture of Terror-Space
of Death’, in Nicholas Dirks, ed.
Colonialism and Culture, 1992.
with the growing demand for rubber in the mid-nineteenth  century,
the Mundurucu peoples of the Brazilian Amazon who lived in villages
on high ground and cultivated manioc, began to collect latex from
wild rubber trees for supplying  to traders. Gradually, they descended
to live in trading posts and became completely dependent on traders.
In India, the trade in forest products was not new. From the medieval
period onwards, we have records of adivasi communities trading
elephants and other goods like hides, horns, silk cocoons, ivory,
bamboo, spices, fibres, grasses, gums and resins through nomadic
communities like the Banjaras.
With the coming of the British, however, trade was completely
regulated by the government. The British government gave many
large European trading firms the sole right to trade in the forest
products of particular areas. Grazing and hunting by local people
were restricted. In the process, many pastoralist and nomadic
communities like the Korava, Karacha and Yerukula of the Madras
Presidency lost their livelihoods. Some of them began to be called
‘criminal tribes’, and were forced to work instead in factories,
mines and plantations, under government supervision.
New opportunities of work did not always mean improved well-
being for the people. In Assam, both men and women from forest
communities like Santhals and Oraons from Jharkhand, and
Gonds from Chhattisgarh were recruited to work on tea
plantations. Their wages were low and conditions of work were
very bad. They could not return easily to their home villages
from where they had been recruited.
Source
India and the Contemporary World
In many parts of India, and across the world, forest communities
rebelled against the changes that were being imposed on them. The
leaders of these movements against the British like Siddhu and Kanu
in the Santhal Parganas, Birsa Munda of Chhotanagpur or Alluri
Sitarama Raju of Andhra Pradesh are still remembered today in songs
and stories.  We will now discuss in detail one such rebellion which
took place in the kingdom of Bastar in 1910.
3.1 The People of Bastar
Bastar is located in the southernmost part of Chhattisgarh and
borders Andhra Pradesh, Orissa and Maharashtra. The central part
of Bastar is on a plateau. To the north of this plateau is the
Chhattisgarh plain and to its south is the Godavari plain. The river
Indrawati winds across Bastar east to west. A number of different
communities live in Bastar such as Maria and Muria Gonds, Dhurwas,
Bhatras and Halbas. They speak different languages but share
common customs and beliefs.  The people of Bastar believe that each
village was given its land by the Earth, and in return, they look after
3  Rebellion in the Forest
Fig.19 – Army camp in Bastar, 1910.
This photograph of an army camp was taken in Bastar in 1910. The
army moved with tents, cooks and soldiers. Here a sepoy is guarding the
camp against rebels.
Fig.20 – Bastar in 2000.
In 1947 Bastar kingdom was merged with
Kanker kingdom and become Bastar district in
Madhya Pradesh. In 1998 it was divided
again into three districts, Kanker, Bastar and
Dantewada. In 2001, these became part of
Chhattisgarh. The 1910 rebellion first started
in the Kanger forest area (encircled) and soon
spread to other parts of the state.
Sketch map
Not to scale.
Forest Society and Colonialism
Source E
the earth by making some offerings at each agricultural festival. In
addition to the Earth, they show respect to the spirits of the river,
the forest and the mountain. Since each village knows where its
boundaries lie, the local people look after all the natural resources
within that boundary.  If people from a village want to take some
wood from the forests of another village, they pay a small fee called
devsari, dand or man in exchange. Some villages also protect their forests
by engaging watchmen and each household contributes some grain
to pay them.  Every year there is one big hunt where the headmen of
villages in a pargana (cluster of  villages) meet and discuss issues of
concern, including forests.
3.2 The Fears of the People
When the colonial government proposed to reserve two-thirds of
the forest in 1905, and stop shifting cultivation, hunting and collection
of forest produce, the people of Bastar were very worried. Some
villages were allowed to stay on in the reserved forests on the condition
that they worked free for the forest department in cutting and
transporting trees, and protecting the forest from fires. Subsequently,
these came to be known as ‘forest villages’. People of other villages
were displaced without any notice or compensation. For long,
villagers had been suffering from increased land rents and frequent
demands for free labour and goods by colonial officials. Then came
the terrible famines, in 1899-1900 and again in 1907-1908.  Reservations
proved to be the last straw.
People began to gather and discuss these issues in their village councils,
in bazaars and at festivals or wherever the headmen and priests of
several villages were assembled. The initiative was taken by the
Dhurwas of the Kanger forest, where reservation first took place.
Although there was no single leader, many people speak of  Gunda
Dhur, from  village Nethanar, as an important figure in the
movement. In 1910, mango boughs, a lump of earth, chillies and
arrows, began circulating between villages. These were actually
messages inviting villagers to rebel against the British. Every village
contributed something to the rebellion expenses. Bazaars were looted,
the houses of officials and traders, schools and police stations were
burnt and robbed, and grain redistributed. Most of those who were
attacked were in some way associated with the colonial state and its
oppressive laws. William Ward, a missionary who observed the events,
wrote: ‘From all directions came streaming into Jagdalpur, police,
merchants, forest peons, schoolmasters and immigrants.’
‘Bhondia collected 400 men, sacrificed a
number of goats and started off to
intercept the Dewan who was expected
to return from the direction of Bijapur.
This mob started on the 10th February,
burnt the Marenga school, the police
post, lines and pound at Keslur and the
school at Tokapal (Rajur), detached a
contingent to burn Karanji school and
captured a head constable and four
constables of the State reserve police
who had been sent out to escort the
Dewan and bring him in. The mob did
not maltreat the guard seriously but
eased them of their weapons and let
them go. One party of rebels under
Bhondia Majhi went off to the Koer river
to block the passage there in case the
Dewan left the main road. The rest went
on to Dilmilli to stop the main road from
Bijapur. Buddhu Majhi and Harchand Naik
led the main body.’
Letter from DeBrett, Political Agent,
Chhattisgarh Feudatory States to
Commissioner, Chhattisgarh Division, 23
June 1910.
India and the Contemporary World
Source F
Elders living in Bastar recounted the story of this battle they had heard
from their parents:
Podiyami Ganga of Kankapal was told by his father Podiyami Tokeli that:
‘The British came and started taking land. The Raja didn’t pay attention
to things happening around him, so seeing that land was being taken,
his supporters gathered people. War started. His staunch supporters
died and the rest were whipped. My father, Podiyami Tokeli suffered many
strokes, but he escaped and survived. It was a movement to get rid of
the British. The British used to tie them to horses and pull them. From
every village two or three people went to Jagdalpur: Gargideva and
Michkola of Chidpal, Dole and Adrabundi of Markamiras, Vadapandu of
Baleras, Unga of Palem and many others.’
Similarly, Chendru, an elder from village Nandrasa, said:
‘On the people’s side, were the big elders – Mille Mudaal of Palem, Soyekal
Dhurwa of Nandrasa, and Pandwa Majhi. People from every pargana
camped in Alnar tarai. The paltan (force) surrounded the people in a
flash. Gunda Dhur had flying powers and flew away. But what could those
with bows and arrows do? The battle took place at night. The people hid
in shrubs and crawled away. The army paltan also ran away. All those
who remained alive (of the people), somehow found their way home to
their villages.’
Source
The British sent troops to suppress the rebellion. The adivasi leaders
tried to negotiate, but the British surrounded their camps and fired
upon them. After that they marched through the villages flogging
and punishing those who had taken part in the rebellion. Most
villages were deserted as people fled into the jungles. It took three
months (February - May) for the British to regain control. However,
they never managed to capture Gunda Dhur. In a major victory
for the rebels, work on reservation was temporarily suspended,
and the area to be reserved was reduced to roughly half of that
planned before 1910.
The story of the forests and people of Bastar does not end there.
After Independence, the same practice of keeping people out of the
forests and reserving them for industrial use continued. In the 1970s,
the World Bank proposed that 4,600 hectares of natural sal forest
should be replaced by tropical pine to provide pulp for the paper
industry. It was only after protests by local environmentalists that
the project was stopped.
Let us now go to another part of Asia, Indonesia, and see what was
happening there over the same period.
Forest Society and Colonialism
Java is now famous as a rice-producing island in Indonesia. But
once upon a time it was covered mostly with forests. The colonial
power in Indonesia were the Dutch, and as we will see, there were
many similarities in the laws for forest control in Indonesia and
India.  Java in Indonesia is where the Dutch started forest
management. Like the British, they wanted timber from Java to
build ships. In 1600, the population of Java was an estimated 3.4
million. There were many villages in the fertile plains, but there
were also many communities living in the mountains and practising
shifting cultivation.
4.1 The Woodcutters of Java
The Kalangs of Java were a community of skilled forest cutters and
shifting cultivators. They were so valuable that in 1755 when the
Mataram kingdom of Java split, the 6,000 Kalang families were
equally divided between the two kingdoms. Without their expertise,
it would have been difficult to harvest teak and for the kings to
build their palaces. When the Dutch began to gain control over the
forests in the eighteenth century, they tried to make the Kalangs
work under them. In 1770, the Kalangs resisted by attacking a Dutch
fort at Joana, but the uprising was suppressed.
4.2 Dutch Scientific Forestry
In the nineteenth century, when it became
important to control territory and not just
people, the Dutch enacted forest laws in Java,
restricting villagers’ access to forests. Now
wood could only be cut for specified purposes
like making river boats or constructing houses,
and only from specific forests under close
supervision. Villagers were punished for
grazing cattle in young stands, transporting
wood without a permit, or travelling on forest
roads with horse carts or cattle.
As in India, the need to manage forests for
shipbuilding and railways led to the
4  Forest Transformations in Java
Fig.21 – Train transporting teak out of the forest – late colonial period.
India and the Contemporary World
Source G
introduction of a forest service. In 1882, 280,000 sleepers were
exported from Java alone. However, all this required labour to cut
the trees, transport the logs and prepare the sleepers. The Dutch
first imposed rents on land being cultivated in the forest and then
exempted some villages from these rents if they worked collectively
to provide free labour and buffaloes for cutting and transporting
timber.  This was known as the blandongdiensten system. Later, instead
of rent exemption, forest villagers were given small wages, but their
right to cultivate forest land was restricted.
4.3 Samin’s Challenge
Around 1890, Surontiko Samin of Randublatung village, a teak forest
village, began questioning state ownership of the forest. He argued that
the state had not created the wind, water, earth and wood, so it could not
own it. Soon a widespread movement developed. Amongst those who
helped organise it were Samin’s sons-in-law. By 1907, 3,000 families
were following his ideas.  Some of the Saminists protested by lying down
on their land when the Dutch came to survey it, while others refused to
pay taxes or fines or perform labour.
Dirk van Hogendorp, an official of the
United East India Company in colonial
Java said:
‘Batavians! Be amazed! Hear with
wonder what I have to communicate. Our
fleets are destroyed, our trade
languishes, our navigation is going to
ruin – we purchase with immense
treasures, timber and other materials
for ship-building from the northern
powers, and on Java we leave warlike
and mercantile squadrons with their
roots in the ground. Yes, the forests of
Java have timber enough to build a
respectable navy in a short time, besides
as many merchant ships as we require
… In spite of all (the cutting) the forests
of Java grow as fast as they are cut,
and would be inexhaustible under good
care and management.’
Dirk van Hogendorp, cited in Peluso, Rich
Forests, Poor People, 1992.
Fig.22 – Most of Indonesia’s forests are located in islands like Sumatra, Kalimantan and West Irian. However, Java is
where the Dutch began their ‘scientific forestry’. The island, which is now famous for rice production, was once richly
covered with teak.
Forest Society and Colonialism
4.4 War and Deforestation
The First World War and the Second World War had a major impact
on forests. In India, working plans were abandoned at this time, and
the forest department cut trees freely to meet British war needs. In
Java, just before the Japanese occupied the region, the Dutch followed
‘a scorched earth’ policy, destroying sawmills, and burning huge
piles of giant teak logs so that they would not fall into Japanese
hands. The Japanese then exploited the forests recklessly for their
own war industries, forcing forest villagers to cut down forests.
Many villagers used this opportunity to expand cultivation in the
forest. After the war, it was difficult for the Indonesian forest service
to get this land back. As in India, people’s need for agricultural land
has brought them into conflict with the forest department’s desire
to control the land and exclude people from it.
4.5 New Developments in Forestry
Since the 1980s, governments across Asia and Africa have begun to
see that scientific forestry and the policy of keeping forest
communities  away from forests has resulted in many conflicts.
Conservation of forests rather than collecting timber has become a
more important goal. The government has recognised that in order
to meet this goal, the people who live near the forests must be
involved. In many cases, across India, from Mizoram to Kerala, dense
forests have survived only because villages protected them in sacred
groves known as sarnas, devarakudu, kan, rai, etc. Some villages have
been patrolling their own forests, with each household taking it in
turns, instead of leaving it to the forest guards. Local forest
communities and environmentalists today are thinking of different
forms of forest management.
Fig.23 – Indian Munitions Board, War Timber
Sleepers piled at Soolay pagoda ready for
shipment,1917.
The Allies would not have been as successful
in the First World War and the Second World
War if they had not been able to exploit the
resources and people of their colonies. Both
the world wars had a devastating effect on the
forests of India, Indonesia and elsewhere.
The forest department cut freely to satisfy war
needs.
Fig.24 – Log yard in Rembang under Dutch
colonial rule.
India and the Contemporary World
Activities
Questions
1. Have there been changes in forest areas where you live? Find out what these
changes are and why they have happened.
2. Write a dialogue between a colonial forester and an adivasi discussing  the
issue of hunting in the forest.
1. Discuss how the changes in forest management in the colonial period affected
the following groups of people:
Shifting cultivators
Nomadic and pastoralist communities
Firms trading in timber/forest produce
Plantation owners
Kings/British officials engaged in shikar
2. What are the similarities between colonial management of the forests in Bastar
and in Java?
3. Between 1880 and 1920, forest cover in the Indian subcontinent declined by 9.7
million hectares, from 108.6 million hectares to 98.9 million hectares. Discuss
the role of the following factors in this decline:
Railways
Shipbuilding
Agricultural expansion
Commercial farming
Tea/Coffee plantations
Adivasis and other peasant users
4. Why are forests affected by wars?
Activities
Pastoralists in the Modern World
Pastoralists in the Modern W
astoralists in the Modern W
astoralists in the Modern W
astoralists in the Modern W
astoralists in the Modern World
In this chapter you will read about nomadic pastoralists. Nomads
are people who do not live in one place but move from one area to
another to earn their living. In many parts of India we can see nomadic
pastoralists on the move with their herds of goats and sheep, or
camels and cattle. Have you ever wondered where they are coming
from and where they are headed? Do you know how they live and
earn? What their past has been?
Pastoralists rarely enter the pages of history textbooks. When you
read about the economy – whether in your classes of history or
economics – you learn about agriculture and industry. Sometimes
you read about artisans; but rarely about pastoralists. As if their
lives do not matter. As if they are figures from the past who have no
place in modern society.
In this chapter you will see how pastoralism has been important in
societies like India and Africa. You will read about the way
colonialism impacted their lives, and how they have coped with the
pressures of modern society. The chapter will first focus on India
and then Africa.
Pastoralists in the Modern World
Fig.1 – Sheep grazing on the Bugyals of eastern Garhwal.
Bugyals are vast natural pastures on the high mountains, above 12,000 feet. They are under snow in the winter and
come to life after April. At this time the entire mountainside is covered with a variety of grasses, roots and herbs.
By monsoon, these pastures are thick with vegetation and carpeted with wild flowers.
Chapter  V
India and the Contemporary World
1.1 In the Mountains
Even today the Gujjar Bakarwals of Jammu and Kashmir are great
herders of goat and sheep. Many of them migrated to this region in
the nineteenth century in search of pastures for their animals.
Gradually, over the decades, they established themselves in the area,
and moved annually between their summer and winter grazing
grounds. In winter, when the high mountains were covered with
snow, they lived with their herds in the low hills of the Siwalik
range. The dry scrub forests here provided pasture for their herds.
By the end of April they began their northern march for their summer
grazing grounds. Several households came together for this journey,
forming what is known as a kafila. They crossed the Pir Panjal passes
and entered the valley of Kashmir. With the onset of summer, the
snow melted and the mountainsides were lush green. The variety of
grasses that sprouted provided rich nutritious forage for the animal
herds. By end September the Bakarwals were on the move again, this
time on their downward journey, back to their winter base. When
the high mountains were covered with snow, the herds were grazed
in the low hills.
In a different area of the mountains, the Gaddi shepherds of
Himachal Pradesh had a similar cycle of seasonal movement. They
too spent their winter in the low hills of Siwalik range, grazing their
flocks in scrub forests. By April they moved north and spent the
summer in Lahul and Spiti.  When the snow melted and the high
passes were clear, many of them moved on to higher mountain
Pastoral
astoral
astoral
astoral
astoral Nomads and their
omads and their
omads and their
omads and their
omads and their Movements
ovements
ovements
ovements
ovements
Source A
Writing in the 1850s, G.C. Barnes gave
the following description of the Gujjars
of Kangra:
‘In the hills the Gujjars are exclusively
a pastoral tribe – they cultivate scarcely
at all. The Gaddis keep flocks of sheep
and goats and the Gujjars, wealth
consists of buffaloes. These people live
in the skirts of the forests, and maintain
their existence exclusively by the sale
of the milk, ghee, and other produce
of their herds. The men graze the
cattle, and frequently lie out for weeks
in the woods tending their herds. The
women repair to the markets every
morning with baskets on their heads,
with little earthen pots filled with milk,
butter-milk and ghee, each of these
pots containing the proportion required
for a day’s meal. During the hot
weather the Gujjars usually drive their
herds to the upper range, where the
buffaloes rejoice in the rich grass which
the rains bring forth and at the same
time attain condition from the
temperate climate and the immunity
from venomous flies that torment their
existence in the plains.’
From: G.C. Barnes, Settlement Report
of Kangra, 1850-55.
Fig.2 – A Gujjar Mandap on the high
mountains in central Garhwal.
The Gujjar cattle herders live in these
mandaps made of ringal – a hill bamboo –
and grass from the Bugyal. A mandap was
also a work place. Here the Gujjar used to
make ghee which they took down for sale. In
recent years they have begun to transport the
milk directly in buses and trucks. These
mandaps are at about 10,000 to 11,000 feet.
Buffaloes cannot climb any higher.
Pastoralists in the Modern World
meadows. By September they began their return movement. On the
way they stopped once again in the villages of Lahul and Spiti, reaping
their summer harvest and sowing their winter crop. Then they descended
with their flock to their winter grazing ground on the Siwalik hills.
Next April, once again, they began their march with their goats and
sheep, to the summer meadows.
Further to the east, in Garhwal and Kumaon, the Gujjar cattle herders
came down to the  dry forests of the bhabar in the
winter, and went up to the high meadows – the
bugyals – in summer. Many of them were
originally from Jammu and came to the UP hills in
the nineteenth century in search of good pastures.
This pattern of cyclical movement between summer
and winter pastures was typical of many pastoral
communities of the Himalayas, including the
Bhotiyas, Sherpas and Kinnauris. All of them had
to adjust to seasonal changes and make effective use
of available pastures in different places. When the
pasture was exhausted or unusable in one place they
moved their herds and flock to new areas. This
continuous movement also allowed the pastures to
recover; it prevented their overuse.
Fig.4 – Gaddi sheep being sheared.
By September the Gaddi shepherds come down from the high
meadows (Dhars). On the way down they halt  for a while to have
their sheep sheared. The sheep are bathed and cleaned before the
wool is cut.
Fig.3 – Gaddis waiting for shearing to begin. Uhl valley near Palampur in Himachal Pradesh.
New words
Bhabar – A dry forested area below the
foothills of Garhwal and Kumaun
Bugyal – Vast meadows in the high
mountains
India and the Contemporary World
1.2 On the Plateaus, Plains and Deserts
Not all pastoralists operated in the mountains. They were also to be
found in the plateaus, plains and deserts of India.
Dhangars were an important pastoral community of Maharashtra.
In the early twentieth century their population in this region was
estimated to be 467,000. Most of them were shepherds, some were
blanket weavers, and still others were buffalo herders. The Dhangar
shepherds stayed in the central plateau of Maharashtra during the
monsoon. This was a semi-arid region with low rainfall and poor
soil. It was covered with thorny scrub. Nothing but dry crops like
bajra could be sown here. In the monsoon this tract became a vast
grazing ground for the Dhangar flocks. By October the Dhangars
harvested their bajra and started on their move west. After a march
of about a month they reached the Konkan. This was a flourishing
agricultural tract with high rainfall and rich soil. Here the shepherds
were welcomed by Konkani peasants. After the kharif harvest was
cut at this time, the fields had to be fertilised and made ready for the
rabi harvest. Dhangar flocks manured the fields and fed on the
stubble. The Konkani peasants also gave supplies of rice which the
shepherds took back to the plateau where grain was scarce. With the
onset of the monsoon the Dhangars left the Konkan and the coastal
areas with their flocks and returned to their settlements on the dry
plateau. The sheep could not tolerate the wet monsoon conditions.
New words
Kharif – The autumn crop, usually harvested
between September and October
Rabi – The spring crop, usually harvested
after March
Stubble – Lower ends of grain stalks left in
the ground after harvesting
Fig.5 – Raika camels grazing
on the Thar desert in western
Rajasthan.
Only camels can survive on the
dry and thorny bushes that can
be found here; but to get
enough feed they have to graze
over a very extensive area.
Pastoralists in the Modern World
Activity
Source B
In Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh, again, the dry central plateau was
covered with stone and grass, inhabited by cattle, goat and sheep
herders. The Gollas herded cattle. The Kurumas and Kurubas reared
sheep and goats and sold woven blankets. They lived near the woods,
cultivated small patches of land, engaged in a variety of petty trades
and took care of their herds. Unlike the mountain pastoralists, it
was not the cold and the snow that defined the seasonal rhythms of
their movement: rather it was the alternation of the monsoon and
dry season. In the dry season they moved to the coastal tracts, and
left when the rains came. Only buffaloes liked the swampy, wet
conditions of the coastal areas during the monsoon months. Other
herds had to be shifted to the dry plateau at this time.
Banjaras were yet another well-known group of graziers. They were
to be found in the villages of Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan,
Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra. In search of good pastureland
for their cattle, they moved over long distances, selling plough cattle
and other goods to villagers in exchange for grain and fodder.
The accounts of many travellers tell us about the life of pastoral
groups. In the early nineteenth century, Buchanan visited the
Gollas during his travel through Mysore. He wrote:
‘Their families live in small villages near the skirt of the woods,
where they cultivate a little ground, and keep some of their
cattle, selling in the towns the produce of the dairy.
Their families are very numerous, seven to eight young men in
each being common. Two or three of these attend the flocks in
the woods, while the remainder cultivate their fields, and supply
the towns with firewood, and with straw for thatch.’
From: Francis Hamilton Buchanan, A Journey from Madras through
the Countries of Mysore, Canara and Malabar (London, 1807).
Read Sources A and B.
! Write briefly about what they tell you about
the nature of the work undertaken by men
and women in pastoral households.
! Why do you think pastoral groups often
live on the edges of forests?
In the deserts of Rajasthan lived the Raikas. The rainfall in
the region was meagre and uncertain. On cultivated land,
harvests fluctuated every year. Over vast stretches no crop
could be grown. So the Raikas combined cultivation with
pastoralism. During  the monsoons, the Raikas of  Barmer,
Jaisalmer, Jodhpur and Bikaner stayed in their home villages,
where pasture was available. By October, when these grazing
grounds were dry and exhausted, they moved out in search
of other pasture and water, and returned again during the
next monsoon. One group of Raikas – known as the Maru
(desert) Raikas – herded camels and another group reared
sheep and goat.
Fig.6 – A camel herder in his settlement.
This is on the Thar desert near Jaisalmer in Rajasthan.
The camel herders of the region are Maru (desert)
Raikas, and their settlement is called a dhandi.
India and the Contemporary World
So we see that the life of these pastoral groups was sustained by a
careful consideration of a host of factors. They had to judge how
long the herds could stay in one area, and know where they could
find water and pasture. They needed to calculate the timing of their
movements, and ensure that they could move through different
territories. They had to set up a relationship with farmers on the
way, so that the herds could graze in harvested fields and manure the
soil. They combined a range of different activities – cultivation, trade,
and herding – to make their living.
How did the life of pastoralists change under colonial rule?
Fig.7 – A camel fair at Balotra in western Rajasthan. Camel herders come to the fair to sell and buy camels. The Maru
Raikas also display their expertise in training their camels. Horses from Gujarat are also brought for sale at this fair.
Fig.8 – A camel fair at Pushkar.
Pastoralists in the Modern World
Fig.10 – Maldhari herders moving in search of pastures. Their villages are in the Rann of Kutch.
Fig.9 – A Maru Raika genealogist with a group of Raikas.
The genealogist recounts the history of the community. Such oral traditions give pastoral groups their own sense of identity.
These oral traditions can tell us about how a group looks at its own past.
India and the Contemporary World
Activity
Source C
Under colonial rule, the life of pastoralists changed dramatically.
Their grazing grounds shrank, their movements were regulated,
and the revenue they had to pay increased. Their agricultural stock
declined and their trades and crafts were adversely affected. How?
First, the colonial state wanted to transform all grazing lands
into cultivated farms. Land revenue was one of the main sources
of its finance. By expanding cultivation it could increase its revenue
collection. It could at the same time produce more jute, cotton,
wheat and other agricultural produce that were required in
England. To colonial officials all uncultivated land appeared to
be unproductive: it produced neither revenue nor agricultural
produce. It was seen as ‘waste land’ that needed to be brought
under cultivation. From the mid-nineteenth century, Waste Land
Rules were enacted in various parts of the country. By these Rules
uncultivated lands were taken over and given to select individuals.
These individuals were granted various concessions and encouraged
to settle these lands. Some of them were made headmen of villages
in the newly cleared areas. In most areas the lands taken over
were actually grazing tracts used regularly by pastoralists. So
expansion of cultivation inevitably meant the decline of pastures
and a problem for pastoralists.
Second, by the mid-nineteenth century, various Forest Acts were
also being enacted in the different provinces.  Through these Acts
some forests which produced commercially valuable timber like
deodar or sal were declared ‘Reserved’. No pastoralist was allowed
access to these forests. Other forests were classified as ‘Protected’.
In these, some customary grazing rights of pastoralists were
granted but their movements were severely restricted. The
colonial officials believed that grazing destroyed the saplings and
young shoots of trees that germinated on the forest floor. The
herds trampled over the saplings and munched away the shoots.
This prevented new trees from growing.
These Forest Acts changed the lives of pastoralists. They were
now prevented from entering many forests that had earlier
provided valuable forage for their cattle. Even in the areas they
were allowed entry, their movements were regulated. They needed
a permit for entry. The timing of their entry and departure was
2 Colonial
Colonial
Colonial
Colonial
Colonial Rule and
ule and
ule and
ule and
ule and Pastoral
astoral
astoral
astoral
astoral Life
H.S. Gibson, the Deputy Conservator of
Forests, Darjeeling, wrote in 1913:
‘… forest which is used for grazing cannot
be used for any other purpose and is
unable to yield timber and fuel, which are
the main legitimate forest produce …’
Write a comment on the closure of the forests
to grazing from the standpoint of:
! a forester
! a pastoralist
New words
Customary  rights – Rights that people are
used to by custom and tradition
Pastoralists in the Modern World
Activity
Source D
specified, and the number of days they could spend in the forest
was limited. Pastoralists could no longer remain in an area even if
forage was available, the grass was succulent and the undergrowth
in the forest was ample. They had to move because the Forest
Department permits that had been issued to them now ruled their
lives. The permit specified the periods in which they could be
legally within a forest. If they overstayed they were liable to fines.
Third, British officials were suspicious of nomadic people. They
distrusted mobile craftsmen and traders who hawked their goods
in villages, and pastoralists who changed their places of residence
every season, moving in search of good pastures for their herds.
The colonial government wanted to rule over a settled population.
They wanted the rural people to live in villages, in fixed places
with fixed rights on particular fields. Such a population was easy
to identify and control. Those who were settled were seen as
peaceable and law abiding; those who were nomadic were
considered to be criminal. In 1871, the colonial government in
India passed the Criminal Tribes Act.  By this Act many
communities of craftsmen, traders and pastoralists were classified
as Criminal Tribes. They were stated to be criminal by nature
and birth. Once this Act came into force, these communities were
expected to live only in notified village settlements. They were
not allowed to move out without a permit. The village police
kept a continuous watch on them.
Fourth, to expand its revenue income, the colonial government
looked for every possible source of taxation. So tax was imposed
on land, on canal water, on salt, on trade goods, and even on
animals. Pastoralists had to pay tax on every animal they grazed
on the pastures. In most pastoral tracts of India, grazing tax was
introduced in the mid-nineteenth century. The tax per head of
cattle went up rapidly and the system of collection was made
increasingly efficient. In the decades between the 1850s and 1880s
the right to collect the tax was auctioned out to contractors. These
contractors tried to extract as high a tax as they could to recover
the money they had paid to the state and earn as much profit as
they could within the year. By the 1880s the government began
collecting taxes directly from the pastoralists. Each of them was
given a pass. To enter a grazing tract, a cattle herder had to show
the pass and pay the tax. The number of cattle heads he had and
the amount of tax he paid was entered on the pass.
In the 1920s, a Royal Commission on
Agriculture reported:
‘The extent of the area available for
grazing has gone down tremendously
with the extension of area under
cultivation because of increasing
population, extension of irrigation
facilities, acquiring the pastures for
Government purposes, for example,
defence, industries and agricultural
experimental farms. [Now] breeders find
it difficult to raise large herds. Thus their
earnings have gone down. The quality
of their livestock has deteriorated,
dietary standards have fallen and
indebtedness has increased.’
The Report of the Royal Commission of
Agriculture in India, 1928.
Imagine you are living in the 1890s.
You belong to a community of nomadic
pastoralists and craftsmen. You learn that the
Government has declared your community as
a Criminal Tribe.
! Describe briefly what you would have
felt and done.
! Write a petition to the local collector
explaining why the Act is unjust and
how it will affect your life.
India and the Contemporary World
2.1 How Did these Changes Affect the Lives of Pastoralists?
These measures led to a serious shortage of pastures. When grazing
lands were taken over and turned into cultivated fields, the available
area of pastureland declined. Similarly, the reservation of forests
meant that shepherds and cattle herders could no longer freely pasture
their cattle in the forests.
As pasturelands disappeared under the plough, the existing animal
stock had to feed on whatever grazing land remained. This led to
continuous intensive grazing of these pastures. Usually nomadic
pastoralists grazed their animals in one area and moved to another
area. These pastoral movements allowed time for the natural
restoration of vegetation growth. When restrictions were imposed
on pastoral movements, grazing lands came to be continuously used
and the quality of patures declined. This in turn created a further
shortage of forage for animals and the deterioration of animal stock.
Underfed cattle died in large numbers during scarcities and famines.
Fig.11 – Pastoralists in India.
This map indicates the location of only those
pastoral communities mentioned in the
chapter. There are many others living in
various parts of India.
Pastoralists in the Modern World
2.2 How Did the Pastoralists Cope with these Changes?
Pastoralists reacted to these changes in a variety of ways. Some
reduced the number of cattle in their herds, since there was not
enough pasture to feed large numbers. Others discovered new
pastures when movement to old grazing grounds became difficult.
After 1947, the camel and sheep herding Raikas, for instance, could
no longer move into Sindh and graze their camels on the banks of
the Indus, as they had done earlier. The new political boundaries
between India and Pakistan stopped their movement. So they had
to find new places to go. In recent years they have been migrating
to Haryana where sheep can graze on agricultural fields after the
harvests are cut. This is the time that the fields need manure that
the animals provide.
Over the years, some richer pastoralists began buying land and
settling down, giving up their nomadic life. Some became settled
peasants cultivating land, others took to more extensive trading.
Many poor pastoralists, on the other hand, borrowed money from
moneylenders to survive. At times they lost their cattle and sheep
and became labourers, working on fields or in small towns.
Yet, pastoralists not only continue to survive, in many regions
their numbers have expanded over recent decades. When
pasturelands in one place was closed to them, they changed the
direction of their movement, reduced the size of the herd, combined
pastoral activity with other forms of income and adapted to the
changes in the modern world. Many ecologists believe that in dry
regions and in the mountains, pastoralism is still ecologically the
most viable form of life.
Such changes were not  experienced only  by pastoral communities
in India. In many other parts of the world, new laws and settlement
patterns forced pastoral communities to alter their lives. How did
pastoral communities elsewhere cope with these changes in the
modern world?
India and the Contemporary World
Let us move to Africa where over half the world’s pastoral population
lives. Even today, over 22 million Africans depend on some form of
pastoral activity for their livelihood. They include communities like
Bedouins, Berbers, Maasai, Somali, Boran and Turkana. Most of
them now live in the semi-arid grasslands or arid deserts where rainfed
agriculture is difficult. They raise cattle, camels, goats, sheep and
donkeys; and they sell milk, meat, animal skin and wool. Some also
earn through trade and transport, others combine pastoral activity
with agriculture; still others do a variety of odd jobs to supplement
their meagre and uncertain earnings from pastoralism.
Like pastoralists in India, the lives of African pastoralists have changed
dramatically over the colonial and post-colonial periods. What have
these changes been?
3 Pastoralism in Africa
astoralism in Africa
astoralism in Africa
astoralism in Africa
astoralism in Africa
Fig.12 – A view of Maasai land with Kilimanjaro in the background.
Forced by changing conditions, the Maasai have grown dependent on food produced in other areas such as maize meal,
rice, potatoes, cabbage.Traditionally the Maasai frowned upon this. Maasai believed that tilling the land for crop farming is a
crime against nature. Once you cultivate the land, it is no longer suitable for grazing. Courtesy: The Massai Association.
Pastoralists in the Modern World
We will discuss some of these changes by looking at one pastoral
community – the Maasai – in some detail. The Maasai cattle herders
live primarily in east Africa: 300, 000 in southern Kenya and another
150,000 in Tanzania. We will see how new laws and regulations took
away their land and restricted their movement. This affected their
lives in times of drought and even reshaped their social relationships.
3.1 Where have the Grazing Lands Gone?
One of the problems the Maasais have faced is the continuous loss of
their grazing lands. Before colonial times, Maasailand stretched over
a vast area from north Kenya to the steppes of northern Tanzania.
In the late nineteenth century, European imperial powers scrambled
for territorial possessions in Africa, slicing up the region into different
colonies. In 1885, Maasailand was cut into half with an international
boundary between British Kenya and German Tanganyika.
Subsequently, the best grazing lands were gradually taken over for
white settlement and the Maasai were pushed into a small area in
Fig.13 – Pastoral communities in Africa.
The inset shows the location of the Maasais in Kenya and Tanzania.
On Tanganyika
Britain conquered what had been German East
Africa during the First World War. In 1919
Tanganyika came under British control. It
attained independence in 1961 and united with
Zanzibar to form Tanzania in 1964.
India and the Contemporary World
south Kenya and north Tanzania. The Maasai lost about 60 per cent
of their pre-colonial lands. They were confined to an arid zone with
uncertain rainfall and poor pastures.
From the late nineteenth century, the British colonial government
in east Africa also encouraged local peasant communities to expand
cultivation. As cultivation expanded, pasturelands were turned into
cultivated fields. In pre-colonial times, the Maasai pastoralists had
dominated their agricultural neighbours both economically and
politically. By the end of colonial rule the situation had reversed.
Large areas of grazing land were also turned into game reserves like
the Maasai Mara and Samburu National Park in Kenya and Serengeti
Park in Tanzania. Pastoralists were not allowed to enter these
reserves; they could neither hunt animals nor graze their herds in
these areas. Very often these reserves were in areas that had
traditionally been regular grazing grounds for Maasai herds. The
Serengeti National Park, for instance, was created over 14,760 km.
of Maasai grazing land.
Fig.14 – Without grass, livestock (cattle, goats and sheep) are malnourished, which means less food available for families
and their children. The areas hardest hit by drought and food shortage  are in the vicinity of Amboseli National Park, which
last year generated approximately 240 million Kenyan Shillings (estimated $3.5 million US) from tourism. In addition, the
Kilimanjaro Water Project cuts through the communities of this area but the villagers are barred from using the water for
irrigation or for livestock.Courtesy: The Massai Association.
Pastoralists in the Modern World
Source E
Pastoral communities elsewhere in Africa faced similar problems.
In Namibia, in south-west Africa, the Kaokoland herders
traditionally moved between Kaokoland and nearby
Ovamboland, and they sold skin, meat and other trade
products in neighbouring markets. All this was stopped with
the new system of territorial boundaries that restricted
movements between regions.
The nomadic cattle herders of Kaokoland in Namibia
complained:
‘We have difficulty. We cry. We are imprisoned. We do not know
why we are locked up. We are in jail. We have no place to live
… We cannot get meat from the south … Our sleeping skins
cannot be sent out … Ovamboland is closed for us. We lived in
Ovamboland for a long time. We want to take our cattle there,
also our sheep and goats. The borders are closed. The borders
press us heavily. We cannot live.’
Statement of Kaokoland herders, Namibia, 1949.
Quoted in Michael Bollig, ‘The colonial encapsulation of the north
western Namibian pastoral economy’, Africa 68 (4), 1998.
Fig.15 – The title Maasai derives from the word Maa. Maa-sai means 'My People'. The Maasai
are traditionally nomadic and pastoral people who depend on milk and meat for subsistence.
High temperatures combine with low rainfall to create conditions which are dry, dusty, and
extremely hot. Drought conditions are common in this semi-arid land of equatorial heat. During
such times pastoral animals die in large numbes. Courtesy: The Massai Association.
India and the Contemporary World
The loss of the finest grazing lands and water resources created
pressure on the small area of land that the Maasai were confined
within. Continuous grazing within a small area inevitably meant a
deterioration of the quality of pastures. Fodder was always in short
supply. Feeding the cattle became a persistent problem.
3.2 The Borders are Closed
In the nineteenth century, African pastoralists could move over vast
areas in search of pastures. When the pastures were exhausted in one
place they moved to a different area to graze their cattle. From the
late nineteenth century, the colonial government began imposing
various restrictions on their mobility.
Like the Maasai, other pastoral groups were also forced to live within
the confines of special reserves. The boundaries of these reserves
became the limits within which they could now move. They were
not allowed to move out with their stock without special permits.
And it was difficult to get permits without trouble and harassment.
Those found guilty of disobeying the rules were severely punished.
Pastoralists were also not allowed to enter the markets in white areas.
In many regions, they were prohibited from participating in any
form of trade. White settlers and European colonists saw pastoralists
as dangerous and savage – people with whom all contact had to be
minimised. Cutting off all links was, however, never really possible,
because white colonists had to depend on black labour to bore mines
and, build roads and towns.
The new territorial boundaries and restrictions imposed on them
suddenly changed the lives of pastoralists. This adversely affected
Source F
In most places in colonial Africa, the police were given instructions to keep a
watch on the movements of  pastoralists, and prevent them from entering white
areas. The following is one such instruction given by a magistrate to the police,
in south-west Africa, restricting the movements of the pastoralists of Kaokoland
in Namibia:
‘Passes to enter the Territory should not be given to these Natives unless
exceptional circumstances necessitate their entering … The object of the above
proclamation is to restrict the number of natives entering the Territory and to
keep a check on them, and ordinary visiting passes should therefore never be
issued to them.’
‘Kaokoveld permits to enter’, Magistrate to Police Station Commanders of Outjo
and Kamanjab, 24 November, 1937.
Source
Pastoralists in the Modern World
both their pastoral and trading activities. Earlier, pastoralists not
only looked after animal herds but traded in various products. The
restrictions under colonial rule did not entirely stop their trading
activities but they were now subject to various restrictions.
3.3 When Pastures Dry
Drought affects the life of pastoralists everywhere. When rains fail
and pastures are dry, cattle are likely to starve unless they can be
moved to areas where forage is available. That is why, traditionally,
pastoralists are nomadic; they move from place to place. This
nomadism allows them to survive bad times and avoid crises.
But from the colonial period, the Maasai were bound down to a
fixed area, confined within a reserve, and prohibited from moving
in search of pastures. They were cut off from the best grazing lands
and forced to live within a semi-arid tract prone to frequent droughts.
Since they could not shift their cattle to places where pastures were
available, large numbers of Maasai cattle died of starvation and disease
in these years of drought. An enquiry in 1930 showed that the Maasai
in Kenya possessed 720,000 cattle, 820,000 sheep and 171,000 donkeys.
In just two years of severe drought, 1933 and 1934, over half the
cattle in the Maasai Reserve died.
As the area of grazing lands shrank, the adverse effect of the droughts
increased in intensity. The frequent bad years led to a steady decline
of the animal stock of the pastoralists.
3.4 Not All were Equally Affected
In Maasailand, as elsewhere in Africa, not all pastoralists were equally
affected by the changes in the colonial period. In pre-colonial times
Maasai society was divided into two social categories – elders and
warriors. The elders formed the ruling group and met in periodic
councils to decide on the affairs of the community and settle disputes.
The warriors consisted of younger people, mainly responsible for
the protection of the tribe. They defended the community and
organised cattle raids. Raiding was important in a society where cattle
was wealth. It is through raids that the power of different pastoral
groups was asserted. Young men came to be recognised as members
of the warrior class when they proved their manliness by raiding
the cattle of other pastoral groups and participating in wars. They,
however, were subject to the authority of the elders.
Fig.16 – Note how the warriors wear
traditional deep red shukas, brightly beaded
Maasai jewelry and carry five-foot, steel tipped
spears. Their long pleats of intricately plaited
hair are tinted red with ochre. As per tradition
they face East to honour the rising sun.
Warriors are in charge of society's security
while boys are responsible for herding
livestock. During the drought season, both
warriors and boys assume responsibility for
herding livestock. Courtesy: The Massai Association.
India and the Contemporary World
To administer the affairs of the Maasai, the British introduced
a series of measures that had important implications. They
appointed chiefs of different sub-groups of Maasai, who were
made responsible for the affairs of the tribe. The British
imposed various restrictions on raiding and warfare.
Consequently, the traditional authority of both elders and
warriors was adversely affected.
The chiefs appointed by the colonial government often
accumulated wealth over time. They had a regular income with
which they could buy animals, goods and land. They lent
money to poor neighbours who needed cash to pay taxes. Many
of them began living in towns, and became involved in trade.
Their wives and children stayed back in the villages to look
after the animals. These chiefs managed to survive the
devastations of war and drought. They had both pastoral and
non-pastoral income, and could buy animals when their stock
was depleted.
But the life history of the poor pastoralists who depended only
on their livestock was different. Most often, they did not have
the resources to tide over bad times. In times of war and famine,
they lost nearly everything. They had to go looking for work
in the towns. Some eked out a living as charcoal burners, others
did odd jobs. The lucky could get more regular work in road
or building construction.
The social changes in Maasai society occurred at two levels.
First, the traditional difference based on age, between the elders
Fig.17 - Even today, young men go through
an elaborate ritual before they become
warriors, although actually it is no longer
common. They must travel throughout the
section's region for about four months,
ending with an event where they run to the
homestead and enter with an attitude of a
raider. During the ceremony, boys dress in
loose clothing and dance non-stop throughout
the day. This ceremony is the transition into a
new age. Girls are not required to go through
such a ritual. Courtesy: The Massai Association.
Pastoralists in the Modern World
and warriors, was disturbed, though it did not break down
entirely. Second, a new distinction between the wealthy and poor
pastoralists developed.
Conclusion
So we see that pastoral communities in different parts of the world
are affected  in a variety of different ways by changes in the modern
world. New laws and new borders affect the patterns of their
movement. With increasing restrictions on their mobility,
pastoralists find it difficult to move in search of pastures. As pasture
lands disappear grazing becomes a problem, while pastures that
remain deteriorate through continuous over grazing. Times of
drought become times of crises, when cattle die in large numbers.
Yet, pastoralists do adapt to new times. They change the paths of
their annual movement, reduce their cattle numbers, press for rights
to enter new areas, exert political pressure on the government for
relief, subsidy and other forms of support and demand a right in
the management of forests and water resources. Pastoralists are not
relics of the past. They are not people who have no place in the
modern world. Environmentalists and economists have increasingly
come to recognise that pastoral nomadism is a form of life that is
perfectly suited to many hilly and dry regions of the world.
Fig.18 – A Raika shepherd on Jaipur highway.
Heavy traffic on highways has made migration of shepherds a new experience.
India and the Contemporary World
Questions
Activities
1. Explain why nomadic tribes need to move from one place to another.
What are the advantages to the environment of this continuous
movement?
2. Discuss why the colonial government in India brought in the following
laws. In each case, explain how the law changed the lives of
pastoralists:
Waste Land rules
Forest Acts
Criminal Tribes Act
Grazing Tax
3. Give reasons to explain why the Maasai community lost their grazing
lands.
4. There are many similarities in the way in which the modern world forced
changes in the lives of pastoral communities in India and East Africa.
Write about any two examples of changes which were similar
for Indian pastoralists and the Maasai herders.
1. Imagine that it is 1950 and you are a 60-year-old Raika herder living in
post-Independence India. You are telling your grand-daughter about the
changes which have taken place in your lifestyle after Independence. What
would you say?
2. Imagine that you have been asked by a famous magazine to write an article
about the life and customs of the Maasai in pre-colonial Africa. Write the
article, giving it an interesting title.
3. Find out more about the some of the pastoral communities marked in Figs.
11 and 13.
Activities
Peasants and Farmers
Peasants and Farmers
easants and Farmers
easants and Farmers
easants and Farmers
easants and Farmers
P e a s a n t s   a n d   F a r m e r s
In the previous two chapters you read about pastures and forests,
and about those who depended on these resources.  You learnt about
shifting cultivators, pastoral groups and tribals. You saw how access
to forests and pastures was regulated by modern governments, and
how these restrictions and controls affected the lives of those who
used these resources.
In this chapter you will read about peasants and farmers, with a
special focus on three different countries. You will find out about
the small cottagers in England, the wheat farmers of the USA, and
the opium producers of Bengal. You will see what happens to different
rural groups with the coming of modern agriculture; what happens
when different regions of the world are integrated with the capitalist
world market. By comparing the histories of different places you
will see how these histories are different, even though some of the
processes are similar.
Let us begin our journey with England where the agricultural
revolution first occurred.
Chapter VI
India and the Contemporary World
Source A
On 1 June 1830, a farmer in the north-west of England found his
barn and haystack reduced to ashes by a fire that started at night.  In
the months that followed, cases of such fire were reported from
numerous districts. At times only the rick was burnt, at other times
the entire farmhouse. Then on the night of 28 August 1830, a threshing
machine of a farmer was destroyed by labourers in East Kent in
England. In the subsequent two years, riots spread over southern
England and about 387 threshing machines were broken. Through
this period, farmers received threatening letters urging them to stop
using machines that deprived workmen of their livelihood. Most of
these letters were signed in the name of Captain Swing. Alarmed
landlords feared attacks by armed bands at night, and many destroyed
their own machines. Government action was severe. Those suspected
of rioting were rounded up. 1, 976 prisoners were tried, nine men
were hanged, 505 transported – over 450 of them to Australia – and
644 put behind bars.
Captain Swing was a mythic name used in these letters. But who
were the Swing rioters? Why did they break threshing machines?
What were they protesting against? To answer these questions, we
need to trace the developments in English agriculture in the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries.
1.1 The Time of Open fields and Commons
Over the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries the English
countryside changed dramatically. Before this time in large parts of
England the countryside was open. It was not partitioned into
enclosed lands privately owned by landlords. Peasants cultivated on
strips of land around the village they lived in. At the beginning of
each year, at a public meeting, each villager was allocated a number
of strips to cultivate. Usually, these strips were of varying quality
and often located in different places, not next to each other. The
effort was to ensure that everyone had a mix of good and bad land.
Beyond these strips of cultivation lay the common land. All villagers
had access to the commons. Here they pastured their cows and grazed
their sheep, collected fuelwood for fire and berries and fruit for food.
They fished in the rivers and ponds, and hunted rabbit in common
forests. For the poor, the common land was essential for survival. It
1   The Coming of Modern Agriculture in England
The threatening letters circulated widely.
At times the threats were gentle, at
others severe. Some of them were as
brief as the following.
This is to acquaint you that if your
threshing  machines are not destroyed
by you directly we shall commence our
labours.
Signed on behalf of the whole
Swing
From E.J. Hobsbawm and George Rude,
Captain Swing.
Peasants and Farmers
Source B
This Swing letter is an example of a
sterner threat:
Your name is down amongst the Black
hearts in the Black Book and this is to
advise you and the like of you, who are
…… to make your wills.
Ye have been the Blackguard Enemies
of the people on all occasions, ye have
not yet done as ye ought.
Swing
supplemented their meagre income, sustained their cattle, and helped
them tide over bad times when crops failed.
In some parts of England, this economy of open fields and common
lands had started changing from about the sixteenth century. When
the price of wool went up in the world market in the sixteenth
century, rich farmers wanted to expand wool production to earn
profits. They were eager to improve their sheep breeds and ensure
good feed for them. They were keen on controlling large areas of
land in compact blocks to allow improved breeding. So they began
dividing and enclosing common land and building hedges around
their holdings to separate their property from that of others. They
drove out villagers who had small cottages on the commons, and
they prevented the poor from entering the enclosed fields.
Till the middle of the eighteenth century the enclosure movement
proceeded very slowly. The early enclosures were usually created by
individual landlords. They were not supported by the state or the
church. After the mid-eighteenth century, however, the enclosure
movement swept through the countryside, changing the English
landscape for ever. Between 1750 and 1850, 6 million acres of land
was enclosed. The British Parliament no longer watched this process
from a distance. It passed 4,000 Acts legalising these enclosures.
Fig.1 – Threshing machines broken in different counties of England
during the Captain Swing movement.(1830-32)
Based on E. J. Hobsbawm and George Rude, Captain Swing.
Number of machines broken
Swing movement areas
India and the Contemporary World
1.2 New Demands for Grain
Why was there such a frantic effort to enclose lands?  What did the
enclosures imply? The new enclosures were different from the old.
Unlike the sixteenth-century enclosures that promoted sheep farming,
the land being enclosed in the late eighteenth century was for grain
production. The new enclosures were happening in a different context;
they became a sign of a changing time. From the mid-eighteenth
century, the English population expanded rapidly. Between 1750 and
1900, it multiplied over four times, mounting from 7 million in 1750
to 21 million in 1850 and 30 million in 1900. This meant an increased
demand for foodgrains to feed the population. Moreover, Britain at
this time was industrialising. More and more people began to live
and work in urban areas. Men from rural areas migrated to towns in
search of jobs. To survive they had to buy foodgrains in the market.
As the urban population grew, the market for foodgrains expanded,
and when demand increased rapidly, foodgrain prices rose.
By the end of the eighteenth century, France was at war with England.
This disrupted trade and the import of foodgrains from Europe.
Prices of foodgrains in England sky rocketed, encouraging landowners
to enclose lands and enlarge the area under grain cultivation. Profits
flowed in and landowners pressurised the Parliament to pass the
Enclosure Acts.
Activity
Look at the graph carefully. See how the price
line moves up sharply in the 1790s and slumps
dramatically after 1815. Can you explain why the
line of the graph shows this pattern?
New words
Bushel – A measure of capacity.
Shillings – An English currency. 20 shillings = £1
Fig.2 – Annual average wheat prices in England and Wales: 1771-1850.
1771-75
1776 -80
1781-85
1786-90
1791-95
1796-1800
1801-05
1805-10
1811-15
1816-20
1821 -25
1826-30
1831-35
1836-40
1841-45
1846-50
YEARS
SHILLINGS PER BUSHEL
average price
Peasants and Farmers
1.3 The Age of Enclosures
There is one dramatic fact that makes the period after the 1780s
different from any earlier period in English history. In earlier times,
rapid population growth was most often followed by a period of
food shortages. Food-grain production in the past had not expanded
as rapidly as the population. In the nineteenth century this did not
happen in England. Grain production grew as quickly as population.
Even though the population increased rapidly, in 1868 England
was producing  about 80 per cent of the food it consumed. The
rest was imported.
This increase in food-grain production was made possible not by
any radical innovations in agricultural technology, but by bringing
new lands under cultivation. Landlords sliced up pasturelands, carved
up open fields, cut up forest commons, took over marshes, and
turned larger and larger areas into agricultural fields.
Farmers at this time continued to use the simple innovations in
agriculture that had become common by the early eighteenth
Fig.3 – Suffolk countryside in the early nineteenth century.
This is a painting by the English painter John Constable (1776 -1837). Son of a wealthy corn merchant, he grew up in the
Suffolk countryside in east England, a region that had been enclosed much before the nineteenth century.  At a time when
the idyllic countryside was disappearing, the open fields were being enclosed, Constable painted sentimental images of open
countryside. In this particular painting we do see some fences and the separation of fields, but we get no idea of what was
happening in the landscape. Constable's paintings usually did not have working people. If you look at Fig.1, you will see that
Suffolk was surrounded by regions where threshing machines were broken in large numbers during the Swing riots.
Fig.4 – Enclosures of common field by
Parliamentary Acts: eighteenth-nineteenth
centuries.
Based on E. J. Hobsbawm and George Rude,
Captain Swing.
India and the Contemporary World
century. It was in about the 1660s that farmers in many parts of England
began growing turnip and clover. They soon discovered that planting
these crops improved the soil and made it more fertile. Turnip was,
moreover, a good fodder crop relished by cattle. So farmers began
cultivating turnips and clover regularly. These crops became part of
the cropping system. Later findings showed that these crops had the
capacity to increase the nitrogen content of the soil. Nitrogen was
important for crop growth. Cultivation of the same soil over a few
years depleted the nitrogen in the soil and reduced its fertility. By
restoring nitrogen, turnip and clover made the soil fertile once again.
We find that farmers in the early nineteenth century used much the
same method to improve agriculture on a more regular basis.
Enclosures were now seen as necessary to make long-term investments
on land and plan crop rotations to improve the soil.  Enclosures also
allowed the richer landowners to expand the land under their control
and produce more for the market.
1.4 What Happened To the Poor?
Enclosures filled the pockets of landlords. But what happened to those
who depended on the commons for their survival? When fences came
up, the enclosed land became the exclusive property of one landowner.
The poor could no longer collect their firewood from the forests, or
graze their cattle on the commons. They could no longer collect apples
and berries, or hunt small animals for meat. Nor could they gather the
stalks that lay on the fields after the crops were cut. Everything belonged
to the landlords, everything had a price which the poor could not
afford to pay.
In places where enclosures happened on an extensive scale – particularly
the Midlands and the counties around – the poor were displaced from
the land. They found their customary rights gradually disappearing.
Deprived of their rights and driven off the land, they tramped in search
of work. From the Midlands, they moved to the southern counties of
England. This was a region that was most intensively cultivated, and
there was a great demand for agricultural labourers. But nowhere could
the poor find secure jobs.
Earlier, it was common for labourers to live with landowners. They
ate at the master’s table, and helped their master through the year,
doing a variety of odd jobs. By 1800 this practice was disappearing.
Labourers were being paid wages and employed only during harvest
time. As landowners tried to increase their profits, they cut the
Activity
What happened to the women and children?
Cow keeping, collection of firewood,
gleaning, gathering of fruits and berries from
the common lands was earlier mostly done
by women and children.
Can you suggest how enclosures must have
affected the lives of women and children?
Can you imagine how the disappearance of
common lands might have changed the
relationship between men, women and
children within the family?
Peasants and Farmers
Activity
Source D
Source C
One peasant who lost his rights to
common land after the enclosures wrote
to the local lord:
‘Should a poor man take one of your
sheep from the common, his life would
be forfeited by law. But should You take
the common from a hundred poor men’s
sheep, the law gives no redress. The
poor man is liable to be hung for taking
from You what would not supply you with
a meal; & You would do nothing illegal
by depriving him of his subsistence;
…What should be the inference of the
poor…when the laws are not accessible
to the injured poor and the government
gives them no redress?’
Source: J.M. Neeson, Commoners:
Common Rights, Enclosures and Social
Change, 1700-1820 (1993).
In contrast many writers emphasised the
advantages of enclosures.
‘There can be no question of the superior
profit to the farmer of enclosures rather
than open fields. In one case he is in
chains; he can make no changes in soil
or prices, he is like a horse in team, he
must jog along with the rest.’
John Middleton, an 18th century writer.
Read Sources C and D and answer the
following.
! What is the peasant trying to say in
Source C?
! What is John Middleton arguing?
! Re-read from Section 1.1 to 1.4 and
summarize the two sides of the argument
for and against open fields. Which
argument do you sympathise with?
amount they had to spend on their workmen.  Work became insecure,
employment uncertain, income unstable. For a very large part of
the year the poor had no work.
1.5 The Introduction of Threshing Machines
During the Napoleonic Wars, prices of foodgrains were high and
farmers expanded production vigorously. Fearing a shortage of
labour, they began buying the new threshing machines that had come
into the market.They complained of the insolence of labourers, their
drinking habits, and the difficulty of making them work. The
machines, they thought, would help them reduce their dependence
on labourers.
After the Napoleonic Wars had ended, thousands of soldiers returned
to the villages. They needed alternative jobs to survive. But this was
a time when grain from Europe began flowing into England, prices
declined, and an Agricultural Depression set in (see prices in Fig.2).
Anxious, landowners began reducing the area they cultivated and
demanded that the imports of crops be stopped. They tried to cut
wages and the number of workmen they employed. The unemployed
poor tramped from village to village, and those with uncertain jobs
lived in fear of a loss of their livelihood.
The Captain Swing riots spread in the countryside at this time. For
the poor the threshing machines had become a sign of bad times.
Conclusion
The coming of modern agriculture in England thus meant many
different changes. The open fields disappeared, and the customary
rights of peasants were undermined. The richer farmers expanded
grain production, sold this grain in the world market, made profits,
and became powerful. The poor left their villages in large numbers.
Some went from the Midlands to the Southern counties where jobs
were available, others to the cities. The income of labourers became
unstable, their jobs insecure, their livelihood precarious.
India and the Contemporary World
Now let us travel across the Atlantic to the USA. Let us see how
modern agriculture developed there, how the USA became the
bread basket of the world, and what this meant to the rural people
of America.
At the time that common fields were being enclosed in England
at the end of the eighteenth century, settled agriculture had not
developed on any extensive scale in the USA. Forests covered over
800 million acres and grasslands 600 million acres. Fig.5 will give
you some idea of what the natural vegetation was like at the time.
2  Bread Basket and Dust Bowl
Most of the landscape was not under the control of white Americans.
Till the 1780s, white American settlements were confined to a small
narrow strip of coastal land in the east. If you travelled through the
country at that time you would have met various Native American
groups. Several of them were nomadic, some were settled. Many of
them lived only by hunting, gathering and fishing; others cultivated
corn, beans, tobacco and pumpkin. Still others were expert trappers
through whom European traders had secured their supplies of beaver
fur since the sixteenth century. In Fig.5 you can see the location of
the different tribes in the early eighteenth century.
Fig.5 – Forests and grasslands in the
USA before the westward expansion of
white settlers.
Adapted from Baker, 'Agricultural Regions
of North America’, Economic Geography,
Vol.2, 1926. About half the forest cover
and one third of the grasslands were cleared
for agricultural settlement. In the map you
can also see the location of the various
native American communities in the early
nineteenth century.
Peasants and Farmers
By the early twentieth century, this landscape had transformed
radically. White Americans had moved westward and established
control up to the west coast, displacing local tribes and carving out
the entire landscape into different agricultural belts. The USA had
come to dominate the world market in agricultural produce.  How
did this change come about? Who were the new settlers? How did
the spread of cultivation shape the lives of the Indian groups who
had once lived there?
2.1 The Westward Move and Wheat Cultivation
The story of agrarian expansion is closely connected to the westward
movement of the white settlers who took over the land. After the
American War of Independence from 1775 to 1783 and the formation
of the United States of America, the white Americans began to move
westward. By the time Thomas Jefferson became President of the
USA in 1800, over 700,000 white settlers had moved on to the
Appalachian plateau through the passes. Seen from the east coast,
America seemed to be a land of promise. Its wilderness could be
turned into cultivated fields. Forest timber could be cut for export,
animals hunted for skin, mountains mined for gold and minerals.
But this meant that the American Indians had to be cleared from
Fig.6 – The agricultural belts in the USA in 1920.
Adapted from several essays by Baker published in Economic Geography in the 1920s.
India and the Contemporary World
Fig.8 – Sod houses in the Frontier. (Courtesy:
Fred Hultstrand History in Pictures Collection, NDIRS-NDSU,
Fargo.)
A typical sod house that settlers lived in when
they began clearing the grasslands. Timber for
houses was not available in this area.
Fig.7 – The westward expansion of white settlement between 1775 and 1920.
the land. In the decades after 1800 the US government committed
itself to a policy of driving the American Indians westward, first
beyond the river Mississippi, and then further west. Numerous
wars were waged in which Indians were massacred and many of
their villages burnt. The Indians resisted, won many victories in
wars, but were ultimately forced to sign treaties, give up their land
and move westward.
As the Indians retreated, the settlers poured in. They came in
successive waves. They settled on the Appalachian plateau by the
first decade of the eighteenth century, and then moved into the
Mississippi valley between 1820 and 1850.  They slashed and burnt
forests, pulled out the stumps, cleared the land for cultivation, and
built log cabins in the forest clearings. Then they cleared larger
areas, and erected fences around the fields. They ploughed the land
and sowed corn and wheat.
In the early years, the fertile soil produced good crops. When the
soil became impoverished and exhausted in one place, the migrants
would move further west, to explore new lands and raise a new
crop. It was, however, only after the 1860s that settlers swept into
the Great Plains across the River Mississippi. In subsequent decades
this region became a major wheat-producing area of America.
New words
Sod – Pieces of earth with grass
Peasants and Farmers
Let us follow the story of the wheat farmers in some detail.  Let us
see how they turned the grasslands into the bread basket of America,
what problems they faced, and what consequences followed.
2.2 The Wheat Farmers
From the late nineteenth century, there was a dramatic expansion
of wheat production in the USA. The urban population in the
USA was growing and the export market was becoming ever bigger.
As the demand increased, wheat prices rose, encouraging farmers
to produce wheat. The spread of the railways made it easy to
transport the grain from the wheat-growing regions to the eastern
coast for export. By the early twentieth century the  demand became
even higher, and during the First World War the world market
boomed. Russian supplies of wheat were cut off and the USA had
to feed Europe. US President Wilson called upon farmers to
respond to the need of the time. ‘Plant more wheat, wheat will win
the war,’ he said.
In 1910, about 45 million acres of land in the USA was under wheat.
Nine years later, the area had expanded to 74 million acres, an
increase of about 65 per cent. Most of the increase was in the Great
Plains where new areas were being ploughed to extend cultivation.
In many cases, big farmers – the wheat barons – controlled as much
as 2,000 to 3,000 acres of land individually.
2.3 The Coming of New Technology
This dramatic expansion was made possible by new technology.
Through the nineteenth century, as the settlers moved into new
habitats and new lands, they modified their implements to meet
their requirements. When they entered the mid-western prairie,
the simple ploughs the farmers had used in the eastern coastal areas
of the USA proved ineffective. The prairie was covered with a thick
mat of grass with tough roots. To break the sod and turn the soil
over, a variety of new ploughs were devised locally, some of them
12 feet long. Their front rested on small wheels and they were
hitched on to six yokes of oxen  or horses. By the early twentieth
century, farmers in the Great Plains were breaking the ground
with tractors and disk ploughs, clearing vast stretches for
wheat cultivation.
Once the crop had ripened it had to be harvested. Before the 1830s,
the grain used to be harvested with a cradle or sickle. At harvest
time, hundreds of men and women could be seen in the fields
Fig.11 – Cyrus McCormick invented the reaper
in 1831.
Fig.9 – A typical farming family on a Sunday
afternoon. Picture taken in the Great Plains of
Dakota in the first decade of the twentieth
century. (Courtesy: Fred Hultstrand History in Pictures
Collection, NDIRS-NDSU, Fargo.)
Fig.10 – A walking plough.
Note the front resting on a small wheel. At the
rear is the handle with which the ploughman
guided the plough.
The plough was hitched to a team of oxen or
horses. (See Fig.13)
India and the Contemporary World
Fig.15 – Breaking the ground on the Great Plains in North Dakota, 1910. (Courtesy: Fred Hultstrand History in Pictures Collection, NDIRS-
NDSU, Fargo.)
You can see a Minneapolis steam tractor pulling a John Deere plough with metal shares that cut into the ground.
The plough could break the soil quickly and cut even strong grassroots effectively. Notice the deep furrows behind the
machine and the unploughed land with grass on the left. Only big wheat farmers could afford these machines.
Fig.14 – Seeding with drills and tractors.
A highland farm in North Dakota, 1910. -
(Courtesy:  F.A. Pazandak Photgraphy Collection, NDIRS-
NDSU, Fargo)
Here you can see three drills and packers
unhitched from the tractor. The drills were
about 10 to 12 feet long, each with about
20 disks drilling the soil for seeding. Packers
followed behind the disks covering the seeds
with soil. You can see the vast seeded field
extending into the horizon.
Fig.12 – The scythe was used for mowing grass before the
mid-nineteenth century.
Fig.13 – Breaking ploughs before the age of
mechanisation.
(Courtesy: Fred Hultstrand History in Pictures Collection, NDIRS-
NDSU, Fargo.)
You can see the twelve ploughs hitched to a
team of horses.
Peasants and Farmers
Fig.16 – Black blizzard in Western Kansas,
14 April 1935.
cutting the crop. In1831, Cyrus McCormick invented the first
mechanical reaper which could cut in one day as much as five
men could cut with cradles and 16 men with sickles. By the early
twentieth century, most farmers were using combined harvesters
to cut grain. With one of these machines, 500 acres of wheat could
be harvested in two weeks.
For the big farmers of the Great Plains these machines had many
attractions. The prices of wheat were high and the demand seemed
limitless. The new machines allowed these big farmers to rapidly
clear large tracts, break up the soil, remove the grass and prepare
the ground for cultivation.  The work could be done quickly and
with a minimal number of hands. With power-driven machinery,
four men could plough, seed and harvest 2,000 to 4,000 acres of
wheat in a season.
2.4 What Happened to the Poor?
For the poorer farmers, machines brought misery. Many of them
bought these machines, imagining that wheat prices would remain
high and profits would flow in. If they had no money, the banks
offered loans. Those who borrowed found it difficult to pay back
their debts. Many of them deserted their farms and looked for
jobs elsewhere.
But jobs were difficult to find. Mechanisation had reduced the
need for labour. And the boom of the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries seemed to have come to an end by the mid-
1920s. After that, most farmers faced trouble.  Production had
expanded so rapidly during the war and post-war years that that
there was a large surplus. Unsold stocks piled up, storehouses
overflowed with grain, and vast amounts of corn and wheat were
turned into animal feed. Wheat prices fell and export markets
collapsed. This created the grounds for the Great Agrarian
Depression of the 1930s that ruined wheat farmers everywhere.
2.5 Dust Bowl
The expansion of wheat agriculture in the Great Plains created
other problems. In the 1930s, terrifying duststorms began to blow
over the southern plains. Black blizzards rolled in, very often 7,000
to 8,000 feet high, rising like monstrous waves of muddy water.
They came day after day, year after year, through the 1930s. As
India and the Contemporary World
Fig.17 – Drought Survivors. Painted by Alexander Hogue, (1936).
Hogue dramatised the tragic scenes of death and destruction that he
saw, in a series of paintings. Life Magazine referred to Hogue as the
artist of the dust bowl.
the skies darkened, and the dust swept in, people were blinded and
choked. Cattle were suffocated to death, their lungs caked with
dust and mud. Sand buried fences, covered fields, and coated the
surfaces of rivers till the fish died. Dead bodies of birds and animals
were strewn all over the landscape. Tractors and machines that had
ploughed the earth and harvested the wheat in the 1920s were now
clogged with dust, damaged beyond repair.
What had gone wrong? Why these duststorms? In part they came
because the early 1930s were years of persistent drought. The rains
failed year after year, and temperatures soared. The wind blew with
ferocious speed. But ordinary duststorms became black blizzards
only because the entire landscape had been ploughed over, stripped
of all grass that held it together. When wheat cultivation had
expanded dramatically in the early twentieth century, zealous farmers
had recklessly uprooted all vegetation, and tractors had turned the
soil over, and broken the sod into dust. The whole region had become
a dust bowl. The American dream of a land of plenty had turned
into a nightmare. The settlers had thought that they could conquer
the entire landscape, turn all land over to growing crops that could
yield profits. After the 1930s, they realized that they had to respect
the ecological conditions of each region.
Peasants and Farmers
Let us now move to India and see what was happening in the Indian
countryside in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
As you know, British rule was gradually established in India after the
Battle of Plassey (1757). Over the period of colonial rule, the rural
landscape was radically transformed. The British saw land revenue as a
major source of government income. To build the resources of the state,
efforts were made to impose a regular system of land revenue, increase
revenue rates, and expand the area under cultivation. As cultivation
expanded, the area under forests and pastures declined. All this created
many problems for peasants and pastoralists. They found their access to
forests and grazing lands increasingly restricted by rules and regulations.
And they struggled to meet the pressures of government revenue demand.
In the colonial period, rural India also came to produce a range of crops
for the world market. In the early nineteenth century, indigo and opium
were two of the major commercial crops. By the end of the century,
peasants were producing sugarcane, cotton, jute, wheat and several other
crops for export, to feed the population of urban Europe and to supply
the mills of Lancashire and Manchester in England.
How did Indian cultivators respond to their entry into the modern
world of international commerce and trade? Let us look at the history
of one crop – opium – to get an idea of what colonial rule meant to
peasants, and how the market operated in the colonies.
3.1 A Taste for Tea: The Trade with China
The history of opium production in India was linked up with the story
of British trade with China. In the late eighteenth century, the English
East India Company was buying tea and silk from China for sale in
England. As tea became a popular English drink, the tea trade became
more and more important. In 1785, about 15 million pounds of tea was
being imported into England. By 1830, the figure had jumped to over
30 million pounds. In fact, the profits of the East India Company came
to depend on the tea trade.
This created a problem. England at this time produced nothing
that could be easily sold in China. The Confucian rulers of China,
the Manchus, were suspicious of all foreign merchants. They feared
that the merchants would meddle in local politics and disrupt  their
3  The Indian Farmer and Opium Production
India and the Contemporary World
authority. So the Manchus were unwilling to allow the entry of
foreign goods.
In such a situation, how could Western merchants finance the tea
trade? How could they balance their trade? They could buy tea only
by paying in silver coins or bullion. This meant an outflow of treasure
from England, a prospect that created widespread anxiety. It was
believed that a loss of treasure would impoverish the nation and deplete
its wealth. Merchants therefore looked for ways to stop this loss of
silver. They searched for a commodity they could sell in China,
something they could persuade the Chinese to buy.
Opium was such a commodity. The Portuguese had introduced
opium into China in the early sixteenth century. Opium was however,
known primarily for its medical properties and used in miniuscule
quantities for certain types of medicines. The Chinese were aware of
the dangers of opium addiction, and the Emperor had forbidden its
production and sale except for medicinal purposes. But Western
merchants in the mid-eighteenth century began an illegal trade in
opium. It was unloaded in a number of sea ports of south-eastern
China and carried by local agents to the interiors. By the early 1820s,
about 10,000 crates were being annually smuggled into China. Fifteen
years later, over 35,000 crates were being unloaded every year.
While the English cultivated a taste for Chinese tea, the Chinese
became addicted to opium. People of all classes took to the drug –
shopkeepers and peddlers, officials and army men, aristocrats and
paupers. Lin Ze-xu, Special Commissioner at Canton in 1839,
estimated that there were over 4 million opium smokers in China.
Fig.18 – The triangular trade.
The British traders took opium from India to
China and tea from China to England. Between
India and England trade flowed both ways. By
the early 19th century, exports of handlooms
from India declined while the export of raw
materials (silk and cotton) and foodgrains
increased. From England, manufactured goods
flowed into India leading to a decline of Indian
artisanal production.
Activity
On the arrows in the map indicate the
commodities that flowed from one country to
another.
Peasants and Farmers
Source E
In 1839, the Chinese Emperor sent Lin Ze-xu to Canton as a Special Commissioner
with instructions to stop the opium trade. After he arrived in Canton in the spring of
1839, Lin arrested 1, 600 men involved in the trade, and confiscated 11,000 pounds
of opium. Then he forced the foreign factories to hand over their stocks of opium,
burnt 20, 000 crates of opium and blew the ashes to the wind. When he announced
that Canton was closed to foreign trade, Britain declared war. Defeated in the Opium
War (1837-42) , the Chinese were forced to accept the humiliating terms of the
subsequent treaties, legalizing opium trade and opening up China to foreign
merchants.
Before the war, Lin wrote a strong letter to Queen Victoria criticizing the trade in
opium. Here is an extract from Lin’s “Letter of Advice to Queen Victoria”
‘All those people in China who sell opium or smoke opium should receive the death
penalty. We trace the crime of those barbarians who through the years have been
selling opium, then the deep harm they have wrought and the great profit they have
usurped should fundamentally justify their execution according to law. …
We find your country is sixty or seventy thousand li [three li make one mile, ordinarily]
from China. Yet there are barbarian ships that strive to come here for trade for the
purpose of making a great profit. The wealth of China is used to profit the barbarians.
That is to say, the great profit made by barbarians is all taken from the rightful share
of China. By what right do they then in return us the poisonous drug to injure the
Chinese people?...Let us ask, where is your conscience? I have heard that the smoking
of opium is very strictly forbidden by your country; that is because the harm caused
by opium is clearly understood. Since it is not permitted to do harm to your own
country, then even less should you let it be passed on to the harm of other countries
— how much less to China!’
Source: From Ssuyu Teng and John Fairbank, China’s Response to the West (1954).
Fig.19 – A ship arrives from China.
This is a painting by Thomas Daniell, an English artist who came to India with his nephew William Daniell in 1786.
The Daniells went first to China, stayed there for while, and then sailed from Canton (in south China) to India. The
ship in which they came was registered in an Indian port and was engaged in trade in Eastern waters. The illegal trade
in opium with China was carried on, in such ships.
Source
India and the Contemporary World
Activity
Imagine that you are the leader of a group of
farmers protesting against having to grow
opium. You have been granted a meeting
with the local official of the East India
Company. How would the conversation
proceed? Divide the class into the two
groups and act out the conversation you
would have.
New words
Maund – A measure of weight.
1 maund = 40 seers. 1 seer is a little
under a kg.
Activity
Imagine that you were asked by the Emperor
of China to prepare a leaflet for young people
about the harmful effects of opium. Find out
about the effect of opium on the human body.
Design your leaflet and give it an eye-
catching title
A British doctor in Canton put the figure at 12 million. As China
became a country of opium addicts, British trade in tea flourished.
The returns from opium sale financed the tea purchases in China.
3.2 Where did Opium come from?
This is where the Indian peasants come into the story.
When the British conquered Bengal, they made a determined effort
to produce opium in the lands under their control. As the market
for opium expanded in China, larger volumes of opium flowed out
of Bengal ports. Before 1767, no more than 500 chests (of two
maunds each) were being exported from India. Within four years,
the quantity trebled. A hundred years later, in 1870, the government
was exporting about 50,000 chests annually.
Supplies had to be increased to feed this booming export trade. But
this was not easy. How could the cultivators be persuaded to grow
opium? For a variety of reasons, they were unwilling to turn their
fields over to poppy. First, the crop had to be grown on the best
land, on fields that lay near villages and were well manured. On this
land peasants usually produced pulses. If they planted opium on this
land, then pulses could not be grown there, or they would have to
be grown on inferior land where harvests were poorer and uncertain.
Second, many cultivators owned no land. To cultivate, they had to
pay rent and lease land from landlords. And the rent charged on
good lands near villages was very high. Third, the cultivation of opium
was a difficult process. The plant was delicate, and cultivators had to
spend long hours nurturing it. This meant that they did not have
enough time to care for other crops. Finally, the price the government
paid to the cultivators for the opium they produced was very low. It
was unprofitable for cultivators to grow opium at that price.
3.3 How Were Unwilling Cultivators Made to Produce Opium?
Unwilling cultivators were made to produce opium through a system
of advances. In the rural areas of Bengal and Bihar, there were large
numbers of poor peasants. They never had enough to survive. It was
difficult for them to pay rent to the landlord or to buy food and
clothing.  From the 1780s, such peasants found their village headmen
(mahato) giving them money advances to produce opium.  When
offered a loan, the cultivators were tempted to accept, hoping to
Peasants and Farmers
Source F
The Deputy Opium Agent of Allahabad
wrote in 1833:
‘The Board appears  to think that the
cultivators are not unwilling to cultivate.
For two years past I have had constant
communications with the cultivators in
some of the districts south of the Jumna
and state positively the people are
discontented and dissatisfied almost to
a man. I have made many enquires on
the subject and the impression left on
my mind is that cultivation of the poppy
is considered a curse by the people and
that only by undue authority is it upheld
… The cultivation was introduced at the
request, nay I may say, at the command
of the Collector; … The people tell me,
they are ill used and abused and even
beaten by the chuprassies … The people
almost uniformly told, they suffered loss
from poppy …’
From Benoy Chowdhury, Growth of
Commercial Agriculture in Bengal.
meet their immediate needs and pay back the loan at a later stage.
But the loan tied the peasant to the headman and through him to the
government. It was the government opium agents who were advancing
the money to the headmen, who in turn gave it to the cultivators. By
taking the loan, the cultivator was forced to grow opium on a specified
area of land and hand over the produce to the agents once the crop
had been harvested. He had no option of planting the field with a
crop of his choice or of selling his produce to anyone but the
government agent. And he had to accept the low price offered for
the produce.
The problem could have been partly solved by increasing the price
of opium. But the government was reluctant to do so. It wanted to
produce opium at a cheap rate and sell it at a high price to opium
agents in Calcutta, who then shipped it to China. This difference
between the buying and selling price was the government’s opium
revenue. The prices given to the peasants were so low that by the
early eighteenth century angry peasants began agitating for higher
prices and refused to take advances. In regions around Benaras,
cultivators began giving up opium cultivation. They produced
sugarcane and potatoes instead.  Many cultivators sold off their crop
to travelling traders (pykars) who offered higher prices.
By 1773, the British government in Bengal had established a
monopoly to trade in opium. No one else was legally permitted to
trade in the product. By the 1820s, the British found to their horror
that opium production in their territories was rapidly declining, but
its production outside the British territories was increasing.  It was
being produced in Central India and Rajasthan, within princely states
that were not under British control. In these regions, local traders
were offering much higher prices to peasants and exporting opium
to China. In fact, armed bands of traders were found carrying on
the trade in the 1820s. To the British this trade was illegal:  it was
smuggling and it had to be stopped. Government monopoly had to
be retained. It therefore instructed its agents posted in the princely
states to confiscate all opium and destroy the crops.
This conflict between the British government, peasants and local
traders continued as long as opium production lasted.
We should not however, think that the experiences of all peasants in
colonial India were like those of the opium cultivators. We will read
about other experiences of peasants in colonial India in a later chapter.
India and the Contemporary World
Conclusion
In this chapter you saw how rural areas in different parts of the
world changed in the modern period. While looking at these changes
we must remember that their pattern was not the same everywhere.
All sections of rural people were not affected in the same way. Some
gained, others lost. Nor was the history of modernisation simply a
glorious story of growth and development. It was also a story of
displacements and impoverishment, ecological crises and social
rebellion, colonisation and repression. We need to look at these
variations and strands to understand the diverse ways in which
peasants and farmers confronted the modern world.
Fig.20 – Packed chests of opium being taken to Ghazipur railway station in the nineteenth century.
Peasants and Farmers
Questions
1. Explain briefly what the open field system meant to rural people in eighteenth-
century England.
Look at the system from the point of view of :
A rich farmer
A labourer
A peasant woman
2. Explain briefly the factors which led to the enclosures in England.
3. Why were threshing machines opposed by the poor in England?
4. Who was Captain Swing? What did the name symbolise or represent?
5. What was the impact of the westward expansion of settlers in the USA?
6. What were the advantages and disadvantages of the use of mechanical
harvesting machines in the USA?
7. What lessons can we draw from the conversion of the countryside in the USA
from a bread basket to a dust bowl?
8. Write a paragraph on why the British insisted on farmers growing opium in
India.
9. Why were Indian farmers reluctant to grow opium?
Activities
1. Draw a timeline from 1650 to1930 showing the significant agricultural changes
which you have read about in this chapter.
2. Fill in the following table with the events outlined in this chapter. Remember,
there could be more than one change in a country.
COUNTRY
CHANGE WHICH
WHO LOST
WHO WON
OCCURRED
Activities
India and the Contemporary World
History and Sport: The Story of Cricket
SECTION III
Section III will introduce you to the history of everyday life. In this section you will
read about the history of sports and clothing.
History is not just about the dramatic events in the world. It is equally about the
small things in our lives. Everything around us has a history – the clothes we wear,
the food we eat, the music we hear, the medicines we use, the literature we read, the
games we play. All these have evolved over time. Since we relate to them in our daily
lives, their history escapes us. We never pause to think what  things were like a
century ago; or how people in different societies see these everyday things – food
and clothing for instance – differently.
Chapter VII is on History and Sports. You will study this history through the story
of one game that in India has captured the imagination of the nation for some decades.
News of cricket today hits the headline of newspapers. Cricket matches are organised
to establish friendship between nations and cricketers are seen as ambassadors of the
country. The game has, in fact, come to represent the unity of India. But did you
know that this was not always so? This chapter will tell you about the long and
chequered history of the game.
At one time, a century and half ago, cricket was an English game. It had been invented
in England and became intimately linked to the culture of nineteenth century
Victorian society. The game was expected to represent all that the English valued –
fair play, discipline, gentlemanliness. It was introduced in schools as part of a wider
programme of physical training through which boys were to be moulded into ideal
citizens. Girls were not to play games meant for boys. With the British, cricket
spread to the colonies. There again it was supposed to uphold the values of Englishness.
EVERYDAY LIFE, CULTURE AND POLITICS
EVERYDAY LIFE, CULTURE AND POLITICS
India and the Contemporary World
The colonial masters assumed that only they could play the game as it ought to be
played, in its true spirit. They were, in fact,  worried when the inhabitants of the
colonies not only began to play the game, but often played it better than the masters;
and at times beat the English at their own game. The game of cricket thus got linked up
closely with the politics of colonialism and nationalism.
Within the colonies the game had a complex history. As Chapter VII will show, it was
connected to the politics of caste and region, community and nation. The emergence of
cricket as a national game was the result of many decades of historical development.
From cricket you will move to clothing (Chapter VIII). You will see how a history of
clothing can tell us so much about the history of societies. The clothes people wear are
shaped by the rules and norms of societies. They reflect people’s sense of beauty and
honour, their notions of proper conduct and behavior. As societies change, these norms
alter. But these changes in the norms of society and styles of clothing come about as a
consequence of long years of struggle. They have a history. They do not just
happen naturally.
Chapter VIII will introduce you to this history. It will show how the shifts in clothing
in England and India were shaped by the social movements within these societies, and
by changes within the economy. You will see how clothing too, is deeply connected to
the politics of colonialism and nationalism, caste and class. A look at the history of
clothing helps us discover new layers of meaning in the politics of Swadeshi and the
symbol of the charkha. It even helps us understand Mahatma Gandhi better, for he was
one individual who was highly sensitive to the politics of clothing, and wrote
extensively on it.
Once you see the history behind one or two such issues, you may begin to ask historical
questions about other such aspects of ordinary life which you have taken for granted.
History and Sport: The Story of Cricket
Cricket grew out of the many stick-and-ball games played in England
500 years ago, under a variety of  different rules. The word ‘bat’ is an old
English word that simply means stick or club. By the seventeenth century,
cricket had evolved enough to be recognisable as a distinct game and it
was popular enough for its fans to be fined for playing it on Sunday
instead of  going to church. Till the middle of the eighteenth century, bats
were roughly the same shape as hockey sticks, curving outwards at the
bottom. There was a simple reason for this: the ball was bowled underarm,
along the ground and the curve at the end of the bat gave the batsman
the best chance of making contact.
How that early version of  cricket played in village England grew into
the modern game played in giant stadiums in great cities is a proper
subject for history because one of the uses of  history is to understand
how the present was made. And sport is a large part of  contemporary
life: it is one way in which we amuse ourselves, compete with each
other, stay fit, and express our social loyalties. If tens of millions of
Indians today drop everything to watch the Indian team play a Test
match or a one-day international, it is reasonable for a history of India
to explore how that stick-and-ball game invented in south-eastern
England became the ruling passion of  the Indian sub-continent. This
is particularly so, since the game was linked to the wider history of
colonialism and nationalism and was in part shaped by the politics of
religion and caste.
Our history of  cricket will look first at the
evolution of cricket as a game in England,
and discuss the wider culture of physical
training and athleticism of the time. It will
then move to India, discuss the history of
the adoption of cricket in this country, and
trace the modern transformation of the
game. In each of these sections we will see
how the history of  the game was connected
to the social history of  the time.
History and Sport: The Story of Cricket
History and Sport:
History and Sport:
History and Sport:
History and Sport:
History and Sport:
The Story of Cricket
The Story of Cricket
The Story of Cricket
The Story of Cricket
The Story of Cricket
Fig.1 – The oldest cricket bat in existence.
Note the curved end, similar to a hockey
stick.
Fig.2 — An artist’s sketch of the cricket ground at Lord’s in England
in 1821.
Chapter VII
India and the Contemporary World
The social and economic history of England in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries, cricket’s early years, shaped the game and gave
cricket its unique nature.
For example, one of the peculiarities of Test cricket is that a match
can go on for five days and still end in a draw. No other modern
team sport takes even half as much time to complete. A football
match is generally over in an hour-and-a-half of playing time. Even
baseball, a long-drawn-out bat-and-ball game by the standards of
modern sport, completes nine innings in less than half the time that
it takes to play a limited-overs match, the shortened version of
modern cricket!
Another curious characteristic of cricket is that the length of the
pitch is specified – 22 yards – but the size or shape of the ground is
not. Most other team sports, such as hockey and football lay down
the dimensions of the playing area: cricket does not. Grounds can be
oval like the Adelaide Oval or nearly circular, like Chepauk in
Chennai. A six at the Melbourne Cricket Ground needs to clear
much more ground than a lofted shot for the same reward at Feroz
Shah Kotla in Delhi.
There’s a historical reason behind both these oddities. Cricket was
the earliest modern team sport to be codified, which is another way
of saying that cricket gave itself rules and regulations so that it could
be played in a uniform and standardised way
well before team games like soccer and hockey.
The first written ‘Laws of Cricket’ were drawn
up in 1744. They stated, ‘the principals shall
choose from amongst the gentlemen present two
umpires who shall absolutely decide all disputes.
The stumps must be 22 inches high and the bail
across them six inches. The ball must be between
5 and 6 ounces, and the two sets of stumps 22
yards apart’. There were no limits on the shape
or size of the bat. It appears that 40 notches or
runs was viewed as a very big score, probably
due to the bowlers bowling quickly at shins
unprotected by pads. The world’s first cricket
club was formed in Hambledon in the 1760s
1  The
The Historical
istorical
istorical
istorical
istorical Development of
evelopment of
evelopment of
evelopment of
evelopment of Cricket
ricket
ricket
ricket
ricket
as a Game in England
ame in England
ame in England
ame in England
ame in England
Fig.3 – The pavilion of the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) in 1874.
History and Sport: The Story of Cricket
and the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) was founded in 1787. In
1788, the MCC published its first revision of the laws and became
the guardian of cricket’s regulations.
The MCC’s revision of the laws brought in a series of changes in
the game that occurred in the second half of the eighteenth century.
During the 1760s and 1770s it became common to pitch the ball
through the air, rather than roll it along the ground. This change
gave bowlers the options of length, deception through the air, plus
increased pace. It also opened new possibilities for spin and swing.
In response, batsmen had to master timing and shot selection. One
immediate result was the replacement of the curved bat with the
straight one. All of this raised the premium on skill and reduced
the influence of rough ground and brute force.
The weight of the ball was limited to between 5½  to 5¾ ounces,
and the width of the bat to four inches. The latter ruling followed
an innings by a batsman who appeared with a bat as wide as the
wicket! In 1774, the first leg-before law was published. Also around
this time, a third stump became common. By 1780, three days had
become the length of a major match, and this year also saw the
creation of the first six-seam cricket ball.
While many important changes occurred during the nineteenth
century (the rule about wide balls was applied, the exact
circumference of the ball was specified, protective equipment like
pads and gloves became available, boundaries were introduced where
previously all shots had to be run and, most importantly, over-
arm bowling became legal) cricket remained a pre-industrial sport
that matured during the early phase of the Industrial Revolution,
the late eighteenth century.  This history has made cricket a game
with characteristics of both the past and the present day.
Cricket’s connection with a rural past can be seen in the length of
a Test match. Originally, cricket matches had no time limit. The
game went on for as long as it took to bowl out a side twice. The
rhythms of village life were slower and cricket’s rules were made
before the Industrial Revolution. Modern factory work meant that
people were paid by the hour or the day or the week: games that
were codified after the industrial revolution, like football and
hockey, were strictly time-limited to fit the routines of industrial
city life.
In the same way, cricket’s vagueness about the size of a cricket
ground is a result of its village origins. Cricket was originally played
New words
Codified – Made into a formalised system
with clearly established rules and laws
Fig.4 – The laws of cricket drawn up and
revised by the MCC were regularly published in
this form. Note that norms of betting were also
formalised.
India and the Contemporary World
on country commons, unfenced land that was public property.
The size of the commons varied from one village to another, so
there were no designated boundaries or boundary hits. When the
ball went into the crowd, the crowd cleared a way for the fieldsman
to retrieve it. Even after boundaries were written into the laws of
cricket, their distance from the wicket was not specified. The laws
simply lay down that ‘the umpire shall agree with both captains on
the boundaries of the playing area’.
If you look at the game’s equipment, you can see how cricket both
changed with changing times and yet fundamentally remained true to
its origins in rural England. Cricket’s most important tools are all made
of natural, pre-industrial materials. The bat is made of wood as are
the stumps and the bails. The ball is made with leather, twine and
cork. Even today both bat and ball are handmade, not industrially
manufactured. The material of the bat changed slightly over time. Once
it was cut out of a single piece of wood. Now it consists of  two pieces,
the blade which is made out of the wood of  the willow tree and the
handle which is made out of cane that became available as European
colonialists and trading companies established themselves in Asia.
Unlike golf and tennis, cricket has refused to remake its tools with
industrial or man-made materials: plastic, fibre glass and metal have
been firmly rejected. Australian cricketer Dennis Lillee tried to play an
innings with an aluminium bat, only to have it outlawed by the umpires.
But in the matter of  protective equipment, cricket has been influenced
by technological change. The invention of vulcanised rubber led to
the introduction of pads in 1848 and protective gloves soon afterwards,
and the modern game would be unimaginable without helmets made
out of metal and synthetic lightweight materials.
Fig.5 – This poster announces a match at
Lord’s in 1848.
It shows the difference between the amateurs
and the professionals by calling the two sides
the Gentlemen and the Players.
Advertisements for nineteenth century
matches looked like theatre posters suggesting
the dramatic nature of the game.
Fig.6 – The legendary batsman W.G. Grace coming out to bat at Lord’s
in 1895.
He was playing for the Gentlemen against the Players.
History and Sport: The Story of Cricket
Source A
1.1 Cricket and Victorian England
The organisation of cricket in England reflected the nature of English
society. The rich who could afford to play it for pleasure were called
amateurs and the poor who played it for a living were called
professionals. The rich were amateurs for two reasons. One, they
considered sport a kind of leisure. To play for the pleasure of playing
and not for money was an aristocratic value. Two, there was not
enough money in the game for the rich to be interested. The wages
of professionals were paid by patronage or subscription or gate
money. The game was seasonal and did not offer employment the
year round. Most professionals worked as miners or in other forms
of working class employment in winter, the off-season.
The social superiority of amateurs was built into the customs of
cricket. Amateurs were called Gentlemen while professionals had to
be content with being described as Players. They even entered the
ground from different entrances. Amateurs tended to be batsmen,
New words
Patronage – Agreement by wealthy
supporter to give financial support for a
specific cause
Subscription
Collected
financial
contribution for a specific purpose (such as
cricket)
Thomas Hughes (1822-1896) studied at Rugby School during the headmastership of Thomas Arnold.
Based on his school experience, he wrote a novel, Tom Brown’s Schooldays. The book, published in 1857,
became popular and helped spread the ideas of what came to be called muscular Christianity that believed
that healthy citizens had to be moulded through Christian ideals and sports.
In this book Tom Brown is transformed from a nervous, homesick, timid boy into a robust, manly student.
He becomes a heroic figure recognised for his physical courage, sportsmanship, loyalty and patriotism.
This transformation is brought about by the discipline of the public school and the culture of sports.
——EXTRACT——
‘Come, none of your irony, Brown,’ answers the master. ‘I’m beginning to understand the game scientifically.
What a noble game it is, too!’
‘Isn’t it? But it’s more than a game. It’s an institution,’ said Tom.
‘Yes,’ said Arthur, ‘the birthright of British boys old and young, as habeas corpus and trial by jury are of
British men.’
‘The discipline and reliance on one another which it teaches is so valuable, I think,’ went on the master,
‘it ought to be such an unselfish game. It merges the individual in the eleven; he doesn’t play that he may
win, but that his side may.’
‘That’s very true,’ said Tom, ‘and that’s why football and cricket, now one comes to think of it, are such much
better games than fives’ or hare-and-hounds, or any others where the object is to come in first or to win for
oneself, and not that one’s side may win.’
‘And then the Captain of the eleven!’ said the master, ‘what a post is his in our School-world!...requiring skill
and gentleness and firmness, and I know not what other rare qualities.’
Extract from Tom Brown’s Schooldays by Thomas Hughes
India and the Contemporary World
leaving the energetic, hardworking aspects of the game, like fast
bowling, to the professionals. That is partly why the laws of the
game always give the benefit of the doubt to the batsman. Cricket is
a batsman’s game because its rules were made to favour  ‘Gentlemen’,
who did most of the batting. The social superiority of the amateur
was also the reason the captain of a cricket team was  traditionally a
batsman: not because batsmen were naturally better captains but
because they were generally Gentlemen. Captains of teams, whether
club teams or national sides, were always amateurs. It was not till the
1930s that the English Test team was led by a professional, the
Yorkshire batsman, Len Hutton.
It’s often said that the ‘battle of Waterloo was won on the playing
fields of Eton’. This means that Britain’s military success was based
on the values taught to schoolboys in its public schools. Eton was
the most famous of these schools. The English boarding school was
the institution that trained English boys for careers in the military,
the civil service and the church, the three great institutions of imperial
England. By the beginning of the nineteenth century, men like
Thomas Arnold, headmaster of the famous Rugby School and
founder of the modern public school system, saw team sport like
cricket and rugby not just as outdoor play, but as an organised way
of teaching English boys the discipline, the importance of hierarchy,
the skills, the codes of honour and the leadership qualities that helped
them build and run the British empire. Victorian empire builders
justified the conquest of other countries as an act of unselfish social
service, by which backward peoples were introduced to the civilising
influence of British law and Western knowledge. Cricket helped to
confirm this self-image of the English elite by glorifying the amateur
ideal, where cricket was played not for victory or profit, but for its
own sake, in the spirit of fair play.
In actual fact the Napoleonic wars were won because of the economic
contribution of the iron works of Scotland and Wales, the mills of
Lancashire and the financial houses of the City of London. It was
the English lead in trade and industry that made Britain the world’s
greatest power, but it suited the English ruling class to believe that it
was the superior character of its young men, built in boarding schools,
playing gentlemanly games like cricket, that tipped the balance.
New words
Hierarchy – Organised by rank and status
Fig.7 – A cricket match at Lord’s between the
famous public schools Eton and Harrow.
While the game itself would look similar
wherever it is played, the crowd does not.
Notice how the upper-class social character
of the game is brought out by the focus on
gentlemen in bowler hats and ladies with their
parasols shading them from the sun.
From Illustrated London News,
July 20 1872.
History and Sport: The Story of Cricket
Activity
Source B
Sport for girls?
Till the last part of the nineteenth century, sports and vigorous
exercise for girls was not a part of their education. Dorothea
Beale, principal of Cheltenham Ladies College from 1858 to 1906,
reported to the schools Enquiry Commission in 1864:
‘The vigorous exercise which boys get from cricket, etc., must
be supplied in the case of girls by walking and … skipping.’
From: Kathleen, E. McCrone, ‘Play up! Play up! And Play the Game:
Sport at the Late Victorian Girls Public School’.
By the 1890s, school began acquiring playgrounds and allowing
girls to play some of the games earlier considered male
preserves. But the competition was still discouraged. Dorothea
Beale told the school council in 1893-1894:
‘I am most anxious that girls should not over-exert themselves,
or become absorbed in athletic rivalries, and therefore we do
not play against the other schools. I think it is better for girls to
learn to take an interest in botany, geology etc., and not make
country excursions.’
From: Kathleen, E. McCrone, ‘Play up! Play up! And Play the Game’.
What does the sports curriculum of a
nineteenth century girls’ school tell us about
the behaviour considered proper for girls at
that time?
Fig.8 – Croquet, not cricket, for women.
Sports for women was not designed as  vigorous, competitive exercise.  Croquet was a slow-paced, elegant game
considered suitable for women, especially of the upper class. The players’ flowing gowns, frills and hats show the
character of women’s sports. From Illustrated London News, 20 July, 1872.
India and the Contemporary World
While some English team games like hockey and football became
international games, played all over the world, cricket remained a
colonial game, limited to countries that had once been part of the
British empire. The pre-industrial oddness of cricket made it a hard game
to export. It took root only in countries that the British conquered and
ruled. In these colonies, cricket was established as a popular sport either
by white settlers (as in South Africa, Zimbabwe, Australia, New Zealand,
the West Indies and Kenya) or by local elites who wanted to copy the
habits of their colonial masters, as in India.
While British imperial officials brought the
game to the colonies, they made little effort
to spread the game, especially in colonial
territories where the subjects of empire were
mainly non-white, such as India and the
West Indies. Here, playing cricket became a
sign of superior social and racial status, and
the Afro-Caribbean population was
discouraged from participating in organised
club cricket, which remained dominated by
white plantation owners and their servants.
The first non-white club in the West Indies
was established towards the end of the
nineteenth century, and even in this case its
members were light-skinned mulattos. So
while black people played an enormous
2  The
2  The
2  The
2  The
2  The Spread of
pread of
pread of
pread of
pread of Cricket
ricket
ricket
ricket
ricket
New words
Mulattos – People of mixed European and
African descent
Fig.10 – A leisurely game for recreation, being played against the backdrop of
the Himalayas.
The only Indians in the picture seem to be the servants seen near the pavilion.
Fig.9 – An afternoon of tennis in the plains of colonial India.
Notice how the artist tries to show that the game was for recreation as
well as exercise. Men and women could play games together for
recreation not competition.
From: Graphic, February 1880.
History and Sport: The Story of Cricket
amount of informal cricket on beaches, in back alleys
and parks, club cricket till as late as the 1930s was
dominated by white elites.
Despite the exclusiveness of the white cricket elite
in the West Indies, the game became hugely popular
in the Caribbean. Success at cricket became a measure
of racial equality and political progress.  At the time
of their independence many of the political leaders
of Caribbean countries like Forbes Burnham and
Eric Williams saw in the game a chance for self-
respect and international standing. When the West
Indies won its first Test series against England in
1950, it was celebrated as a national achievement, as
a way of demonstrating that West Indians were the
equals of white Englishmen. There were two ironies to this great
victory. One, the West Indian team that won was captained by a
white player. The first time a black player led the West Indies Test
team was in 1960 when Frank Worrell was named captain. And two,
the West Indies cricket team represented not one nation but several
dominions that later became independent countries. The pan-West
Indian team that represents the Caribbean region in international
Test cricket is the only exception to a series of unsuccessful efforts to
bring about West Indian unification.
Cricket fans know that watching a match involves taking sides. In a
Ranji Trophy match when Delhi plays Mumbai, the loyalty of
spectators depends on which city they come from or support. When
India plays Australia, the spectators watching the match on television
in Bhopal or Chennai feel involved as Indians – they are moved by
nationalist loyalties. But through the early history of Indian first-
class cricket, teams were not organised on geographical principles
and it was not till 1932 that a national team was given the right to
represent India in a Test match. So how were teams organised and,
in the absence of regional or national teams, how did cricket fans
choose sides? We turn to history for answers, to discover how cricket
in India developed and to get a sense of the loyalties that united and
divided Indians in the days of the Raj.
2.1 Cricket, Race and Religion
Cricket in colonial India was organised on the principle of race and
religion. The first record we have of cricket being played in India is
from 1721, an account of recreational cricket played by English sailors
New words
Dominion – Self-governing areas under
the control of the British crown
Fig.11 – A rough-and-ready cricket game being played by
Indians in a village in the Himalayas (1894).
In contrast to Figure 10, notice the home-made wickets and bat,
carved out of rough bits of wood.
Fig.12 – Learie Constantine.
One of the best-known
cricketers of the West
Indies.
India and the Contemporary World
in Cambay. The first Indian club, the Calcutta Cricket Club, was
established in 1792. Through the eighteenth century, cricket in India
was almost wholly a sport played by British military men and civil
servants in all-white clubs and gymkhanas. Playing cricket in the
privacy of these clubs was more than just fun: it was also an escape
from the strangeness, discomfort and danger of their stay in India.
Indians were considered to have no talent for the game and certainly
not meant to play it. But they did.
The origins of Indian cricket, that is, cricket played by Indians are to
be found in Bombay and the first Indian community to start playing
the game was the small community of Zoroastrians, the Parsis.
Brought into close contact with the British because of their interest
in trade and the first Indian community to westernise, the Parsis
founded the first Indian cricket club, the Oriental Cricket Club in
Bombay in 1848. Parsi clubs were funded and sponsored by Parsi
businessmen like the Tatas and the Wadias. The white cricket elite in
India offered no help to the enthusiastic Parsis. In fact, there was a
quarrel between the Bombay Gymkhana, a whites-only club, and
Parsi cricketers over the use of a public park. The Parsis complained
that the park was left unfit for cricket because the polo ponies of the
Bombay Gymkhana dug up the surface.
When it became clear that the colonial
authorities were prejudiced in favour of
their white compatriots, the Parsis built
their own gymkhana to play cricket in.
The rivalry between the Parsis and the
racist Bombay Gymkhana had a happy
ending for these pioneers of Indian cricket.
A Parsi team beat the Bombay Gymkhana
at cricket in 1889, just four years after the
foundation of the Indian National
Congress in 1885, an organisation that was
lucky to have amongst its early leaders the
great Parsi statesman and intellectual
Dadabhai Naoroji.
The establishment of the Parsi Gymkhana became a precedent for
other Indians who in turn established clubs based on the idea of
religious community. By the 1890s, Hindus and Muslims were busy
gathering funds and support for a Hindu Gymkhana and an Islam
Gymkhana. The British did not consider colonial India as a nation.
They saw it as a collection of castes and races and religious
communities and gave themselves the credit for unifying the sub-
New word
Precedent – Previous action which
provides reason to repeat it
Fig.13 – The Parsi team, the first Indian cricket team to tour England
in 1886.
Note that along with the traditional cricket flannels, they wear Parsi caps.
History and Sport: The Story of Cricket
continent. In the late nineteenth century, many Indian institutions
and movements were organised around the idea of religious
community because the colonial state encouraged these divisions and
was quick to recognise communal institutions. For example, the
Governor of the Bombay Presidency while dealing with an
application from the Islam Gymkhana for land on Bombay’s seafront
wrote: ‘… we can be certain that in a short time we shall get a similar
application from some Hindu Gymkhana … I don’t see how we are
to refuse these applicants; but I will … refuse any more grants once a
Gymkhana has been established … by each nationality’. (emphasis
added). It is obvious from this letter that colonial officials regarded
religious communities as separate nationalities. Applications that used
the communal categories favoured by the colonial state were, as this
letter shows, more likely to be approved.
This history of gymkhana cricket led to first-class cricket being
organised on communal and racial lines. The teams that played
colonial India’s greatest and most famous first-class cricket tournament
did not represent regions, as teams in today’s Ranji Trophy currently
do, but religious communities. The tournament was initially called
the Quadrangular, because it was played by four teams: the
Europeans, the Parsis, the Hindus and the Muslims. It later became
the Pentangular when a fifth team was added, namely, the Rest, which
comprised all the communities left over, such as the Indian Christians.
For example, Vijay Hazare, a Christian, played for the Rest.
By the late 1930s and early 1940s, journalists, cricketers and political
leaders had begun to criticize the racial and communal foundations
of the Pentangular tournament. The distinguished editor of the
newspaper the Bombay Chronicle, S.A. Brelvi, the famous radio
commentator A.F.S. Talyarkhan and India’s most respected political
figure, Mahatma Gandhi, condemned the Pentangular as a
communally divisive competition that was out of place in a time
when nationalists were trying to unite India’s diverse population. A
rival first-class tournament on regional lines, the National Cricket
Championship (later named the Ranji Trophy), was established but
not until Independence did it properly replace the Pentangular. The
colonial state and its divisive conception of India was the rock on
which the Pentangular was built. It was a colonial  tournament and it
died with the Raj.
Box 1
Caste and cricket
Palwankar Baloo was born in Poona in
1875. Born at a time when Indians weren’t
allowed to play Test cricket, he was the
greatest Indian slow bowler of his time.
He played for the Hindus in the
Quadrangular, the major cricket tournament
of the colonial period. Despite being their
greatest player he was never made captain
of the Hindus because he was born a Dalit
and upper-caste selectors discriminated
against him. But his younger brother, Vithal,
a batsman did become captain of the
Hindus in 1923 and led the team to a
famous victory against the Europeans.
Writing to a newspaper a cricket fan made a
connection between the Hindus’ victory and
Gandhiji’s war on ‘untouchability’:
‘The Hindus’ brilliant victory was due more
to the judicious and bold step of the Hindu
Gymkhana in appointing Mr Vithal, brother of
Mr Baloo – premier bowler of India – who is
a member of the Untouchable Class to
captain the Hindu team. The moral that can
be safely drawn from the Hindus’
magnificent victory is that removal of
Untouchability would lead to swaraj – which
is the prophecy of the Mahatma.’
A Corner of a Foreign Field by
Ramachandra Guha.
Fig.14 – Palwankar Baloo (1904).
A Dalit, Baloo’s enormous cricketing talent made sure that he could not be
kept out of the team, but he was never allowed to take over as captain.
India and the Contemporary World
Source C
Modern cricket is dominated by Tests and one-day internationals, played
between national teams. The players who become famous, who live on
in the memories of cricket’s public, are those who have played for their
country. The players Indian fans remember from the era of the
Pentangular and the Quadrangular are those who were fortunate enough
to play Test cricket. C.K. Nayudu, an outstanding Indian batsman of
his time, lives on in the popular imagination when some of his great
contemporaries like Palwankar Vithal and Palwankar Baloo have been
forgotten because his career lasted long enough for him to play Test
cricket for India while theirs did not. Even though Nayudu was past his
3  The
3  The
3  The
3  The
3  The Modern
odern
odern
odern
odern Transformation of the
ransformation of the
ransformation of the
ransformation of the
ransformation of the Game
Mahatma Gandhi and colonial sport
Mahatma Gandhi believed that sport was essential for creating a balance between the body and the
mind. However, he often emphasised that games like cricket and hockey were imported into India by
the British and were replacing traditional games. Such games as cricket, hockey, football and tennis
were for the privileged, he believed. They showed a colonial mindset and were a less effective education
than the simple exercise of those who worked on the land.
Read the following three extracts from Mahatma Gandhi’s writing and contrast them to the ideas on
education and sport expressed by Thomas Arnold or Hughes (Source A).
‘Now let us examine our body. Are we supposed to cultivate the body by playing tennis, football or
cricket for an hour every day? It does, certainly, build up the body. Like a wild horse, however, the
body will be strong but not trained. A trained body is healthy, vigorous and sinewy. The hands and
feet can do any desired work. A pickaxe, a shovel, a hammer, etc. are like ornaments to a trained hand
and it can wield them … A well-trained body does not get tired in trudging 30 miles …. Does the
student acquire such physical culture? We can assert that modern curricula do not impart physical
education in this sense.’
‘What Is Education’, 26 February 1926, The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. 34.
‘I should, however, be exceedingly surprised and even painfully surprised, if I were told that before
cricket and football descended upon your sacred soil, your boys were devoid of all games. If you have
national games, I would urge upon you that yours is an institution that should lead in reviving old
games. I know that we have in India many noble indigenous games just as interesting and exciting as
cricket or football, also as much attended with risks as football is, but with the added advantage that
they are inexpensive, because the cost is practically next to nothing’
Speech at Mahindra College, 24 November 1927, The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi.
‘A sound body means one which bends itself to the spirit and is always a ready instrument at its
service. Such bodies are not made, in my opinion, on the football field. They are made on cornfields
and farms. I would urge you to think this over and you will find innumerable illustrations to prove my
statement. Our colonial-born Indians are carried away with this football and cricket mania. These
games may have their place under certain circumstances …. Why do we not take the simple fact into
consideration that the vast majority of mankind who are vigorous in body and mind are simple
agriculturists, that they are strangers to these games, and they are the salt of the earth?’
Letter to Lazarus, 17 April 1915, The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. 14.
History and Sport: The Story of Cricket
cricketing prime when he played for India in its first Test matches against
England starting in 1932, his place in India’s cricket history is assured
because he was the country’s first Test captain.
India entered the world of Test cricket in 1932, a decade and a half
before it became an independent nation. This was possible because Test
cricket from its origins in 1877 was organised as a contest between
different parts of the British empire, not sovereign nations. The first
Test was played between England and Australia when Australia was still
a white settler colony, not even a self-governing dominion. Similarly,
the small countries of the Caribbean that together make up the West
Indies team were British colonies till well after the Second World War.
3.1 Decolonisation and Sport
Decolonisation, or the process through which different parts of European
empires became independent nations, began with the independence of
India in 1947 and continued for the next half a century. This process led
to the decline of British influence in trade, commerce, military affairs,
international politics and, inevitably, sporting matters. But this did not
happen at once; it took a while for the relative unimportance of post-
imperial Britain to be reflected in the organisation of world cricket.
Even after Indian independence kick-started the disappearance of the
British empire, the regulation of international cricket remained the
business of the Imperial  Cricket Conference ICC. The ICC, renamed the
International Cricket Conference as late as 1965, was dominated by its
foundation members, England and Australia, which retained the right
of veto over its proceedings. Not till 1989 was the privileged position of
England and Australia scrapped in favour of equal membership.
The colonial flavour of world cricket during the 1950s and 1960s can be
seen from the fact that England and the other white commonwealth
countries, Australia and New Zealand, continued to play Test cricket
with South Africa, a racist state that practised a policy of racial
segregation which, among other things, barred non-whites (who made
up the majority of South Africa’s population) from representing that
country in Test matches. Test-playing nations like India, Pakistan and
the West Indies boycotted South Africa, but they did not have the
necessary power in the ICC to debar that country from Test cricket.
That only came to pass when the political pressure to isolate South
Africa applied by the newly decolonised nations of Asia and Africa
combined with liberal feeling in Britain and forced the English cricket
authorities to cancel a tour by South Africa in 1970.
New words
Segregation – Separation (of people) on the
basis of colour or race
India and the Contemporary World
The 1970s were the decade in which cricket was transformed: it was a
time when a traditional game evolved to fit a changing world. If 1970
was notable for the exclusion of South Africa from international cricket,
1971 was a landmark year because the first one-day international was
played between England and Australia in Melbourne. The enormous
popularity of this shortened version of  the game led to the first World
Cup being successfully staged in 1975. Then in 1977, even as cricket
celebrated 100 years of Test matches, the game was changed forever, not
by a player or cricket administrator, but by a businessman.
Kerry Packer, an Australian television tycoon who saw the money-
making potential of  cricket as a televised sport, signed up fifty-one of
the world’s leading cricketers against the wishes of the national cricket
boards and for about two years staged unofficial Tests and One-Day
internationals under the name of World Series Cricket. While Packer’s
‘circus’ as it was then described folded up after two years, the
innovations he introduced during this time to make cricket more
attractive to television audiences endured and changed the nature of
the game.
Coloured dress, protective helmets, field restrictions, cricket under
lights, became a standard part of the post-Packer game. Crucially, Packer
drove home the lesson that cricket was a marketable game, which could
generate huge revenues. Cricket boards became rich by selling television
rights to television companies. Television channels made money by
selling television spots to companies who were happy to pay large
sums of money to air commercials for their products to cricket’s captive
television audience. Continuous television coverage made cricketers
celebrities who, besides being paid better by their cricket boards, now
made even larger sums of  money by making commercials for a wide
range of products, from tyres to colas, on television.
Television coverage changed cricket. It expanded the audience for the
game by beaming cricket into small towns and villages. It also broadened
cricket’s social base. Children who had never previously had the chance
to watch international cricket because they lived outside the big cities,
where top-level cricket was played, could now watch and learn by imitating
their heroes.
The technology of satellite television and the world wide reach of
multi-national television companies created a global market for cricket.
4 Commerce, Media and Cricket
4 Commerce, Media and Cricket
4 Commerce, Media and Cricket
4 Commerce, Media and Cricket
4 Commerce, Media and Cricket Today
History and Sport: The Story of Cricket
Matches in Sydney could now be watched live in Surat. This simple
fact shifted the balance of power in cricket: a process that had been
begun by the break-up of the British Empire was taken to its logical
conclusion by globalisation. Since India had the largest viewership
for the game amongst the cricket-playing nations and the largest
market in the cricketing world, the game’s centre of gravity shifted
to South Asia. This shift was symbolized by the shifting of the ICC
headquarters from London to tax-free Dubai.
A more important sign that the centre of gravity in cricket has shifted
away from the old, Anglo-Australian axis is that innovations in cricket
technique in recent years have mainly come from the practice of sub-
continental teams in countries like India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.
Pakistan has pioneered two great advances in bowling: the doosra and
the ‘reverse swing’. Both skills were developed in response to sub-
continental conditions: the doosra to counter aggressive batsmen with
heavy modern bats who were threatening to make finger-spin
obsolete and ‘reverse swing’ to move the ball in on dusty, unresponsive
wickets under clear skies. Initially, both innovations were greeted
with great suspicion by countries like Britain and Australia which
saw them as an underhanded, illegal bending of the laws of cricket.
In time, it came to be accepted that the laws of cricket could not
continue to be framed for British or Australian conditions of play,
and they became part of the technique of all bowlers, everywhere in
the world.
One hundred and fifty years ago the first Indian cricketers, the Parsis,
had to struggle to find an open space to play in. Today, the global
marketplace has made Indian players the best-paid, most famous
cricketers in the game, men for whom the world is a stage. The
history that brought about this transformation was made up of many
smaller changes: the replacement of the gentlemanly amateur by the
paid professional, the triumph of the one-day game as it
overshadowed Test cricket in terms of popularity, and the remarkable
changes in global commerce and technology. The business of history
is to make sense of change over time. In this chapter we have followed
the spread of a colonial sport through its history, and tried to
understand how it adapted to a post-colonial world.
New Words
Obsolete – No longer in use
India and the Contemporary World
Box 3
Box 2
Hockey,  India’s National Game
Modern hockey evolved from traditional games once current in Britain. Amongst its sporting ancestors, hockey can count the
Scottish game called shinty, the English and Welsh game called bandy and Irish hurling.
Hockey, like many other modern games, was introduced into India by the British army in colonial times. The first hockey club
in India was started in Calcutta in 1885-1886. India was represented in the hockey competition of the Olympic Games for the
first time in 1928. India reached the finals defeating Austria, Belgium, Denmark and Switzerland. In the finals, India defeated
Holland by three goals to nil.
The brilliance and skill of players like the great Dhyan Chand brought India a string of Olympic gold medals. Between 1928
and 1956, India won gold medals in six consecutive Olympic Games. During this golden age of Indian dominance, India
played 24 Olympic matches, and won them all, scored 178 goals (at an average of 7.43 goals per match) and conceded only
seven goals. The two other gold medals for India came in the 1964 Tokyo Olympics and the 1980 Moscow Olympics.
Polo was greatly favoured as a game suitable for military and athletic young men. Following one of the earliest games in
England, a report in the Illustrated London News declared:
‘As an exercise … for military men this bold and graceful sport is likely to give increased dexterity in the use of the lance
or sabre, or other cavalry weapons, as well as a firmer seat in the saddle, and a faculty of quickly turning to the right hand
or to the left, which must be effective in the melee of battle.’
From: Illustrated London News, 1872.
Fig.15 – Polo was a game invented by
colonial officials in India and soon gained
great popularity. Unlike cricket which came
to India from Britain, other games like polo
were exported from the colonies to Britain,
changing the nature of sport in that
country. From: Illustrated London News ,
20 July 1872.
History and Sport: The Story of Cricket
1. Imagine a conversation between Thomas Arnold, the headmaster of Rugby
School, and Mahatma Gandhi on the value of cricket in education. What
would each say? Write out a conversation in the form of a dialogue.
2. Find out the history of any one local sport. Ask your parents and grandparents
how this game was played in their childhood. See whether it is played in the
same way now. Try and think of the historical forces that might account for
the changes.
1. Test cricket is a unique game in many ways. Discuss some of the ways in
which it is different from other team games. How are the peculiarities of
Test cricket shaped by its historical beginnings as a village game?
2. Describe one way in which in the nineteenth century, technology brought
about a change in equipment and give one example where no change in
equipment took place.
3. Explain why cricket became popular in India and the West Indies. Can you
give reasons why it did not become popular in countries in South America?
4. Give brief explanations for the following:
The Parsis were the first Indian community to set up a cricket club
in India.
Mahatma Gandhi condemned the Pentangular tournament.
The name of the ICC was changed from the Imperial Cricket
Conference to the International Cricket Conference.
The shift of the ICC headquarters from London to Dubai
5. How have advances in technology, especially television technology, affected
the development of contemporary cricket?
Activities
Questions
Activities
India and the Contemporary World
Clothing: A Social History
Clothing:
Clothing:
Clothing:
Clothing:
Clothing:
A Social History
A Social History
A Social History
A Social History
A Social History
It is easy to forget that there is a history to the clothes we wear. All
societies observe certain rules, some of them quite strict, about the
way in which men, women and children should dress, or how
different social classes and groups should present themselves. These
norms come to define the identity of people, the way they see
themselves, the way they want others to see them. They shape our
notions of grace and beauty, ideas of modesty and shame. As times
change and societies are transformed, these notions also alter.
Modifications in clothing come to reflect these changes.
The emergence of the modern world is marked by dramatic changes
in clothing. In this chapter, we will look at some of the histories of
clothing in the modern period, that is in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries.
Why are these two centuries important?
Before the age of democratic revolutions and the development of
capitalist markets in eighteenth-century Europe, most people dressed
according to their regional codes, and were limited by the types of
clothes and the cost of materials that were available in their region.
Clothing styles were also strictly regulated by class, gender or status
in the social hierarchy.
After the eighteenth century, the colonisation of most of the world
by Europe, the spread of democratic ideals and the growth of an
industrial society, completely changed the ways in which people
thought about dress and its meanings. People could use styles and
materials that were drawn from other cultures and locations, and
western dress styles for men were adopted worldwide.
In Chapter I you have seen how the French Revolution transformed
many aspects of social and political life. The revolution also swept
away existing dress codes, known as the sumptuary laws. Let us
look briefly at what these laws were.
Clothing: A Social History
Chapter VIII
© NCERT
not to be republished
India and the Contemporary World
In medieval Europe, dress codes were sometimes imposed upon
members of different layers of society through actual laws which
were spelt out in some detail. From about 1294 to the time of the
French Revolution in 1789, the people of France were expected to
strictly follow what were known as ‘sumptuary laws.’ The laws tried
to control the behaviour of those considered social inferiors,
preventing them from wearing certain clothes, consuming certain
foods and beverages (usually this referred to alcohol) and hunting
game in certain areas. In medieval France, the items of clothing a
person could purchase per year was regulated, not only by income
but also by social rank. The material to be used for clothing was also
legally prescribed. Only royalty could wear expensive materials like
ermine and fur, or silk, velvet and brocade. Other
classes were debarred from clothing themselves with
materials that were associated with the aristocracy.
The French Revolution ended these distinctions. As
you know from Chapter I, members of the Jacobin
clubs even called themselves the ‘sans culottes’ to
distinguish themselves from the aristocracy who
wore the fashionable ‘knee breeches’. Sans culottes
literally meant those ‘without knee breeches’. From
now on, both men and women began wearing
clothing that was loose and comfortable. The colours
of France – blue, white and red – became popular as
they were a sign of the patriotic citizen. Other
political symbols too became a part of dress: the red
cap of liberty, long trousers and the revolutionary
cockade pinned on to a hat. The simplicity of clothing
was meant to express the idea of equality.
1 Sumptuary Laws and Social Hierarchy
Sumptuary Laws and Social Hierarchy
Sumptuary Laws and Social Hierarchy
Sumptuary Laws and Social Hierarchy
Sumptuary Laws and Social Hierarchy
New words
Cockade – Cap, usually worn on one side.
Ermine – Type of fur.
Fig.1 – An upper-class couple in eighteenth-century England.
Painting by the English artist Thomas Gainsborough (1727-
1788)
© NCERT
not to be republished
Clothing: A Social History
Activity
Fig.3 – Woman of the middle classes, 1791.
Fig.4 – Volunteers during the French Revolution.
Fig.5 – A sans-culottes family, 1793.
Not all sumptuary laws were meant to emphasise social hierarchy.
Some sumptuary laws were passed to protect home production
against imports. For instance, in sixteenth-century England, velvet
caps made with material imported from France and Italy were popular
amongst men. England passed a law which compelled all persons
over six years of age, except those of high position, to wear woollen
caps made in England, on Sundays and all holy days. This law
remained in effect for twenty-six years and was very useful in building
up the English woollen industry.
Look at Figures 2 - 5. Write 150 words on
what the differences in the pictures tell us
about the society and culture in France at the
time of the Revolution.
Box 1
Fig.2 – An aristocratic couple on the eve of the French Revolution.
Notice the sumptuous clothing, the elaborate headgear, and the lace
edgings on the dress the lady is wearing. She also has a corset inside
the dress. This was meant to confine and shape her waist so that she
appeared narrow waisted. The nobleman, as was the custom of the
time, is wearing a long soldier’s coat, knee breeches, silk stockings and
high heeled shoes. Both of them have elaborate wigs and both have
their faces painted a delicate shade of pink, for the display of natural
skin was considered uncultured.
© NCERT
not to be republished
India and the Contemporary World
2 Clothing and Notions of Beauty
Clothing and Notions of Beauty
Clothing and Notions of Beauty
Clothing and Notions of Beauty
Clothing and Notions of Beauty
The end of sumptuary laws did not mean that everyone in European
societies could now dress in the same way. The French Revolution
had raised the question of equality and  ended aristocratic privileges,
as well as the laws that maintained those privileges. However,
differences between social strata remained. Clearly, the poor could
not dress like the rich, nor eat the same food. But laws no longer
barred people’s right to dress in the way they wished. Differences in
earning, rather than sumptuary laws, now defined what the rich and
poor could wear. And different classes developed their own culture
of dress. The notion of what was beautiful or ugly, proper or
improper, decent or vulgar, differed.
Styles of clothing also emphasised differences between men and
women. Women in Victorian England were groomed from childhood
to be docile and dutiful, submissive and obedient. The ideal woman
was one who could bear pain and suffering. While men were expected
to be serious, strong, independent and aggressive, women were seen
as frivolous, delicate, passive and docile. Norms of clothing reflected
these ideals. From childhood, girls were tightly laced up and dressed
in stays. The effort was to restrict the growth of their bodies, contain
them within small moulds. When slightly older, girls had to wear
tight fitting corsets. Tightly laced, small-waisted women were
admired as attractive, elegant and graceful. Clothing thus played a
part in creating the image of frail, submissive Victorian women.
2.1 How Did Women React to These Norms?
Many women believed in the ideals of womanhood. The ideals were
in the air they breathed, the literature they read, the education they
had received at school and at home. From childhood they grew up
to believe that having a small waist was a womanly duty. Suffering
pain was essential to being a woman. To be seen as attractive, to be
womanly, they had to wear the corset. The torture and pain this
inflicted on the body was to be accepted as normal.
But not everyone accepted these values. Over the nineteenth century,
ideas changed. By the 1830s, women in England began agitating for
democratic rights. As the suffrage movement developed, many began
campaigning for dress reform. Women’s magazines described how
tight dresses and corsets caused deformities and illness among young
New words
Stays – Support as part of a woman’s dress
to hold the body straight
Corset – A closely fitting and stiff inner
bodice, worn by women to give shape and
support to the figure.
Suffrage – The right to vote. The suffragettes
wanted the right for women to vote.
Fig.6 – Scene at an upper-class wedding by the
English painter William Hogarth (1697-1764)
Fig.7 – A child in an aristocratic household by
the English painter William Hogarth (1697-
1764). Notice the tiny waist even at this age,
probably held in by a corset, and the sweeping
gown which would restrict her movement.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Clothing: A Social History
Activity
Source C
Activity
Mary Somerville, one of the first woman mathematicians,
describes in her memoirs the experience of her childhood days:
‘Although perfectly straight and well made, I was encased in
stiff stays, with a steel busk in front, while above my frock,
bands drew my shoulder back until the shoulder blades met.
Then a steel rod with a semi-circle, which went under my chin,
was clasped to the steel busk in my stays. In this constrained
state, I and most of the younger girls had to prepare our
lessons.’
From Martha Somerville, ed., Personal Recollections from Early
Life to Old Age of Mary Somerville, London 1873.
Source A
New words
Busk –  A strip of wood, whalebone or steel in front of the corset to stiffen and support it
Pabulum – Anything essential to maintain life and growth.
Read Sources A and B. What do they tell you
about the ideas of clothing in Victorian
society? If you were the principal in Mary
Somerville’s school how would you have
justified the clothing practices?
Do you know how the famous English poet John Keats (1795 –
1821) described his ideal woman? He said she was ‘like a
milk-white lamb that bleats for man’s protection’.
In his novel Vanity Fair (1848), Thackeray described the charm
of a woman character, Amelia, in these words:
‘I think it was her weakness which was her principal charm, a
kind of sweet submission and softness, which seemed to
appeal to each man she met, for his sympathy and protection.’
Source B
Many government officials of the time were alarmed at the
health implications of the prevailing styles of dressing amongst
women. Consider the following attack on the corset:
‘It is evident physiologically that air is the pabulum of life, and
that the effect of a tight cord round the neck and of tight lacing
differ only in degrees … for the strangulations are both fatal.
To wear tight stays in many cases is to wither, to waste, to
die.’
The Registrar General in the Ninth Annual Report of 1857.
In what ways do you think these notions of
weakness and dependence came to be
reflected in women’s clothing?
girls. Such clothing restricted body growth and hampered blood
circulation.  Muscles remained underdeveloped and the spines got
bent. Doctors reported that many women were regularly complaining
of acute weakness, felt languid, and fainted frequently. Corsets then
became necessary to hold up the weakened spine.
© NCERT
not to be republished
India and the Contemporary World
Box 2
In America, a similar movement developed amongst the white settlers
on the east coast. Traditional feminine clothes were criticised on a
variety of grounds. Long skirts, it was said, swept the grounds and
collected filth and dirt. This caused illness. The skirts were
voluminous and difficult to handle. They hampered movement and
prevented women from working and earning. Reform of the dress,
it was said, would change the position of women. If clothes were
comfortable and convenient, then women could work, earn their
living, and become independent. In the 1870s, the National Woman
Suffrage Association headed by Mrs Stanton, and the American
Woman Suffrage Association dominated by Lucy Stone both
campaigned for dress reform. The argument was: simplify dress,
shorten skirts, and abandon corsets. On both sides of the Atlantic,
there was now a movement for rational dress reform.
The movement for Rational Dress Reform
Mrs Amelia Bloomer, an American, was the first dress reformer to
launch loose tunics worn over ankle-length trousers. The trousers
were known as ‘bloomers’, ‘rationals’, or ‘knickerbockers’. The
Rational Dress Society was started in England in 1881, but did not
achieve significant results. It was the First World War that brought
about radical changes in women’s clothing.
The reformers did not immediately succeed in changing social values.
They had to face ridicule and hostility. Conservatives everywhere
opposed change. They lamented that women who gave up traditional
norms of dressing no longer looked beautiful, and lost their femininty
and grace. Faced with persistent attacks, many women reformers
changed back into traditional clothes to conform to conventions.
By the end of the nineteenth century, however, change was clearly
in the air. Ideals of beauty and styles of clothing were both
transformed under a variety of pressures. People began accepting
the ideas of reformers they had earlier ridiculed. With new times
came new values.
Fig.8 – A woman in nineteenth-century
USA, before the dress reforms.
Notice the flowing gown sweeping the
ground. Reformers reacted to this type
of clothing for women.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Clothing: A Social History
3  New Times
What were these new values? What created the pressure for change?
Many changes were made possible in Britain due to the introduction
of new materials and technologies. Other changes came about because
of the two world wars and the new working conditions for women.
Let us retrace our steps a few centuries to see what these changes
were.
3.1 New Materials
Before the seventeenth century, most ordinary women in Britain
possessed very few clothes made of flax, linen or wool, which were
difficult to clean. After 1600, trade with India brought cheap,
beautiful and easy-to-maintain Indian chintzes within the reach of
many Europeans who could now increase the size of their wardrobes.
Then, during the Industrial Revolution, in the nineteenth century,
Britain began the mass manufacture of cotton textiles which it
exported to many parts of the world, including India. Cotton clothes
became more accessible to a wider section of people in Europe.  By
the early twentieth century, artificial fibres made clothes
cheaper still and easier to wash and maintain.
In the late 1870s, heavy, restrictive
underclothes, which had created such a
storm in the pages of women’s magazines,
were gradually discarded. Clothes got lighter,
shorter and simpler.
New words
Chintz – Cotton cloth printed with designs
and flowers. From the Hindi word chint.
Fig.9a – Even for middle- and upper-class
women, clothing styles changed. Skirts
became shorter and frills were done away with.
Fig.9 – Changes in clothing in the early
twentieth century.
Fig.9b – Women working at a British
ammunition factory during the First World War.
At this time thousands of women came out to
work as war production created a demand for
increased labour.The need for easy movement
changed clothing styles.
© NCERT
not to be republished
India and the Contemporary World
Yet until 1914, clothes were ankle length, as they had been since the
thirteenth century. By 1915, however, the hemline of the skirt rose
dramatically to mid-calf.
Why this sudden change?
3.2 The War
Changes in women’s clothing came about as a result of the two World
wars.
Many European women stopped wearing jewellery and luxurious
clothes. As upper-class women mixed with other classes, social barriers
were eroded and women began to dress in similar ways.
Clothes got shorter during the First World War (1914-1918) out of
practical necessity. By 1917, over 700,000 women in Britain were
employed in ammunition factories. They wore a working uniform
of blouse and trousers with accessories such as scarves, which was
later replaced by khaki overalls and caps. Bright colours faded from
sight and only sober colours were worn as the war dragged on.  Thus
clothes became plainer and simpler. Skirts became shorter. Soon
trousers became a vital part of Western women’s clothing, giving
them greater freedom of movement. Most important, women took
to cutting their hair short for convenience.
By the twentieth century, a plain and austere style came to reflect
seriousness and professionalism. New schools for children emphasised
the importance of plain dressing, and discouraged ornamentation.
Gymnastics and games entered the school curriculum for women.
As women took to sports, they had to wear clothes that did not
hamper movement. When they went out to work they needed clothes
that were comfortable and convenient.
So we see that the history of clothing is linked to the larger history
of society. We saw how clothing was defined by dominant cultural
attitudes and ideals of beauty, and how these notions changed over
time. We saw how reformers and conservatives struggled to shape
these ideals, and how changes within technology and economy, and
the pressures of new times made people feel the need for change.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Clothing: A Social History
What about India in this same period?
During the colonial period there were significant changes in male and
female clothing in India. On the one hand this was a consequence of
the influence of Western dress forms and missionary activity; on the
other it was due to the effort by Indians to fashion clothing styles that
embodied an indigenous tradition and culture. Cloth and clothing in
fact became very important symbols of the national movement. A
brief look at the nineteenth century changes will tell us a great deal
about the transformations of the twentieth century.
When western-style clothing came into India in the nineteenth century,
Indians reacted in three different ways:
One. Many, especially men, began incorporating some elements of
western-style clothing in their dress. The wealthy Parsis of western
India were among the first to adapt Western-style clothing. Baggy
trousers and the phenta (or hat) were added to long collarless coats,
with boots and a walking stick to complete the look of the gentleman.
To some, Western clothes were a sign of modernity and progress.
Western-style clothing was also especially attractive to groups of dalit
converts to Christianity who now found it liberating.  Here too, it
was men rather than women who affected the new dress styles.
Two. There were others who were convinced that western culture
would lead to a loss of traditional cultural identity. The use of Western-
style clothes was taken as a sign of the world turning upside down.
The cartoon of the Bengali Babu shown here,
mocks him for wearing Western-style boots
and hat and coat along with his dhoti.
Three. Some men resolved this dilemma by
wearing Western clothes without giving up
their Indian ones. Many Bengali bureaucrats
in the late nineteenth century began stocking
western-style clothes for work outside the
home and changed into more comfortable
Indian clothes at home. Early- twentieth-
century anthropologist Verrier Elwin
remembered that policemen in Poona who
were going off duty would take their
4   Transformations in Colonial India
Fig.10 – Parsis in Bombay, 1863.
Fig.11  – Converts to
Christianity in Goa in 1907, who
have adopted Western dress.
Fig.12 – Cartoon, ‘The Modern Patriot’, by
Gaganendranath Tagore, early twentieth century.
A sarcastic picture of a foolish man who copies
western dress but claims to love his motherland
with all his heart. The pot-bellied man with
cigarette and Western clothes was ridiculed in
many cartoons of the time.
Fig.13 – Cartoon
from Indian Charivari,
1873.
© NCERT
not to be republished
India and the Contemporary World
trousers off in the street and walk home in ‘just tunic and
undergarments’. This difference between outer and inner worlds is
still observed by some men today.
Still others tried a slightly different solution to the same dilemma. They
attempted to combine Western and Indian forms of dressing.
These changes in clothing, however, had a turbulent history.
4.1 Caste Conflict and Dress Change
Though there were no formal sumptuary laws as in Europe, India
had its own strict social codes of food and dress. The caste system
clearly defined what subordinate and dominant caste Hindus should
wear, eat, etc., and these codes had the force of law. Changes in
clothing styles that threatened these norms therefore often created
violent social reactions.
In May 1822, women of the Shanar caste were attacked by Nairs in
public places in the southern princely state of Travancore, for wearing a
cloth across their upper bodies. Over subsequent decades, a violent conflict
over dress codes ensued.
The Shanars (later known as Nadars), many of whom were considered a
‘subordinate caste’ and so were generally prohibited from using umbrellas
and wearing shoes or golden ornaments. Men and women were also
expected to follow the local custom of never covering their upper bodies
before the dominant castes.
Under the influence of Christian missionaries, Shanar women converts
began in the 1820s to wear tailored blouses and cloths to cover themselves
like the dominant castes. Hindu reformers such as Ayya Vaikunder also
participated in dress reform. Soon Nairs, one of the dominant castes of
the region, attacked these women in public places and tore off their
upper cloths. Complaints were also filed in court against this dress change,
especially since Shanars were also refusing to render free labour for the
dominant castes.
At first, the Government of Travancore issued a proclamation in
1829 ordering Shanar women ‘to abstain in future from covering the
upper parts of the body.’ But this did not prevent Shanar Christian
women, and even Shanar Hindus, from adopting the blouse and
upper cloth.
The abolition of slavery in Travancore in 1855 led to even more
frustration among the dominant castes who felt they were losing control.
In October 1859, riots broke out as Shanar women were attacked in
The term Nadar came to be used for all Shanars
by the time of the 1921 census.
Activity
Try and find out more about reformers of the
time, such as Ayya Vaikunder, who were
engaged in dress and wider social reforms.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Clothing: A Social History
Box 3
the marketplace and stripped of their upper cloths. Houses were looted
and chapels burned. Finally, the government issued another
proclamation permitting Shanar women, whether Christian or Hindu,
to wear a jacket, or cover their upper bodies ‘in any manner whatever,
but not like the women of high caste’.
4.2 British Rule and Dress Codes
How did the British react to Indian ways of dressing? How did Indians
react to British attitudes?
In different cultures, specific items of clothing often convey contrary
meanings. This frequently leads to misunderstanding and conflict. Styles
of clothing in British India changed through such conflicts.
Consider the case of the turban and the hat. When European traders
first began frequenting India, they were distinguished from the Indian
‘turban wearers’ as the ‘hat wearers.’  These two headgears not only
looked different, they also signified different things. The turban in
India was not just for protection from the heat but was a sign of
respectability, and could not be removed at will. In the Western
tradition, the hat had to be removed before social superiors as a sign of
respect. This cultural difference created misunderstanding. The British
were often offended if Indians did not take off their turban when they
met colonial officials. Many Indians on the other hand wore the turban
to consciously assert their regional or national identity.
Another such conflict related to the wearing of shoes. At the beginning
of the nineteenth century, it was customary for British officials to
follow Indian etiquette and remove their footwear in the courts of
ruling kings or chiefs. Some British officials also wore Indian clothes.
But in 1830, Europeans were forbidden from wearing Indian clothes
at official functions, so that the cultural identity of the white masters
was not undermined.
The turban on the head
The Mysore turban, called peta, was edged with gold lace, and adopted
as part of the Durbar dress of the Mysore court in the mid-nineteenth
century. By the end of the nineteenth century, a wide variety of officials,
teachers and artists in Mysore began wearing the turban, sometimes
with the Western suit, as a sign of belonging to the princely state.
Today, the Mysore turban is used largely on ceremonial occasions and
to honour visiting dignitaries.
Fig.14 – Europeans bringing gifts to Shah
Jehan, Agra, 1633, from the Padshahnama.
Notice the European visitors’ hats at the
bottom of the picture, creating a contrast with
the turbans of the courtiers.
Fig.15 – Sir M. Visveswaraya. A leading
engineer-technocrat and the Dewan of Mysore
state from 1912 to 1918. He wore a turban
with his three-piece Western style suit.
© NCERT
not to be republished
India and the Contemporary World
Source D
Activity
When asked to take off his shoes at the
Surat Fouzdaree Adawlut at Surat  in
1862,  Manockjee told the judge that he
was willing to take off even his turban
but not his shoes. He said:
‘Taking off my pugree would have been
a greater insult to myself than to the
court, but I would have submitted to it,
because there is nothing of conscience,
or religion involved in it. I hold no respect
or disrespect, embodied or disembodied
in the shoes, but the putting on of our
turban is the greatest of all respects that
we pay. We do not have our pugrees on
when at home, but when we go out to
see respectable persons we are bound
by social etiquette to have it on whilst
we [Parsees] in our social intercourse
never ever take off our shoes before any
Parsee however great …’
Imagine yourself to be a Muslim pleader in
the Allahabad high court in the late nineteenth
century. What kind of clothes would you wear?
Would they be very different from what you
wore at home?
At the same time, Indians were expected to wear Indian clothes to office
and follow Indian dress codes. In 1824 - 1828, Governor-General Amherst
insisted that Indians take their shoes off as a sign of respect when they
appeared before him, but this was not strictly followed. By the mid-
nineteenth century, when Lord Dalhousie was Governor- General, ‘shoe
respect’ was made stricter, and Indians were made to take off their shoes
when entering any government institution; only those who wore European
clothes were exempted from this rule.  Many Indian government servants
were increasingly uncomfortable with these rules.
In 1862, there was a famous case of defiance of the ‘shoe respect’ rule in
a Surat  courtroom. Manockjee Cowasjee Entee, an assessor in the Surat
Fouzdaree Adawlut, refused to take off his shoes in the court of the
sessions judge. The judge insisted that he take off his shoes as that was the
Indian way of showing respect to superiors. But Manockjee remained
adamant. He was barred entry into the courtroom and he sent a letter of
protest to the governor of Bombay.
The British insisted that since Indians took off their shoes when they
entered a sacred place or home, they should do so when they entered
the courtroom. In the controversy that followed, Indians urged that
taking off shoes in sacred places and at home was linked to two
different questions. One: there was the problem of dirt and filth.
Shoes collected the dirt on the road. This dirt could not be allowed
into spaces that were clean, particularly when people in Indian homes
sat on the ground. Second, leather shoes and the filth that stuck
under it were seen as polluting. But public buildings like the
courtroom were different from home.
But it took many years before shoes were permitted into
the courtroom.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Clothing: A Social History
5  Designing the National Dress
As nationalist feelings swept across India by the late nineteenth
century, Indians began devising cultural symbols that would express
the unity of the nation. Artists looked for a national style of art.
Poets wrote national songs. Then a debate began over the design of
the national flag. The search for a national dress was part of this
move to define the cultural identity of the nation in symbolic ways.
Self-conscious experiments with dress engaged men and women of
the upper classes and castes in many parts of India. The Tagore family
of Bengal experimented, beginning in the 1870s, with designs for a
national dress for both men and women in India. Rabindranath
Tagore suggested that instead of combining Indian and European
dress, India’s national dress should combine elements of Hindu and
Muslim dress. Thus the chapkan (a long buttoned coat) was considered
the most suitable dress for men.
There were also attempts to develop a dress style that would draw
on the tradition of different regions. In the late 1870s, Jnanadanandini
Devi, wife of Satyendranath Tagore, the first Indian member of the
ICS, returned from Bombay to Calcutta.  She adopted the Parsi
style of wearing the sari pinned to the left shoulder with a brooch,
and worn with a blouse and shoes. This was quickly adopted by
Brahmo Samaji women and came to be known as the Brahmika sari.
This style gained acceptance before long among Maharashtrian and
Uttar Pradesh Brahmos, as well as non-Brahmos.
New words
Brahmo – Those belonging to the Brahmo Samaj
Fig.17 – Jnanadanandini Tagore (on the left)
with her husband Satyendranath Tagore and
other family members. She is wearing a
Brahmika sari with a blouse modelled on a
Western gown. (Courtesy: Rabindra Bhawan Photo
Archives, Visva Bharati University, Shantiniketan)
Fig.18 – Sarala daughter of RC Dutt. Note the
Parsi-bordered sari with the high collared and
sleeved velvet blouse showing how clothing
styles flowed across regions and cultures.
Fig. 16 – Lady Bachoobai
(1890), a well-known Parsi
social activist.
She is wearing a silk gara
embroidered with swans and
peonies, a common English flower.
(courtesy: Parsi Zoroastrian Project, New Delhi.)
© NCERT
not to be republished
India and the Contemporary World
Activity
However, these attempts at devising a pan-Indian style did not fully
succeed. Women of Gujarat, Kodagu,  Kerala and Assam continue
to wear different types of sari.
These two quotations (Sources E and F),
from about the same period are from two
different regions of India, Kerala and Bengal.
What do they tell you about the very different
notions of shame regarding women’s attire?
Source E
Source F
Some people supported the attempt to change women’s clothing, others
opposed it.
‘Any civilised nation is against the kind of clothing in use in the
present time among women of our country. Indeed it is a sign of
shamelessness. Educated men have been greatly agitated about
it, almost everyone wishes for another kind of civilised clothing …
there is a custom here of women wearing fine and transparent
clothing which reveals the whole body. Such shameless attire in no
way allows one to frequent civilised company … such clothes can
stand in the way of our moral improvement.’
Soudamini Khastagiri,  Striloker Paricchad (1872)
C. Kesavan’s autobiography Jeevita Samaram recalls his
mother-in-law’s first encounter with a blouse gifted by her
sister-in-law in the late nineteenth century:
‘It looked good, but I felt ticklish wearing it. I took it off, folded
it carefully and brimming with enthusiasm, showed it to my
mother. She gave me a stern look and said “Where are you
going to gallivant in this? Fold it and keep it in the box.” … I
was scared of my mother. She could kill me. At night I wore the
blouse and showed it to my husband. He said it looked good …
[the next morning] I came out wearing the blouse … I didn’t
notice my mother coming. Suddenly I heard her break a piece
from a coconut branch. When I turned round, she was behind
me fierce and furious … she said “Take it off … you want to
walk around in shirts like Muslim women?”’
5.1 The Swadeshi Movement
You have read about the Swadeshi movement in Bengal in the first
decade of the twentieth century. If you reflect back on the movement
you will realize that it was centrally linked to the politics of clothing.
What was this politics?
You know that the British first came to trade in Indian textiles that
were in great demand all over the world. India accounted for one-
fourth of the world’s manufactured goods in the seventeenth century.
There were a million weavers in Bengal alone in the middle of the
Fig.19 – Maharani of Travancore (1930).
Note the Western shoes and the modest long-
sleeved blouse. This style had become
common among the upper classes by the early
twentieth century.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Clothing: A Social History
Activity
eighteenth century. However, the Industrial Revolution in Britain,
which mechanised spinning and weaving and greatly increased the
demand for raw materials such as cotton and indigo, changed
India’s status in the world economy.
Political control of India helped the British in two ways:  Indian
peasants could be forced to grow crops such as indigo, and cheap
British manufacture easily replaced coarser Indian one. Large
numbers of Indian weavers and spinners were left without work,
and important textile weaving centres such as Murshidabad,
Machilipatnam and Surat declined as demand fell.
Yet by the middle of the twentieth century, large numbers of
people began boycotting British or mill-made cloth and adopting
khadi, even though it was coarser, more expensive and difficult
to obtain. How did this change come about?
In 1905, Lord Curzon decided to partition Bengal to control the
growing opposition to British rule. The Swadeshi movement
developed in reaction to this measure. People were urged to
boycott British goods of all kinds and start their own industries
for the manufacture of goods such as matchboxes and cigarettes.
Mass protests followed, with people vowing to cleanse themselves
of colonial rule. The use of khadi was made a patriotic duty.
Women were urged to throw away their silks and glass bangles
and wear simple shell bangles. Rough homespun was glorified in
songs and poems to popularise it.
The change of dress appealed largely to the upper castes
and classes rather than to those who had to make do with
less and could not afford the new products. After 15 years,
many among the upper classes also returned to wearing
European dress.
Though many people rallied to the cause of nationalism at
this time, it was almost impossible to compete with cheap
British goods that had flooded the market.
Despite its limitations, the experiment with Swadeshi gave
Mahatma Gandhi important ideas about using cloth as a
symbolic weapon against British rule.
5.2 Mahatma Gandhi’s Experiments with Clothing
The most familiar image of Mahatma Gandhi is of him seated,
bare chested and in a short dhoti, at the spinning wheel. He
If you were a poor peasant would you have
willingly taken to giving up mill-made cloth?
Fig.20 – The familiar image of Mahatma Gandhi, bare
chested and at his spinning wheel.
© NCERT
not to be republished
India and the Contemporary World
made spinning on the charkha and the daily use of khadi, or coarse
cloth made from homespun yarn, very powerful symbols. These
were not only symbols of self-reliance but also of resistance to the
use of British mill-made cloth.
Mahatma Gandhi’s experiments with clothing sum up the changing
attitude to dress in the Indian subcontinent. As a boy from a Gujarati
Bania family, he usually wore a shirt with a dhoti or pyjama, and
sometimes a coat. When he went to London to study law as a boy of
19 in 1888, he cut off the tuft on his head and dressed in a Western
suit so that he would not be laughed at. On his return, he continued
to wear Western suits, topped with a turban. As a lawyer
in Johannesburg, South Africa in the 1890s, he still wore
Western clothes.
Soon he decided that dressing ‘unsuitably’ was a more powerful
political statement. In Durban in 1913, Gandhi first appeared in a
lungi and kurta with his head shaved as a sign of mourning to protest
against the shooting of Indian coal miners.
On his return to India in 1915, he decided to dress like a Kathiawadi
peasant. Only in 1921 did he adopt the short dhoti, the form of
dress he wore until his death. On 22 September 1921, a year after
launching the non-cooperation movement, which sought swaraj in
one year, he announced:
Fig.21 – Mahatma
Gandhi in his
earliest known
picture, aged 7.
Fig.22 – Mahatma
Gandhi at age 14,
with a friend.
Fig.23 – Mahatma Gandhi (seated front right) London,
1890, at the age of 21. Note the typical Western
three-piece suit.
Fig.24 – In Johannesburg
in 1900, still in Western
dress, including tie.
Fig. 25 – In
1913 in South
Africa, dressed
for Satyagraha
© NCERT
not to be republished
Clothing: A Social History
‘I propose to discard at least up to 31st of October my topi and
vest and to content myself with a loincloth, and a chaddar whenever
necessary for protection of my body. I adopt the change because
I have always hesitated to advise anything I may not be prepared
to follow …’
At this time, he did not want to use this dress all his life and only
wanted to ‘experiment  for a month or two’. But soon he saw this
as his duty to the poor, and he never wore any other dress. He
consciously rejected the well-known clothes of the Indian ascetic
and adopted the dress of the poorest Indian. Khadi, white and
coarse, was to him a sign of purity, of simplicity, and of poverty.
Wearing it became also a symbol of nationalism, a rejection of
Western mill- made cloth.
He wore the short dhoti without a shirt when he went to England
for the Round Table Conference in 1931. He refused to
compromise and wore it even before King George V at
Buckingham Palace. When he was asked by journalists whether
he was wearing enough clothes to go before the King, he joked
that that ‘the King had enough on for both of us’!
Fig.26 – Mahatma Gandhi with Kasturba,
shortly after his return from South Africa.
Dressed simply, he later confessed to feeling
awkward amongst the Westernised Bombay
elite. He said that he was more at home
among the labourers in South Africa.
© NCERT
not to be republished
India and the Contemporary World
Activity
Can you think of other reasons why the use
of khadi could not spread among some
classes, castes and regions of India?
5.3 Not All could Wear Khadi
Mahatma Gandhi’s dream was to clothe the whole nation in khadi.
He felt khadi would be a means of erasing difference between religions,
classes, etc. But was it easy for others to follow in his footsteps? Was
such a unity possible? Not many could take to the single peasant
loincloth as he had. Nor did all want to. Here are some examples of
other responses to Mahatma Gandhi’s call:
·  Nationalists such as Motilal Nehru, a successful barrister from
Allahabad, gave up his expensive Western-style suits and adopted  the
Indian dhoti and kurta. But these were not made of coarse cloth.
·  Those who had been deprived by caste norms for centuries were
attracted to Western dress styles. Therefore, unlike Mahatma Gandhi,
other nationalists such as Babasaheb Ambedkar never gave up the
Western-style suit. Many Dalits began in the early 1910s to wear three-
piece suits, and shoes and socks on all public occasions, as a political
statement of self-respect.
·  A woman who wrote to Mahatma Gandhi from Maharashtra in
1928 said, ‘A year ago, I heard you speaking on the extreme necessity
of every one of us wearing khadi and thereupon decided to adopt it.
But we are poor people, My husband says khadi is costly. Belonging
as I do to Maharashtra, I wear a sari nine yards long … (and) the elders
will not hear of a reduction (to six yards).’
·  Other women, like Sarojini Naidu and Kamala Nehru, wore coloured
saris with designs, instead of coarse, white homespun.
Conclusion
Changes in styles of clothing are thus linked up with shifts in cultural
tastes and notions of beauty, with changes within the economy and
society, and with issues of social and political conflict. So when we see
clothing styles alter we need to ask: why do these changes take place?
What do they tell us about society and its history? What can they tell
us about changes in tastes and technologies, markets and industries?
© NCERT
not to be republished
Clothing: A Social History
Box 4
The Gandhi cap
Some time after his return to India from South Africa in 1915, Mahatma Gandhi transformed the Kashmiri cap that he
sometimes used into a cheap white cotton khadi cap. For two years from 1919, he himself wore the cap, and then gave
it up, but by this time it had become part of the nationalist uniform and even a symbol of defiance. For example, the
Gwalior state tried to prohibit its use in 1921 during the non co-operation movement. During the Khilafat movement the
cap was worn by large numbers of Hindus and Muslims. A group of Santhals who attacked the police in 1922 in Bengal
demanding the release of Santhal prisoners believed that the Gandhi cap would protect them from bullets: three of
them died as a result.
Large numbers of nationalists defiantly wore the Gandhi cap and were even beaten or arrested for doing so. With the
rise of the Khilafat movement in the post-First World War years, the fez, a tasseled Turkish cap, became a sign of anti-
colonialism in India. Though many Hindus – as in Hyderabad for instance – also wore the fez, it soon became identified
solely with Muslims.
Fig.27 –
1915.
Mahatma
Gandhi with a
turban.
Fig.28 –
1915. In an
embroidered
Kashmiri cap.
Fig.29 –
1920.
Wearing the
Gandhi cap.
Fig.30 –
1921. After
shaving his
head.
Fig.31 – On his visit to Europe in 1931. By now his
clothes had become a powerful political statement against
Western cultural domination.
© NCERT
not to be republished
India and the Contemporary World
Questions
1. Explain the reasons for the changes in clothing patterns and materials in
the eighteenth century.
2. What were the sumptuary laws in France?
3. Give any two examples of the ways in which European dress codes were
different from Indian dress codes.
4. In 1805, a British official, Benjamin Heyne, listed the manufactures of
Bangalore which included the following:
Ø Women’s cloth of different musters and names
Ø Coarse chintz
Ø Muslins
Ø Silk cloths
Of this list, which kind of cloth would have definitely fallen out of use in the
early 1900s and why?
5. Suggest reasons why women in nineteenth century India were obliged to
continue wearing traditional Indian dress even when men switched over to
the more convenient Western clothing. What does this show about the
position of women in society?
6. Winston Churchill described Mahatma Gandhi as a ‘seditious Middle Temple
Lawyer’ now ‘posing as a half naked fakir’.
What provoked such a comment and what does it tell you about the
symbolic strength of Mahatma Gandhi’s dress?
7. Why did Mahatma Gandhi’s dream of clothing the nation in khadi appeal
only to some sections of Indians?
1. Imagine you are the 14-year-old child of a trader. Write a paragraph on
what you feel about the sumptuary laws in France.
2. Can you think of any expectations of proper and improper dress which
exist today? Give examples of two forms of clothing which would be
considered disrespectful in certain places but acceptable in others.
Activities
Activities
© NCERT
not to be republished
