Title of the textbook: Contemporary India –I
Class : IX
Corrections:
• In chapter1, page no.2, Figure 1.2 Seven Largest Countries of the World’
• In chapter 1,  page no.5, Figure 1.5 India and Adjacent Countries
The spelling of state Orissa in the map of  India should be changed to Odisha.
Source: www.india.gov.in
• In chapter 3, page no.19, Figure 3.4 Major Rivers and Lakes
Names of  the tributaries of river Brahmaputra namely Dihang and Dibang
should also be added.
• In chapter 3,  page no.21, column 2, in line number 26
Spelling of Orissa should be changed to Odisha
• In chapter 3,  page no.21, column 2, in line number 36
Spelling of Orissa should be changed to Odisha
• In chapter 3,  page no.21, column 2, in line number 40
Spelling of Orissa should be changed to Odisha
• In chapter 5, page no.42, column 1, line 17
India also has approximately 90,000 species of animals as well as rich variety of
fish in its fresh and marine waters.
Source: zsi.gov.in on 11.04.12 (Official website of Zoological Survey of India)
• In chapter 5, page no.43, column 2, ‘Do You Know?’
According to India State of Forest Report 2011, the forest cover in India is 21.05
percent.
• In chapter 5, page no.44, Figure 5.1, the bar diagram of Area Under Forest Cover
• In chapter 5, page no.48, column 1, line 2-3
It has approximately 90,000 of animal species.
Source: zsi.gov.in on 11.04.12 (Official website of Zoological Survey of India)
• In chapter 5, page no.48, column 1, line 3-4
The country has about 2,000 species of birds.
Source: zsi.gov.in on 11.04.12 (Official website of Zoological Survey of India)
• In chapter 5, page no.48, column 1, line 6
There are 2,546 species of fish…
Source: zsi.gov.in on 11.04.12 (Official website of Zoological Survey of India)
• In chapter 5, page number 51, Exercise 1 (iii)
( c ) Odisha
Appendix
Chapter 6: Population1
• In chapter 6, page no.53, column 2, line 17- 20
India’s population as on March 2011 stood at 1,210 million, which account for
17.5 percent of the world population. These 1.21 billion people are unevenly
distributed…
• In chapter 6, page no.53, column 2, line 24 – 25
The 2011 Census data reveals that Uttar Pradesh with a population size of 199
million…
• In chapter 6, page no.54, Figure 6.1
India’s share of population - 17.5
Rest of the world – 82.5
• In chapter 6, page no.54, column 1, line 2 – 4
…Sikkim has a population of just 0.6 million and Lakshadweep has only 64,429
people.
• In chapter 6, page no.54, column 1, line 8-10
Rajasthan, the biggest state in terms of area has only 6 percent of the total
population of India.
1 Note: For 2011 only provisional data is available. Hence, data / analysis are provisional.
Source: Census of India 2011
• In chapter 6, page no.54, column 1, Figure 6.2: Distribution of Population
Figure 6.2: Distribution of Population
• In chapter 6, page no.54, column 2, line 8 – 12
The population density of India in the year 2011 was 382, person per square km.
Densities vary from 1,102 persons per square km in Bihar to only 17 persons per
square km in Arunachal Pradesh.
• In chapter 6, page no.55, Figure 6.3: Density of Population in India
Figure 6.3: Density of Population in India, 2011
• In chapter 6, page no.56 , column 1, line 20-22
India’s population has been steadily increasing from 361 million in 1951 to 1,210
million in 2011.
• In chapter 6, page no.56 , column 1, Table 6.1: The Magnitude and Rate of India’s
Population Growth
Table 6.1: The Magnitude and Rate of India’s Population Growth
• In chapter 6, page no.56, Figure 6.4: India’s Population  and Population Growth
Rate Growth 1961-2011
Figure 6.4(a): India’s  Population Growth Rate Growth 1961-2011
Figure 6.4(b): India’s Population 1901-2011
• In chapter 6, page no.57, column 2,  line 6-11
The urban population has increased from 17.29 percent of the total population in
1951 to 31.80 percent in 2011. There has been a significant increase in the
number of million plus cities from 35 to 53 in just one decade i.e. 2001 to 2011.
Source: Census of India, 2011
• In chapter 6, page no.58, column 1, line 30-31
Table  6.2 shows the sex ratio from 1951-2011.
• In chapter 6, page no.58, column 1,  Table 6.2: India : Sex Ratio 1901-2011
Table 6.2: India : Sex Ratio 1901-2011
• In chapter 6, page no.58, column 1,  Do You Know?
Kerala has a sex ratio of 1084 females per 1000 males, Puducherry has 1038
females per every 1000 males, while Delhi has only 866 females per thousand
males and Haryana has just 877.
• In chapter 6, page no.58, column 2, line 15-18
The literacy rate in the country as per the Census of 2011 is 74.04 percent; 82.14
percent for males and 65.46 percent for females.
• In chapter 6, page no.59, column 1,  line 14-16
….1951 to 7.2* per 1000 in 2011 and life expectancy at birth has increased from
36.7 years in 1951 to 64.7** years in 2011
*Source: SRS bulletin,Volume 46,No.1 December, 2011
**United Nations World Fact Book; (September 17, 2009)
CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
TEXTBOOK IN GEOGRAPHY FOR CLASS IX
SOCIAL SCIENCE
2015-16
First Edition
March 2006    Phalguna 1927
Reprinted
November 2006  Kartika 1928
December 2007  Pausa 1929
February 2009 Pausa 1930
January 2010 Magha 1931
November 2010  Agrahayana 1932
January 2012 Magha 1933
November 2012 Kartika 1934
November 2013 Kartika 1935
December 2014 Agrahayana 1936
PD 480T MJ
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006
` 40.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and
printed at Chandra Prabhu Offset Printing
Works (P) Ltd., C-40, Sector-8, Noida 201
301 (UP)
ISBN  81-7450-520-2
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,
re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any
form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
and should be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata  700 114
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021
Phone :  0361-2674869
Publication Team
Head, Publication
N. K. Gupta
Division
Chief Production
Kalyan Banerjee
Officer
Chief Editor
Shveta Uppal
Chief Business
Gautam Ganguly
Manager
Editorial Assistant
Mathew John
Production Assistant
Subodh Srivastava
Cover
Sarita Verma Mathur
Illustrations
Sarita Verma Mathur
Praveen Mishra
Anil Sharma
Cartography
Cartographic
Designs Agency
Praveen Mishra
2015-16
FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework, (NCF) 2005, recommends that children’s
life at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle
marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to
shape our system and causes a gap between the school, home and community.
The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to
implement this basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and
the maintenance of sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope
these measures will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred
system of education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and
to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given
space, time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with
the information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook
as the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources
and sites of learning are ignored. Including creativity and initiative is possible
if we perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers
of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual  calendar so that the required number of teaching
days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and
evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making
children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or
boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of curricular
burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with
greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching.
The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority
and space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in
small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committee
responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory
group in Social Sciences, Professor Hari Vasudevan and the Chief Advisor for
this book, Professor M. H. Qureshi for guiding the work of this committee.
Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful
to their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions
and organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon their
resources, material and personnel.  We are especially grateful to the members
2015-16
of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department
of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource
Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and
Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. As an
organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in
the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which
will enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi
National Council of Educational
20 December 2005
Research and Training
2015-16
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SOCIAL SCIENCE AT THE
SECONDARY LEVEL
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Calcutta,
Kolkata
CHIEF ADVISOR
M. H. Qureshi, Professor, CSRD, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
MEMBERS
K. Jaya, PGT, Convent of Jesus and Mary, Bangla Sahib Road, New Delhi
Punam Behari, Reader, Miranda Hosue, Chhatra Marg, Delhi University, Delhi
Saroj Sharma, TGT (Retd.), Mother’s International School, Sri Aurboindo Marg,
New Delhi
Sudeshna Bhattacharya, Reader, Miranda House, Chhatra Marg, Delhi
University, Delhi
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Tannu Malik, Lecturer, DESSH, NCERT, New Delhi
2015-16
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Part III (Articles 12 – 35)
(Subject to certain conditions, some exceptions
and reasonable restrictions)
guarantees these
Fundamental Rights
Right to Equality
• before law and equal protection of laws;
• irrespective of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth;
• of opportunity in public employment;
• by abolition of untouchability and titles.
Right to Freedom
• of expression, assembly, association, movement, residence and profession;
• of certain protections in respect of conviction for offences;
• of protection of life and personal liberty;
• of free and compulsory education for children between the age of six and fourteen years;
• of protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.
Right against Exploitation
• for prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour;
• for prohibition of employment of children in hazardous jobs.
Right to Freedom of Religion
• freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion;
• freedom to manage religious affairs;
• freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion;
• freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in educational
institutions wholly maintained by the State.
Cultural and Educational Rights
• for protection of interests of minorities to conserve their language, script and culture;
• for minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
Right to Constitutional Remedies
• by issuance of directions or orders or writs by the Supreme Court and High
Courts for enforcement of these Fundamental Rights.
2015-16
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges the
contributions of B.S. Butola, Professor, CSRD, JNU; Jebachh Singh, PGT Geography,
Sir G. D. Patlipura, Inter School, Patna and Krishna Kumar Upadhyaya, PGT Geography,
K.V.A.F.S., Bareily in the development of this textbook.
Acknowledgements are also due to Savita Sinha, Professor and Head, Department
of Education in Social Science and Humanities, NCERT for her valuable support at
every stage of preparation of this textbook.
The Council is also grateful to the individuals and organisations as listed below for
providing various photographs and illustrations used in this textbook:
M.H. Qureshi, Professor, CSRD, JNU for figure 2.7; ITDC/Ministry of Tourism,
Govt. of India for Figures 2.6, 2.8, 2.9, 2.11, 3.5, 4.1 and pictures of river, migratory
birds and a picture of montane forests on pages 23, 48 and 51 respectively, picture of
desert on Cover I, picture of clouds on Cover IV; Cross Section Interactive for a picture
of lions on page 48; Tourism of Andaman and Nicobar, Govt. of India for Figure 2.11;
Ministry of Environment and Forests, Govt. of India for Figures 2.5, 3.6, picture of
corals on page 15 and picture of forest on Cover I; Photo Division, Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting, Govt. of India for Figure 2.10; Business Line for Figure 3.2 and
Hindustan Times, New Delhi for news in two collages   given on pages 38 and 50.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contributions of Anil Sharma and
Arvind Sharma, DTP Operators; Sameer Khatana and Amar Kumr Prusty, Copy Editors;
Shreshtha and Deepti Sharma, Proof Readers and Dinesh Kumar, Incharge,
Computer Station who have helped in giving a final shape to this textbook. The efforts
of the Publication Department, NCERT are also duly acknowledged.
The following are applicable to all the maps of India used in this book
© Government of India, Copyright 2006
The responsibility for the correctness of internal details rests with the publisher.
The territorial waters of India extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured from
the appropriate base line.
The administrative headquarters of Chandigarh, Haryana and Punjab are at Chandigarh.
The interstate boundaries amongst Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Meghalaya shown on this map are
as interpreted from the “North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act.1971,” but have yet to be verified.
The external boundaries and coastlines of India agree with the Record/Master Copy certified by
Survey of India.
The state boundaries between Uttaranchal & Uttar Pradesh, Bihar & Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh &
Madhya Pradesh have not been verified by the Governments concerned.
The spellings of names in this map, have been taken from various sources.
2015-16
2015-16
CONTENTS
FOREWORD
CHAPTER 1
India – Size and Location
CHAPTER 2
Physical Features of India
CHAPTER 3
Drainage
CHAPTER 4
Climate
CHAPTER 5
Natural Vegetation and Wild Life
CHAPTER 6
Population
GLOSSARY
APPENDIX
2015-16
2015-16
First Edition
March 2006    Phalguna 1927
Reprinted
November 2006  Kartika 1928
December 2007  Pausa 1929
February 2009 Pausa 1930
January 2010 Magha 1931
November 2010  Agrahayana 1932
January 2012 Magha 1933
November 2012 Kartika 1934
November 2013 Kartika 1935
PD 480T MJ
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006
` 40.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and
printed at Raj Printing Works, 2-E, Udyog
Vihar, Greater Noida (UP)
ISBN  81-7450-520-2
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,
re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any
form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
and should be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata  700 114
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021
Phone :  0361-2674869
Publication Team
Head, Publication
Ashok Srivastava
Division
Chief Production
Kalyan Banerjee
Officer
Chief Business
Gautam Ganguly
Manager
Chief Editor
Naresh Yadav
(Contractual Service)
Editorial Assistant
Mathew John
Production Assistant
Subodh Srivastava
Cover
Sarita Verma Mathur
Illustrations
Sarita Verma Mathur
Praveen Mishra
Anil Sharma
Cartography
Cartographic
Designs Agency
Praveen Mishra
2015-16
The Tropic of Cancer (23° 30'N) divides the
country into almost two equal parts. To the
southeast and southwest of the mainland, lie
the Andaman and Nicobar islands and the
Lakshadweep islands in Bay of Bengal and
Arabian Sea respectively.  Find out the extent
of these groups of islands from your atlas.
The land mass of India has an area of 3.28
million square km. India’s total area accounts
for about 2.4 per cent of the total geographical
ndia is one of the ancient civilisations in the
world.  It has achieved multi-faceted socio-
economic progress during the last five
decades.  It has moved forward displaying
remarkable progress in the field of
agriculture, industry, technology and overall
economic development.  India has also
contributed significantly to the making of
world  history.
LOCATION
India is a vast country. Lying entirely in the
Northern hemisphere (Figure 1.1) the main
land extends between latitudes 8°4'N and
37°6'N and longitudes 68°7'E and 97°25'E.
INDIA – SIZE AND LOCATION
Figure 1.1 : India in the World
• The southernmost point of
the Indian Union– ‘Indira Point’ got submerged under
the sea water in 2004 during the Tsunami.
180°W 150°
180°E
INDIAN
OCEAN
Antartica
PACIFIC
OCEAN
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
PACIFIC
OCEAN
Africa
Europe
North
America
South
America
Australia
01/01/2015
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
area of the world. From the Figure 1.2 it is
clear that India is the seventh largest
country of the world. India has a land
boundary of about 15,200 km and the total
length of the coast line of the mainland
including Andaman and Nicobar and
Lakshadweep is 7,516.6 km.
India is bounded by the young fold
mountains in the northwest,  north and
north east. South of about 22° north
latitude, it begins to taper, and extends
towards the Indian Ocean, dividing it into
two seas, the Arabian Sea on the west and
the Bay of  Bengal on its east.
Look at Figure 1.3 and note that the
latitudinal and longitudinal extent of the
mainland is about 30°. Despite this fact the
east-west extent appears to be smaller than
the north-south extent.
From Gujarat to Arunachal Pradesh
there is a time lag of two hours. Hence, time
along the Standard Meridian of India
(82°30'E) passing through Mirzapur (in
Uttar Pradesh) is taken as the standard time
for the whole country. The latitudinal extent
influences the duration of the day and night,
as one moves from south to north.
Why 82°30'E has been selected as the Standard
Meridian of India?
Why is the difference between the durations
of day and night hardly felt at Kannyakumari
but not so in Kashmir?
INDIA AND THE WORLD
The Indian landmass has a central location
between the East and the West Asia. India is a
southward extension of the Asian Continent.
The trans Indian Ocean routes which connect
the countries of Europe in the West and the
countries of  East Asia provide a strategic central
location to India. Note that the Deccan Peninsula
protrudes into the Indian Ocean, thus helping
India to establish close contact with West Asia,
Africa and Europe from the western coast and
with Southeast and East Asia from the eastern
coast. No other country has a long coastline on
the Indian Ocean as India has and indeed, it is
India’s eminent position in the Indian Ocean
which justifies the naming of an Ocean after it.
Figure 1.2 : Seven Largest Countries of the World
Source : United Nations Demographic Year Book 2009-2010
Since the opening of the
Suez Canal in 1869, India’s distance from Europe
has been reduced by 7,000 km.
01/01/2015
2015-16
INDIA – SIZE AND LOCATION
Figure 1.3 : India : Extent and Standard Meridian
01/01/2015
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Figure 1.4 : India on International Highway of Trade and Commerce
•  The number of Union Territories
along the western and eastern coasts.
•  Area-wise which is the smallest and which is
the largest state?
•  The states which do not have an international
border or lie on the coast
•  Classify the states into four groups each
having common frontiers with
(i) Pakistan, (ii) China, (iii) Myanmar, and
(iv) Bangladesh.
India shares its land boundaries with
Pakistan and Afghanistan in the northwest,
China (Tibet), Nepal and Bhutan in the north
and Myanmar and Bangladesh in the east.
Our southern neighbours across the sea
consist of the two island countries, namely
India’s contacts with the World have
continued through the ages but her relationships
through the land routes are much older than
her maritime contacts. The various passes across
the mountains in the north have provided
passages to the ancient travellers, while the
oceans restricted such interaction for a long time.
These routes have contributed in the
exchange of ideas and commodities since
ancient times. The ideas of the Upanishads
and the Ramayana, the stories of Panchtantra,
the Indian numerals and the decimal system
thus could reach many parts of the world. The
spices, muslin and other merchandise were
taken from India to different countries. On the
other hand, the influence of Greek sculpture,
and the architectural styles of dome and
minarets from West Asia can be seen in
different parts of our country.
INDIA’S NEIGHBOURS
India occupies an important strategic position
in South Asia. India has 29 states and 7 Union
Territories (Figure 1.5).
Before 1947, there were two
types of states in India – the provinces and the
Princely states.  Provinces were ruled directly by
British officials who were appointed by the
Viceroy. Princely states were ruled by local,
hereditary rulers, who acknowledged sovereignity
in return for local autonomy.
01/01/2015
2015-16
INDIA – SIZE AND LOCATION
Figure 1.5 : India and Adjacent Countries
Sri Lanka and Maldives. Sri Lanka is
separated from India by a narrow channel
of sea formed by the Palk Strait and the Gulf
of Mannar while Maldives Islands are situated
to the south of the Lakshadweep Islands.
India has had strong geographical and
historical links with her neighbours. Look
at the physical map of Asia in your atlas,
and note how India stands apart from the
rest of Asia.
* Note:
Telangana became the 29th State of India on the 2nd June 2014 after the reorganisation of the state of
Andhra Pradesh
01/01/2015
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
The Tropic of Cancer does  not pass  through
Rajasthan
(c) Chhattisgarh
Orissa
(d) Tripura
The easternmost longitude  of India is
97° 25' E
(c)  77° 6' E
68° 7' E
(d)  82° 32' E
(iii)
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal and Sikkim have common
frontiers with
China
(c) Nepal
Bhutan
(d) Myanmar
If you intend to visit Kavarati during your summer vacations, which one of
the following Union Territories of India you will be going to
Puducherry
(c) Andaman and Nicobar
Lakshadweep
(d) Diu  and Daman
My friend hails from a country which does not share land boundary with
India. Identify  the country.
Bhutan
(c) Bangladesh
Tajikistan
(d) Nepal
Answer the following questions briefly.
Name the group of islands lying in the Arabian sea.
Name the countries which are larger than India.
(iii)
Which island group of India lies to its south-east?
Which island countries are our southern neighbours?
The sun rises two hours earlier in Arunachal Pradesh as compared to Gujarat
in the west but the watches show the same time.  How does this happen?
The central location of India at the head of the Indian Ocean is considered of
great significance. Why?
MAP SKILLS
Identify the following with the help of map reading.
The Island groups of India lying in the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal.
The countries constituting Indian Subcontinent.
(iii)
The states through which the Tropic of Cancer passes.
The northernmost latitude in degrees.
The southernmost latitude of the Indian mainland in degrees.
The eastern and the western most longitude in degrees.
(vii)
The place situated on the three seas.
(viii)
The strait separating Sri Lanka from India.
The Union Territories of India.
PROJECT/ACTIVITY
Find out the longitudinal and latitudinal extent of your state.
Collect information about the ‘Silk Route’. Also find out the new
developments, which are improving communication routes in the regions of
high altitude.
EXERCISE
01/01/2015
2015-16
ou have already learnt earlier that India
is a vast country with varied landforms.
What kind of terrain do you live in?  If
you live in the plains you are familiar with the
vast stretches of plain land. In contrast, if you
live in hilly region, the rugged terrain with
mountains and valleys are common features.
In fact, our country has practically all major
physical features of the earth i.e. mountains,
plains, deserts, plateaus and islands.  You
must be wondering  how  these physical
features have been formed.  We will learn more
about major physical features of India and how
they have been formed.
We find different types of rocks; some are
very hard like marble which has been used for
making the Taj Mahal, and some are very soft
like soap stone which is used in making talcum
powder. The colour of soil varies from one place
to the other because soil is formed out of
different types of rocks. Have you ever thought
about the causes of these variations? Most of
these variations are caused due to differences
in rock formations.
India is a large landmass formed during
different geological periods which has influenced
her relief. Besides geological formations, a
number of processes such as weathering,
erosion and deposition have created and
modified the relief to its present form.
Earth scientists have attempted to explain
the formation of physical features with the help
of some theories based on  certain evidences.
One such plausible theory is the “Theory of Plate
Tectonics”. According to this theory, the crust
(upper part) of the earth has been formed out of
seven major and some minor plates. (Figure 2.2)
PHYSICAL FEATURES OF INDIA
The movement of the plates results in the
building up of stresses within the plates and the
continental rocks above, leading to folding,
faulting and volcanic activity. Broadly, these
plate movements are classified into three
types(Figure 2.1). While some plates come towards
each other and form convergent boundary. Some
plates move away from each other and form
divergent  boundary. In the event of two plates
coming together they may either collide and
crumble, or one may slide under the other. At
times, they may also move horizontally past
PLATE
PLATE
PLATE
PLATE
Divergent Boundary
Mantle
Convergent Boundary
PLATE
PLATE
PLATE
PLATE
PLATE
PLATE
PLATE
PLATE
Mantle
Transform Boundary
Mantle
Mantle
Figure  2.1 : Plate Boundaries
© NCERT
not to be republished
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
each other and form transform boundary. The
movement of these plates have changed the
position and size of the continents over millions
of years. Such movements have also influenced
the evolution of the present landform features
of India.
Gondwana land: It is the southern part of the
ancient super continent Pangea with Angara Land
in the northern part.
The Himalayan uplift out of the Tethys sea
and subsidence of the northern flank of the
peninsular plateau resulted in the formation
of a large basin. In due course of time this
depression, gradually got filled with deposition
of sediments by the rivers flowing from the
mountains in the north and the peninsular
plateau in the south. A flat land of extensive
alluvial deposits led to the formation of the
northern plains of India.
The land of India displays great physical
variation. Geologically, the Peninsular Plateau
constitutes one of the ancient landmasses on
the earth’s surface. It was supposed to be one
of the most stable land blocks. The Himalayas
and the Northern Plains are the most recent
landforms. From the view point of geology,
Himalayan mountains form an unstable zone.
The whole mountain system of Himalaya
represents a very youthful topography with
high peaks, deep valleys and fast flowing rivers.
The northern plains are formed of alluvial
volcanoes
earthquakes in the world are located at plate
margins, but some do occur within the plates.
Figure 2.2 : World : Plate Margins
The oldest landmass, (the Peninsula part), was
a part of the Gondwana land. The Gondwana
land included India, Australia, South Africa,
South America and Antarctica as one single land
mass. The convectional currents split the crust
into a number of pieces, thus leading to the drifting
of the Indo-Australian plate after being separated
from the Gondwana land, towards north. The
northward drift resulted in the collision of the plate
with the much larger Eurasian Plate. Due to this
collision, the sedimentary rocks which were
accumulated in the geosyncline known as the
Tethys were folded to form the mountain system
of western Asia and  Himalaya.
© NCERT
not to be republished
PHYSICAL FEATURES OF INDIA
deposits. The peninsular plateau is composed
of igneous and metamorphic rocks with gently
rising hills and wide valleys.
MAJOR PHYSIOGRAPHIC DIVISIONS
The physical  features of India can be grouped
under the following physiographic divisions
(Figure 2.4):
The Himalayan Mountains
The Northern Plains
The Peninsular Plateau
The Indian Desert
The Coastal Plains
The Islands
The Himalayan Mountains
The Himalayas, geologically young and
structurally fold mountains stretch over the
Figure 2.3 : Himalayas
northern borders of India. These mountain
ranges run in a west-east direction from the
Indus to the Brahmaputra. The Himalayas
represent the loftiest and one of the most
rugged mountain barriers of the world. They
form an arc, which covers a distance of about
2,400 Km. Their width varies from 400 Km
in Kashmir to 150 Km in Arunachal Pradesh.
The altitudinal variations are greater in the
eastern half than those in the western half.
The Himalaya consists of three parallel
ranges in its longitudinal extent. A number
of valleys lie between these ranges. The
northern most range is known as the Great
or Inner Himalayas or the ‘Himadri’. It is the
most continuous range consisting of the
loftiest peaks with an average height of 6,000
metres. It contains all the prominent
Himalayan peaks.
© NCERT
not to be republished
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Figure 2.4 : Relief
© NCERT
not to be republished
PHYSICAL FEATURES OF INDIA
Some Highest Peaks of the Himalayas
Country
Height
in metres
Mt. Everest
Nepal
Kanchenjunga
India
Makalu
Nepal
Dhaulagiri
Nepal
Nanga Parbat
India
Annapurna
Nepal
Nanda Devi
India
Kamet
India
Namcha Barwa
India
Gurla Mandhata
Nepal
The folds of Great Himalayas are
asymmetrical in nature. The core of this part
of Himalayas is composed of granite. It is
perennially snow bound, and a number of
glaciers descend from this range.
alluvium.  The longitudinal valley lying
between lesser Himalaya and the Shiwaliks are
known as Duns. Dehra Dun, Kotli Dun and
Patli Dun are some of the well-known Duns.
Besides the longitudinal divisions, the
Himalayas have been divided on the basis of
regions from west to east. These divisions
have been demarcated by river valleys. For
example, the part of Himalayas lying between
Indus and Satluj has been traditionally
known as Punjab Himalaya but it is also
known regionally as Kashmir and Himachal
Himalaya from west to east respectively. The
part of the Himalayas lying between Satluj
and Kali rivers is known as Kumaon
Himalayas. The Kali and Tista rivers
demarcate the Nepal Himalayas and the part
lying between Tista and Dihang rivers is
known as Assam Himalayas. There are
regional names also in these broad
categories. Find out some regional names of
the Himalayas
The Brahmaputra marks the eastern most
boundary of the Himalayas. Beyond the Dihang
gorge, the Himalayas bend sharply to the south
and spread along the eastern boundary of
India. They are known as the Purvachal or the
Eastern hills and mountains. These hills
running through the north-eastern states are
mostly composed of strong sandstones which
are sedimentary rocks. Covered with dense
forests, they mostly run as parallel ranges
and valleys. The Purvachal comprises the
•  The names of the glaciers and passes
that lie in Great Himalayas
•   The  name of  the states where highest peaks
are located.
• Location of  Mussoorie, Nainital,
Ranikhet from your atlas and also name the state
where they are located.
Figure 2.5 : The Himalayas
The range lying to the south of the Himadri
forms the most rugged mountain system and
is known as Himachal or lesser Himalaya. The
ranges are mainly composed of highly
compressed and altered rocks. The altitude
varies between 3,700 and 4,500 metres and
the average width is of 50 Km. While the Pir
Panjal range forms the longest and the most
important range, the Dhaula Dhar and the
Mahabharat ranges are also prominent ones.
This range consists of the famous valley of
Kashmir, the Kangra and Kullu Valley in
Himachal Pradesh. This region is well known
for its hill stations.
The outer most range of the Himalayas is
called the Shiwaliks. They extend over a width
of 10-50 Km and have an altitude varying
between 900 and 1100 metres. These ranges
are composed of unconsolidated sediments
brought down by rivers from the main
Himalayan ranges located farther north. These
valleys are covered with thick gravel and
© NCERT
not to be republished
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Patkai hills, the Naga hills, Manipur hills and
the Mizo hills.
The Northern Plain
The northern plain has been formed by the
interplay of the three major river systems,
namely– the Indus, the Ganga and the
Brahmaputra along with their tributaries. This
plain is formed of alluvial soil. The deposition
of alluvium in a vast basin lying at the foothills
of the Himalaya over millions of years, formed
this fertile plain. It spreads over an area of 7
lakh sq. km. The plain being about 2400 Km
long and 240 to 320 Km broad, is a densely
populated physiographic division. With a rich
soil cover combined with adequate water
supply and favourable climate it is
agriculturally a very productive part of India.
The rivers coming from northern
mountains are involved in depositional work.
In the lower course, due to gentle slope, the
velocity of the river decreases which results in
the formation of riverine islands.
The rivers in their lower course split into
numerous channels due to the deposition of silt.
These channels are known as distributaries.
The Northern Plain is broadly divided into
three sections. The Western part of the Northern
Plain is referred to as the Punjab Plains.
Formed by the Indus and its tributaries, the
larger part of this plain lies in Pakistan. The
Indus and its tributaries–the Jhelum, the
Chenab, the Ravi, the Beas and the Satluj
originate in the Himalaya. This section of the
plain is dominated by the doabs.
Figure 2.7 : The Northern Plains
Majuli, in the Brahmaputra
River is the largest inhabited riverine island in the
world.
Figure 2.6 : Mizo Hills
‘Doab’ is made up of two
words- ‘do’ meaning two and ‘ab’ meaning water.
Similarly ‘Punjab’ is also made up two words- ‘Punj’
meaning five and ‘ab’ meaning water.
The Ganga plain extends between Ghaggar
and Teesta rivers.  It is spread over the states of
North India, Haryana, Delhi, U.P., Bihar, partly
Jharkhand and West Bengal to its East,
particularly in Assam lies the Brahmaputra plain.
The northern plains are generally deseribed
as flat land with no variations in its relief. It is
not true. These vast plains also have diverse
relief features. According to the variations in
relief features, the Northern plains can be
divided into four regions. The rivers, after
descending from the mountains deposit
pebbles in a narrow belt of about 8 to 16 km
in width lying parallel to the slopes of the
Shiwaliks. It is known as bhabar. All the
streams disappear in this bhabar belt. South
of this belt, the streams and rivers re-emerge
and create a wet, swampy and marshy region
known as terai. This was a thickly forested
region full of wildlife. The forests have been
cleared to create agricultural land and to settle
migrants from Pakistan after partition.  Locate
Dudhwa National Park in this region.
The largest part of the northern plain is
formed of older alluvium. They lie above the
flood plains of the rivers and present a terrace
like feature. This part is known as bhangar.
© NCERT
not to be republished
PHYSICAL FEATURES OF INDIA
The Deccan Plateau is a triangular landmass
that lies to the south of the river Narmada. The
Satpura range flanks its broad base in the north
while the Mahadev, the Kaimur hills and the
Maikal range form its eastern extensions. Locate
these hills and ranges in the physical map of
India. The Deccan Plateau is higher in the west
and slopes gently eastwards. An extension of the
Plateau is also visible in the northeast– locally
known as the Meghalaya, Karbi-Anglong Plateau
and North Cachar Hills.  It is separated by a
fault from the Chotanagpur Plateau. Three
Prominent hill ranges from the west to east are
the Garo, the Khasi and the Jaintia Hills.
The Western Ghats and the Eastern Ghats
mark the western and the eastern edges of the
Deccan Plateau respectively. Western Ghats lie
parallel to the western coast. They are continuous
and can be crossed through passes only. Locate
the Thal, Bhor and the Pal Ghats in the Physical
map of India.
The Western Ghats are higher than the
Eastern Ghats. Their average elevation is 900–
1600 metres as against 600 metres of the
Eastern Ghats. The Eastern Ghats stretch from
the Mahanadi Valley to the Nigiris in the south.
The Eastern Ghats are discontinuous and
irregular and dissected by rivers draining into
the Bay of Bengal. The Western Ghats cause
orographic rain by facing the rain bearing moist
winds to rise along the western slopes of the
Ghats. The Western Ghats are known by
different local names. The height of the Western
Ghats progressively increases from north to
south. The highest peaks include the Anai
Mudi (2,695metres) and the Doda Betta (2,637
metres). Mahendragiri (1,501 metres) is the
highest peak in the Eastern Ghats. Shevroy
Hills and the Javadi Hills are located to the
southeast of the Eastern Ghats. Locate the
famous hill stations of Udagamandalam,
popularly known as Ooty and the Kodaikanal.
One of the distinct features of the peninsular
plateau is the black soil area known as Decean
Trap. This is of volcanic origin hence the rocks
are igneous. Actually these rocks have
denuded over time and are responsible for the
formation of black soil. The Aravali Hills lie on
the western and northwestern margins of the
The soil in this region contains calcareous
deposits locally known as kankar. The newer,
younger deposits of the flood plains are called
khadar. They are renewed almost every year
and so are fertile, thus, ideal for intensive
agriculture.
The Peninsular Plateau
The Peninsular plateau is a tableland
composed of the old crystalline, igneous and
metamorphic rocks. It was formed due to the
breaking and drifting of the Gondwana land
and thus, making it a part of the oldest
landmass. The plateau has broad and shallow
valleys and rounded hills. This plateau
consists of two broad divisions, namely, the
Central Highlands and the Deccan Plateau.
The part of the Peninsular plateau lying to
the north of the Narmada river covering a
major area of the Malwa plateau is known as
the Central Highlands. The Vindhyan range
is bounded by the Central Highlands on the
south and the Aravalis on the northwest. The
further westward extension gradually merges
with the sandy and rocky desert of Rajasthan.
The flow of the rivers draining this region,
namely the Chambal, the Sind, the Betwa and
Ken is from southwest to northeast, thus
indicating the slope. The Central Highlands
are wider in the west but narrower in the east.
The eastward extensions of this plateau are
locally known as the Bundelkhand and
Baghelkhand. The  Chotanagpur plateau
marks the further eastward extension,
drained by the Damodar river.
Figure 2.8 : A waterfall in Chotanagpur Plateau
© NCERT
not to be republished
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
peninsular plateau. These are highly eroded
hills and are found as broken hills. They extend
from Gujarat to Delhi in a southwest-northeast
direction.
The Indian Desert
The Indian desest lies towards the western
margins of the Aravali Hills. It is an undulating
sandy plain covered with sand dunes. This
region receives very low rainfall below 150 mm
per year.  It has arid climate with low
vegetation cover. Streams appear during the
rainy season. Soon after they disappear into
the sand as they do not have enough water to
reach the sea.  Luni is the only large river in
this region.
The plains along the Bay of Bengal are wide
and level. In the northern part, it is referred to
as the Northern Circar, while the southern part
is known as the Coromandel Coast. Large
rivers such as the Mahanadi, the Godavari, the
Krishna and the Kaveri have formed extensive
delta  on this coast. Lake Chilika is an
important feature along the eastern coast.
The Chilika Lake is the
largest salt water lake in India. It lies in the state
of Orissa, to the south of the Mahanadi delta.
The Islands
You have already seen that India has a vast main
land. Besides this, the country has also two groups
of islands. Can you identify these island groups?
Figure 2.10 : The Coastal Plains
Figure 2.11 : An Island
Figure 2.9 : The Indian Desert
Barchans (crescent shaped dunes) cover
larger areas but longitudinal dunes become
more prominent near the Indo-Pakistan
boundary. If you visit Jaisalmer, you may go
to see a group of barchans.
The Coastal Plains
The Peninsular plateau is flanked by stretch
of narrow coastal strips, running along the
Arabian Sea on the west and the Bay of Bengal
on the east. The western coast, sandwiched
between the Western Ghats and the Arabian
Sea, is a narrow plain. It consists of three
sections. The northern part of the coast is called
the Konkan (Mumbai – Goa), the central stretch
is called the Kannad Plain while the southern
stretch is referred to as the Malabar coast.
Locate the Lakshadweep Islands group
lying close to the Malabar coast of Kerala. This
group of islands is composed of small coral
isalnds. Earlier they were known as Laccadive,
Minicoy and Amindive. In 1973 these were
© NCERT
not to be republished
PHYSICAL FEATURES OF INDIA
Corals
Coral polyps are short-lived microscopic
organisms, which live in colonies. They flourish
in shallow, mud free and warm waters.  They
secrete calcium carbonate.  The coral secretion
and their skeletons from coral deposits in the
form of reefs:.  they are mainly of three kinds:
barrier reef. fringing reef and atolls.  The Great
Barrier Reef of Australia is a good example of the
first kind of coral reefs. Atolls are circular or
horse shoe shaped coral reefs.
named as Lakshadweep. It covers small area
of 32 sq km. Kavaratti island is the
administrative headquarters of Lakshadweep.
This island group has great diversity of flora
and fauna. The Pitti island, which is
uninhabited, has a bird sanctuary.
starategic importance for the country.  There
is great diversity of flora and fauna in this
group of islands too. These islands lie close to
equator and experience equatorial climate and
has thick forest cover.
Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
A landmass bounded by sea on three sides is referred to as
Coast
(c) Peninsula
Island
(d) none of the above
Mountain ranges in the eastern part of India forming its boundary with
Myanmar are collectively called as
Himachal
(c) Purvachal
Uttarakhand
(d) none of the above
(iii)
The western coastal strip, south of Goa is referred to as
Coromandel
(c) Kannad
Konkan
(d) Northern Circar
The highest peak in the Eastern Ghats is
Anai Mudi
(c) Mahendragiri
Kanchenjunga
(d) Khasi
Answer the following questions briefly.
What are tectonic plates?
Which continents of today were part of the Gondwana land?
Now you see the elongated chain of islands
located in the Bay of Bengal extending from
north to south. These are Andaman and
Nicobar islands. They are bigger in size and
are more numerous and scattered. The entire
group of islands is divided into two broad
categories –  The Andaman in the north and
the Nicobar in the south. It is believed that these
islands are an elevated portion of submarine
mountains.  These island groups are of great
India’s only active volcano is
found on Barren island in Andaman and Nicobar
group of Islands.
A detailed account of the different
physiographic units highlights the unique
features of each region.  It would, however,
be clear that each region complements the
other and makes the country richer in its
natural resources.  The mountains are the
major sources of water and forest wealth.
The northern plains are the granaries of the
country.  They provide the base for early
civilisations.  The plateau is a storehouse
of minerals, which has played a crucial role
in the industrialisation of the country.  The
coastal region and island groups provide
sites for fishing and port activities.  Thus,
the diverse physical features of the land
have immense future possibilities of
development.
EXERCISE
© NCERT
not to be republished
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
(iii)
What is the bhabar?
Name the three major divisions of the Himalayas from north to south.
Which plateau lies between the Aravali and the Vindhyan ranges?
Name the island group of India having coral origin.
Distinguish between
Converging and diverging tectonic plates
Bhangar and Khadar
(iii)
Western Ghats and Eastern Ghats
Describe how the Himalayas were formed.
Which are the major physiographic divisions of India?  Contrast the relief of the
Himalayan region with that of the Peninsular plateau.
Give an account of the Northern Plains of India.
Write short notes on the following.
The Indian Desert
The Central Highlands
(iii)
The Island groups of India
MAP SKILLS
On an outline map of India show the following.
Mountain and hill ranges – the Karakoram, the Zaskar, the Patkai Bum, the
Jaintia, the Vindhya range, the Aravali, and the Cardamom hills.
Peaks – K2, Kanchenjunga, Nanga Parbat and the Anai Mudi.
(iii)
Plateaus, Chotanagpur and Malwa
The Indian Desert, Western Ghats, Lakshadweep Islands
PROJECT/ACTIVITY
Locate the peaks, passes, ranges, plateaus, hills, and duns hidden in the puzzle.
Try to find where these features are located.  You may start your search horizontally,
vertically or diagonally.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Water Divide
Sream A
Sream B
Figure 3.1 : Water Divide
DRAINAGE
he term drainage describes the river
system of an area. Look at the physical
map. You will notice that small streams
flowing from different directions come together
to form the main river, which ultimately drains
into a large water body such as a lake or a sea
or an ocean. The area drained by a single river
system is called a drainage basin. A closer
observation on a map will indicate that any
elevated area, such as a mountain or an upland,
separates two drainage basins. Such an upland
is known as a water divide (Figure 3.1).
The world’s largest drainage
basin is of the Amazon river
Figure 3.2 : A Gorge
subcontinent. Accordingly, the Indian rivers
are divided into two major groups:
the Himalayan rivers; and
the Peninsular rivers.
Apart from originating from the two major
physiographic regions of India, the Himalayan
and the Peninsular rivers are different from
each other in many ways. Most of the
Himalayan rivers are perennial.  It means
that they have water throughout the year.
These rivers receive  water from rain as well
as from melted snow from the lofty
mountains. The two major Himalayan rivers,
the Indus and the Brahmaputra originate
from the north of the mountain ranges. They
have cut through the mountains making
gorges. The Himalayan rivers have long
courses from their source to the sea. They
perform intensive erosional activity in their
upper courses and carry huge loads of silt
and sand. In the middle and the lower courses,
these rivers form meanders, oxbow lakes, and
many other depositional features in their
• Which river has the largest basin in India?
DRAINAGE SYSTEMS IN INDIA
The drainage systems of India are mainly
controlled by the broad relief features of the
Stream  A
Stream B
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
floodplains. They also have well-developed
deltas (Figure 3.3).
A large number of the Peninsular rivers are
seasonal, as their flow is dependent on rainfall.
During the dry season, even the large rivers
have reduced flow of water in their channels.
The Peninsular rivers have shorter and
shallower courses as compared to their
Himalayan counterparts. However, some of
them originate in the central highlands and flow
towards the west. Can you identify two such
large rivers? Most of the rivers of peninsular
India originate in the Western Ghats and flow
towards the Bay of Bengal.
The Himalayan Rivers
The major Himalayan rivers are the Indus, the
Ganga and the Brahmaputra. These rivers are
long, and are joined by many large and
important tributaries. A river alongwith its
tributaries may be called a river system.
The Indus River System
The river Indus rises in Tibet, near Lake
Mansarowar. Flowing west, it enters India in the
Ladakh district of Jammu and Kashmir. It forms
a picturesque gorge in this part. Several
tributaries, the Zaskar, the Nubra, the Shyok
and the Hunza, join it in the Kashmir region.
The Indus flows through Baltistan and Gilgit and
emerges from the mountains at Attock. The
Satluj, the Beas, the Ravi, the Chenab and the
Jhelum join together to enter the Indus near
Mithankot in Pakistan. Beyond this, the Indus
flows southwards eventually reaching the
Arabian Sea, east of Karachi.   The Indus plain
has a very gentle slope. With a total length of
2900 km, the Indus is one of the longest rivers
Source of River
Upper Course
Middle Course
Ox-Bow Lake
Lower
Course
Meander
Delta
Figure 3.3 : Some Features Made by Rivers
Drainage Patterns
The streams within a drainage basin form
certain patterns, depending on the slope
of land, underlying rock structure as well
as the climatic conditions of the area.
These are dendritic, trellis, rectangular,
and radial patterns.  The dendritic pattern
develops where the river channel follows
the slope of the terrain. The stream with
its tributaries resembles the branches of
a tree, thus the name dendritic. A river
joined by its tributaries, at approximately
right angles, develops a trellis pattern. A
trellis drainage pattern  develops where
hard and soft rocks exist parallel to each
other. A rectangular drainage pattern
develops on a strongly jointed rocky
terrain. The radial pattern develops when streams flow in different
directions from a central peak or dome like structure.
A combination of several patterns may be found in the same drainage basin.
DRAINAGE
Figure 3.4 : Major Rivers and Lakes
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
of the world.  A little over a third of the Indus
basin is located in India in the states of Jammu
and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and the Punjab
and the rest is in Pakistan.
• According to the regulations
of the Indus Water Treaty (1960), India can use
only 20 per cent of the total water carried by Indus
river system. This water is used for irrigation in
the Punjab, Haryana and the southern and
western parts of Rajasthan.
The Ganga River System
The headwaters of the Ganga, called the
‘Bhagirathi’ is fed by the Gangotri Glacier and
joined by the Alaknanda at Devaprayag in
Uttarakhand. At Haridwar the Ganga emerges
from the mountains on to the plains.
The main tributaries, which come from the
peninsular uplands, are the Chambal, the
Betwa and the Son. These rise from semi arid
areas, have shorter courses and do not carry
much water in them. Find out where and how
they ultimately join the Ganga.
Enlarged with the waters from its right and
left bank tributaries, the Ganga flows
eastwards till Farakka in West Bengal. This is
the northernmost point of the Ganga delta. The
river bifurcates here; the Bhagirathi-Hooghly
(a distributary) flows southwards through the
deltaic plains to the Bay of Bengal. The
mainstream, flows southwards into
Bangladesh and is joined by the Brahmaputra.
Further down stream, it is known as the
Meghna. This mighty river, with waters from
the Ganga, and the Brahmaputra, flows into
the Bay of Bengal. The delta formed by these
rivers is known as the Sunderban delta.
• The Sundarban Delta derived
its name from the Sundari tree which grows well in
marshland.
•  It is the world’s largest and fastest growing delta.
It is also the home of Royal Bengal tiger.
The  length of the Ganga is over 2500 km.
Look at figure 3.4; can you identify the type of
drainage pattern formed by the Ganga river
system? Ambala is located on the water divide
between the Indus and the Ganga river systems.
The plains from Ambala to the Sunderban
stretch over nearly 1800 km, but the fall in its
slope is hardly 300 metres. In other words, there
is a fall of just one metre for every 6 km.
Therefore, the river develops large meanders.
The Brahmaputra River System
The Brahmaputra rises in Tibet east of
Mansarowar lake very close to the sources of
the Indus and the Satluj. It is slightly longer
than the Indus, and most of its course lies
outside India. It flows eastwards parallel to
the Himalayas. On reaching the Namcha
Barwa (7757 m), it takes a ‘U’ turn and enters
India in Arunachal Pradesh through a gorge.
Here, it is called the Dihang and it is joined
by the Dibang, the Lohit, and many other
Figure 3.5 : Confluence of Bhagirathi and Alaknanda at
Devaprayag
The Ganga is joined by many tributaries
from the Himalayas, a few of them being major
rivers such as the Yamuna, the Ghaghara, the
Gandak and the Kosi. The river Yamuna rises
from the Yamunotri Glacier in the Himalayas.
It flows parallel to the Ganga and as a right
bank tributary, meets the Ganga at Allahabad.
The Ghaghara, the Gandak and the Kosi rise
in the Nepal Himalaya. They are the rivers,
which flood parts of the northern plains every
year, causing widespread damage to life and
property but enriching the soil for the extensive
agricultural lands.
DRAINAGE
tributaries to form the Brahmaputra in
Assam.
•  Brahmaputra is known as
the Tsang Po in Tibet and Jamuna in Bangladesh.
In Tibet the river carries a smaller volume of
water and less silt as it is a cold and a dry area.
In India it passes through a region of high rainfall.
Here the river carries a large volume of water and
considerable amount of silt. The Brahmaputra
has a braided channel in its entire length in
Assam and forms many riverine islands. Do you
remember the name of the world’s largest riverine
island formed by the Brahmaputra?
Every year during the rainy season, the
river overflows its banks, causing widespread
devastation due to floods in Assam and
Bangladesh. Unlike other north Indian rivers
the Brahmaputra is marked by huge deposits
of silt on its bed causing  the river bed to rise.
The river also shifts its channel frequently.
The Peninsular Rivers
The main water divide in Peninsular India is
formed by the Western Ghats, which runs from
north to south close to the western coast.  Most
of the major rivers of the Peninsula such as
the Mahanadi, the Godavari, the Krishna and
the Kaveri flow eastwards and drain into the
Bay of Bengal. These rivers make deltas at
their mouths. There are numerous small
streams flowing west of the Western Ghats.
The Narmada and the Tapi are the only long
rivers, which flow west and make esturies.  The
drainage basins of the peninsular rivers are
comparatively small in size.
The Narmada Basin
The Narmada rises in the Amarkantak hills
in Madhya Pradesh. It flows towards the west
in a rift valley formed due to faulting. On its
way to the sea, the Narmada creates many
picturesque locations. The ‘Marble rocks’,
near Jabalpur where the Narmada flows
through a deep gorge, and the ‘Dhuadhar
falls’ where the river plunges over steep rocks,
are some of the notable ones.
All the tributaries of the Narmada are very
short and most of these join the main stream
at right angles. The Narmada basin covers parts
of Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat.
The Tapi Basin
The Tapi rises in the Satpura ranges, in the
Betul district of Madhya Pradesh. It also flows
in a rift valley parallel to the Narmada but it is
much shorter in length. Its basin covers parts
of Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Maharashtra.
The coastal plains between Western Ghats
and the Arabian sea are very narrow. Hence,
the coastal rivers are short. The main west
flowing rivers are Sabarmati, Mahi,
Bharathpuzha and Periyar. Find out the states
in which these rivers drain the water.
The Godavari Basin
The Godavari is the largest Peninsular river.
It rises from the slopes of the Western Ghats
in the Nasik district of Maharashtra. Its
length is about 1500 km.  It drains into the
Bay of Bengal. Its drainage basin is also the
largest among the peninsular rivers.  The
basin covers parts of Maharashtra (about 50
per cent of the basin area lies in Maharashtra),
Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Andhra
Pradesh. The Godavari is joined by a number
of tributaries such as the Purna, the Wardha,
the Pranhita, the Manjra, the Wainganga and
the Penganga.  The last three tributaries are
very large. Because of its length and the
area it covers, it is also known as the
‘Dakshin Ganga’.
The Mahanadi Basin
The Mahanadi rises in the highlands of
Chhattisgarh. It flows through Odisha to reach
the Bay of Bengal.  The length of the river is
about 860 km. Its drainage basin is shared by
Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand,
and Odisha.
The Krishna Basin
Rising from a spring near Mahabaleshwar, the
Krishna flows for about 1400 km and reaches
the Bay of Bengal.  The Tungabhadra, the
Koyana, the Ghatprabha, the Musi and the
Bhima are some of its tributaries.  Its drainage
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
basin is shared by Maharasthra, Karnataka
and Andhra Pradesh.
The Kaveri Basin
The Kaveri rises in the Brahmagri range of the
Western Ghats and it reaches the Bay of Bengal
in south of Cuddalore, in Tamil Nadu.  Total
length of the river is about 760 km.  Its main
tributaries are Amravati, Bhavani, Hemavati
and Kabini.  Its basin drains parts of
Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu.
•  The river Kaveri makes the
second biggest waterfall in India, known as
Sivasamudram. The hydroelectric power
generated from the falls is supplied to Mysore,
Bangalore and the Kolar Gold Field.
•  The name of the biggest waterfall
in India.
Beside these major rivers, there are some
smaller rivers flowing towards the east. The
Damoder, the Brahmani, the Baitarni and the
Subarnrekha are some notable examples.
Locate them in your atlas.
• 71 per cent of the world’s
surface is covered with water, but 97 per cent of
that is salt water.
• Of the 3 per cent that is available as freshwater,
three quarters of it is trapped as ice.
LAKES
You may be familiar with the valley of Kashmir
and the famous Dal Lake, the house boats and
shikaras, which attract thousands of tourists
every year.  Similarly, you may have visited
some other tourist spot near a lake and enjoyed
boating, swimming and other water games.
Imagine that if Srinagar, Nainital and other
tourists places did not have a lake would they
have been as attractive as they are today? Have
you ever tried to know the importance of lakes
in  making a place attractive to tourists?  Apart
from attraction for tourists lakes are also useful
to human beings in many ways.
• Lakes of large extent are called the seas,
like the Caspian, the Dead and the Aral seas.
India has many lakes. These differ from
each other in the size, and other
characteristics. Most lakes are permanent;
some contain water  only during the rainy
season, like the lakes in the basins of inland
drainage of semi-arid regions. There are some
of the lakes which are the result of the action
of glaciers and ice sheets, while the others
have been formed by wind, river action, and
human activities.
A meandering river across a flood plain
forms cut-offs that later develop into  ox-bow
lakes. Spits and bars form lagoons in the
coastal areas, eg the Chilika lake, the Pulicat
lake, the Kolleru lake. Lakes in the region of
inland drainage are sometimes seasonal; for
example, the Sambhar lake in Rajasthan, which
is a salt water lake. Its water is used for
producing salt.
Most of the fresh water lakes are in the
Himalayan region.  They are of glacial origin.
In other words, they  formed when glaciers
dug out a basin, which was later filled with
snowmelt. The Wular lake in Jammu and
Kashmir, in contrast, is the result of the
tectonic activity.  It is the largest freshwater
lake in India.  The Dal lake, Bhimtal, Nainital,
Loktak and Barapani are some other
important fresh water lakes.
Apart from natural lakes, the damming of
the rivers for the generation of hydel power has
also led to the formation of Lakes such as Guru
Gobind Sagar (Bhakra Nangal Project).
Figure 3.6 : Loktak Lake
DRAINAGE
Activity
Make a list of natural and artifcial
lakes with the help of the atlas.
Lakes are of great value to human beings.
A lake helps to regulate the flow of a river.
During heavy rainfall, it prevents flooding and
during the dry season, it helps to maintain
an even flow of water. Lakes can also be used
for developing hydel power. They moderate the
climate of the surroundings; maintain the
aquatic ecosystem, enhance natural beauty,
help develop tourism and provide recreation.
ROLE OF RIVERS IN THE ECONOMY
Rivers have been of fundamental importance
throughout the human history. Water from the
rivers is a basic natural resource, essential for
various human activities. Therefore, the river
banks have attracted settlers from ancient
times. These settlements have now become big
cities. Make a list of cities in your state which
are located on the bank of a river.
Using rivers for irrigation, navigation,
hydro-power generation  is of  special
significance – particularly to a country like
India, where agriculture is the major source
of  livelihood of the majority of its population.
RIVER POLLUTION
The growing domestic, municipal, industrial
and agricultural demand for water from rivers
naturally affects the quality of water. As a
result, more and more water is being drained
out of the rivers reducing their volume. On
the other hand, a heavy load of untreated
sewage and industrial effluents are emptied
into the rivers. This affects not only the quality
of water but also the self-cleansing capacity
of the river. For example, given the adequate
streamflow, the Ganga water is able to dilute
and assimilate pollution loads within 20 km
of large cities. But the increasing
urbanisation and industrialisation do not
allow it to happen and the pollution level of
many rivers has been rising. Concern over
rising pollution in our rivers led to the
launching of various action plans to clean the
rivers. Have you heard about such action
plans? How does our health get affected by
polluted river water? Think about “life of
human beings without fresh water”. Arrange
a debate on this topic in the class.
National River Conservation Plan (NRCP)
The activities of Ganga Action Plan (GAP)
phase-I, initiated in 1985, were declared
closed on 31st March 2000. The Steering
Committee of the National River
Conservation Authority reviewed the
progress of the GAP and necessary correction
on the basis of lessons learnt and
experiences gained from GAP Phase-I. These
have been applied to the major polluted
rivers of the country under the NRCP.
The Ganga Action Plan (GAP) Phase-II,
has been merged with the NRCP. The
expanded NRCP now covers 152 towns located
along 27 interstate rivers in 16 states. Under
this action plan, pollution abatement works
are being taken up in 57 towns. A total of
215 schemes of pollution abatement have
been sanctioned. So far, 69 schemes have
been completed under this action plan. A
million litres of sewage is targeted to be
intercepted, diverted and treated.
Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
Which one of the following describes the drainage patterns resembling the
branches of a tree?
Radial
(c) Centrifugal
Dendritic
(d) Trellis
EXERCISE
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
In which of the following states is the Wular lake located?
Rajasthan
(c) Punjab
Uttar Pradesh
(d) Jammu and Kashmir
(iii)
The river Narmada has its source at
Satpura
(c) Amarkantak
Brahmagiri
(d) Slopes of the Western Ghats
Which one of the following lakes is a salt water lake?
Sambhar
(c) Wular
(d) Gobind Sagar
Which one of the following is the longest river of the Peninsular India?
Narmada
(c) Godavari
Krishna
(d) Mahanadi
Which one amongst the following rivers flows through a rift valley?
Mahanadi
(c) Krishna
Tungabhadra
(d) Tapi
Answer the following questions briefly.
What is meant by a water divide? Give an example.
Which is the largest river basin in India?
(iii)
Where do the rivers Indus and Ganga have their origin?
Name the two headstreams of the Ganga. Where do they meet to form the Ganga?
Why does the Brahmaputra in its Tibetan part have less silt, despite a
longer course?
Which two Peninsular rivers flow through trough?
(vii)
State some economic benefits of rivers and lakes.
Below are given names of a few lakes of India. Group them under two categories
– natural and created by human beings.
Wular
Nainital
Bhimtal
Gobind Sagar
Loktak
Barapani
Chilika
Sambhar
Rana Pratap Sagar
Nizam Sagar
Pulicat
Nagarjuna Sagar
Hirakund
Discuss the significant difference between the Himalayan and the Peninsular
rivers.
Compare the east flowing and the west flowing rivers of the Peninsular plateau.
Why are rivers important for the country’s economy?
Map Skills
On an outline map of India mark and label the following rivers: Ganga,
Satluj, Damodar, Krishna, Narmada, Tapi, Mahanadi, and Brahmaputra.
On an outline map of India mark and label the following lakes: Chilika,
Sambhar, Wular, Pulicat, Kolleru.
DRAINAGE
Project/Activity
Solve this crossword puzzle with the help of given clues.
Across
Nagarjuna Sagar is a river valley project. Name the river?
The longest river of India.
The river which originates from a place known as Beas Kund.
The river which rises in the Betul district of MP and flows westwards.
The river which was known as the “Sorrow” of West Bengal.
The river on which the reservoir for India Gandhi canal has been built.
The river whose source lies near Rohtang Pass.
The longest river of Peninsular India?
A tributary of Indus originating from Himachal Pradesh.
The river flowing through fault, drains into the Arabian Sea.
A river of south India, which receives rain water both in summer and winter.
A river which flows through Ladakh, Gilgit and Pakistan.
An important river of the Indian desert.
The river which joins Chenab in Pakistan.
A river which rises at Yamunotri glacier.
n the last two chapters you have read about
the landforms and the drainage of
our country.  These are the two of the three
basic elements that one learns about the natural
environment of any area.  In this chapter you
will learn about the third, that is, the
atmospheric conditions that prevail over our
country.  Why do we wear woollens in December
or why it is hot and uncomfortable in the month
of May, and why it rains in June - July?  The
answers to all these questions can be found out
by studying about the climate of India.
Climate refers to the sum total of  weather
conditions and variations over a large  area for
a long period of time (more than thirty years).
Weather refers to the state of the atmosphere
over an area at any point of time. The elements
of weather and climate are the same, i.e.
temperature, atmospheric pressure, wind,
humidity and precipitation. You may have
observed that the weather conditions fluctuate
very often even within a day. But there is some
common pattern over a few weeks or months,
i.e. days are cool or hot, windy or calm, cloudy
or bright, and wet or dry. On the basis of the
generalised monthly atmospheric conditions,
the year is divided into seasons such as winter,
summer or rainy seasons.
The world is divided into a number of
climatic regions. Do you know what type of
climate India has and why it is so? We will
learn about it in this chapter.
•  The word monsoon is
derived from the Arabic word ‘mausim’ which
literally means season.
• ‘Monsoon’ refers to the seasonal reversal in the
wind direction during a year.
CLIMATE
The climate of India is described as the
‘monsoon’ type. In Asia, this type of climate
is found mainly in the south and the southeast.
Despite an overall unity in the general pattern,
there are perceptible regional variations in
climatic conditions within the country. Let us
take two important elements – temperature and
precipitation, and examine how they vary from
place to place and season to season.
In summer, the mercury occasionally
touches 50°C in some parts of the Rajasthan
desert, whereas it may be around 20°C in
Pahalgam in Jammu and Kashmir. On a winter
night, temperature at Drass in Jammu and
Kashmir may be as low as minus 45°C.
Thiruvananthapuram, on the other hand, may
have a temperature of 22°C.
In certain places there is a
wide difference between day and night
temperatures. In the Thar Desert the day
temperature may rise to 50°C, and drop down
to near 15°C the same night. On the other hand,
there is hardly any difference in day and night
temperatures in the Andaman and Nicobar
islands or in Kerala.
Let us now look at precipitation. There are
variations not only in the form and types of
precipitation but also in its amount and the
seasonal distribution. While precipitation is
mostly in the form of snowfall in the upper parts
of Himalayas, it rains over the rest of the
country. The annual precipitation varies from
over 400 cm in Meghalaya to less than 10 cm
in Ladakh and western Rajasthan. Most parts
of the country receive rainfall from June to
September. But some parts like the Tamil Nadu
2015-16
CLIMATE
•Why most of the world’s deserts are
located in the western margins of continents in the
subtropics?
Finally, relief too plays a major role in
determining the climate of a place. High mountains
act as barriers for cold or hot winds; they may
also cause precipitation if they are high enough
and lie in the path of rain-bearing winds. The
leeward side of mountains remains relatively dry.
FACTORS AFFECTING INDIA’S CLIMATE
Latitude
The Tropic of Cancer passes through the middle
of the country from the Rann of Kuchchh in the
west to Mizoram in the east. Almost half of the
country, lying south of the Tropic of Cancer,
belongs to the tropical area. All the remaining
area, north of the Tropic, lies in the sub-tropics.
Therefore, India’s climate has characteristics of
tropical as well as subtropical climates.
Altitude
India has mountains to the north, which have
an average height of about 6,000 metres. India
also has a vast coastal area where the
maximum elevation is about 30 metres. The
Himalayas prevent the cold winds from Central
Asia from entering the subcontinent. It is
because of these mountains that this
subcontinent experiences comparatively
milder winters as compared to central Asia.
Pressure and Winds
The climate and associated weather conditions
in India are governed by the following
atmospheric conditions:
Pressure and surface winds;
Upper air circulation; and
Western cyclonic disturbances and
tropical cyclones.
India lies in the region of north easterly
winds. These winds originate from the
subtropical high-pressure belt of the northern
coast gets a large portion of its rain during
October and November.
In general, coastal areas experience less
contrasts in temperature conditions. Seasonal
contrasts are more in the interior of the
country. There is decrease in rainfall generally
from east to west in the Northern Plains. These
variations have given rise to variety in lives of
people – in terms of the food they eat, the
clothes they wear and also the kind of houses
they live in.
Why the houses in Rajasthan have thick
walls and flat roofs?
•  Why is it that the houses in the Tarai region and
in Goa and Mangalore have sloping roofs?
• Why houses in Assam are built on stilts?
CLIMATIC CONTROLS
There are six major controls of  the climate of
any place. They are: latitude, altitude,
pressure and wind system, distance from
the sea (continentality), ocean currents and
relief features.
Due to the curvature of the earth, the
amount of solar energy received varies
according to latitude. As a result, air
temperature generally decreases from the
equator towards the poles. As one goes from
the surface of the earth to higher altitudes,
the atmosphere becomes less dense and
temperature decreases. The hills are therefore
cooler during summers. The pressure and
wind system of any area depend on the
latitude and altitude of the place. Thus it
influences the temperature and rainfall
pattern. The sea exerts a moderating influence
on climate: As the distance from the sea
increases, its moderating influence decreases
and the people experience extreme weather
conditions. This condition is known as
continentality (i.e. very hot during summers
and very cold during winters). Ocean currents
along with onshore winds affect the climate of
the coastal areas, For example, any coastal
area with warm or cold currents flowing past
it, will be warmed or cooled if the winds are
onshore.
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
hemisphere. They blow south, get deflected to
the right due to the Coriolis force, and move
on towards the equatorial low-pressure area.
Generally, these winds carry very little
moisture as they originate and blow over land.
Therefore, they bring little or no rain. Hence,
India should have been an arid land, but, it is
not so. Let us see why?
Coriolis force: An apparent force caused by the earth’s
rotation. The Coriolis force is responsible for deflecting
winds towards the right in the northern hemisphere
and towards the left in the southern hemisphere.  This
is also known as ‘Ferrel’s Law’.
The pressure and wind conditions over
India are unique. During winter, there is a
high-pressure area north of the Himalayas.
Cold dry winds blow from this region to the
low-pressure areas over the oceans to the
south. In summer, a low-pressure area
develops over interior Asia as well as over
northwestern India. This causes a complete
reversal of the direction of winds during
summer. Air moves from the high-pressure
area over the southern Indian Ocean, in a
south-easterly direction, crosses the equator,
and turns right towards the low-pressure areas
over the Indian subcontinent. These are known
as the Southwest Monsoon winds. These winds
blow over the warm oceans, gather moisture
and bring widespread rainfall over the
mainland of India.
The upper air circulation in this region is
dominated by a westerly flow. An important
component of this flow is the jet stream.
These jet streams are located approximately
over 27°-30° north latitude, therefore, they are
known as subtropical westerly jet streams. Over
India, these jet streams blow south of the
Himalayas, all through the year except in
summer. The western cyclonic disturbances
experienced in the north and north-western parts
of the country are brought in by this westerly
flow. In summer, the subtropical westerly jet
stream moves north of the Himalayas with the
apparent movement of the sun. An easterly jet
stream, called the sub-tropical easterly jet stream
blows over peninsular India, approximately over
14°N during the summer months.
Western Cyclonic Disturbances
The western cyclonic disturbances are weather
phenomena of the winter months brought in by the
westerly flow from the Mediterranean region. They
usually influence the weather of the north and
north-western regions of India. Tropical cyclones
occur during the monsoon as well as in October -
November, and are part of the easterly flow. These
distrurbances affect the coastal regions of the
country. Have you read or heard about the
disasters caused by them on Orissa and Andhra
Pradesh coast?
THE INDIAN MONSOON
The climate of India is strongly influenced by
monsoon winds. The sailors who came to India
in historic times were one of the first to have
noticed the phenomenon of the monsoon. They
benefited from the reversal of the wind system
as they came by sailing ships at the mercy of
winds. The Arabs, who had also come to India
as traders named this seasonal reversal of the
wind system ‘monsoon’.
Figure 4.1 : Arrival of Monsoon
Jet stream: These are a narrow belt of high
altitude (above 12,000 m) westerly winds in the
troposphere. Their speed varies from about 110
km/h in summer to about 184 km/h in winter.
A number of separate jet streams have been
identified. The most constant are the mid-latitude
and the sub tropical jet stream.
2015-16
CLIMATE
Figure 4.3 : Atmospheric Conditions over the Indian Subcontinent in the Month of June
Figure 4.2 : Atmospheric Conditions over the Indian Subcontinent in the Month of January
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
conditions is known as the Southern
Oscillation or SO. The difference in pressure
over Tahiti (Pacific Ocean, 18°S/149°W) and
Darwin in northern Australia (Indian Ocean,
12°30’S/131°E) is computed to predict the
intensity of the monsoons. If the pressure
differences were negative, it would mean below
average and late monsoons. A feature connected
with the SO is the El Nino phenomenon in which
a warm ocean current that flows past the
Peruvian Coast, in place of the cold Peruvian
current, every 2 to 5 years. The changes in
pressure conditions are connected to the El Nino.
Hence, the phenomenon is referred to as ENSO
(El Nino Southern Oscillations).
El Nino: This is a name given to the periodic
development of a warm ocean current along the
coast of Peru as a temporary replacement of the
cold Peruvian current. ‘El Nino’ is a Spanish word
meaning ‘the child’, and refers to the baby Christ,
as this current starts flowing during Christmas.
The presence of the El Nino leads to an increase
in sea-surface temperatures and weakening of
the trade winds in the region.
THE ONSET OF THE MONSOON AND WITHDRAWAL
The Monsoon, unlike the trades, are not steady
winds but are pulsating in nature, affected by
different atmospheric conditions encountered
by it, on its way over the warm tropical seas.
The duration of the monsoon is between 100-
120 days from early June to mid-September.
Around the time of its arrival, the normal
rainfall increases suddenly and continues
constantly for several days. This is known as
the ‘burst’ of the monsoon, and can be
distinguished from the pre-monsoon showers.
The monsoon arrives at the southern tip of the
Indian peninsula generally by the first week of
June. Subsequently, it proceeds into two – the
Arabian Sea branch and the Bay of Bengal
branch. The Arabian Sea branch reaches
Mumbai
about
later
approximately the 10th of June. This is a fairly
rapid advance. The Bay of Bengal branch also
advances rapidly and arrives in Assam in the
first week of June. The lofty mountains causes
the monsoon winds to deflect towards the west
The monsoons are experienced in the
tropical area roughly between 20° N and 20°
S. To understand the mechanism of the
monsoons, the following facts are important.
(a) The differential heating and cooling of
land and water creates low pressure on the
landmass of India while the seas around
experience comparatively high pressure.
(b) The shift of the position of Inter Tropical
Convergence Zone (ITCZ) in summer, over
the Ganga plain (this is the equatorial trough
normally positioned about 5°N of the
equator. It is also known as the monsoon-
trough during the monsoon season).
(c) The presence of the high-pressure area,
east of Madagascar, approximately at
20°S over the Indian Ocean. The intensity
and position of this high-pressure area
affects the Indian Monsoon.
(d) The Tibetan plateau gets intensely
heated during summer, which results in
strong vertical air currents and the
formation of low pressure over the plateau
at about 9 km above sea level.
(e) The movement of the westerly jet stream
to the north of the Himalayas and the
presence of the tropical easterly jet
stream over the Indian peninsula during
summer.
Inter Tropical Convergence Zone
The Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ,) is a
broad trough of low pressure in equatorial
latitudes. This is where the northeast and the
southeast trade winds converge. This
convergence zone lies more or less parallel to
the equator but moves north or south with the
apparent movement of the sun.
Apart from this, it has also been noticed that
changes in the pressure conditions over the
southern oceans also affect the monsoons.
Normally when the tropical eastern south Pacific
Ocean experiences high pressure, the tropical
eastern Indian Ocean experiences low pressure.
But in certain years, there is a reversal in the
pressure conditions and the eastern Pacific has
lower pressure in comparison to the eastern
Indian Ocean. This periodic change in pressure
2015-16
CLIMATE
over the Ganga plains. By mid-June the
Arabian Sea branch of the monsoon arrives
over Saurashtra-Kuchchh and the central part
of the country. The Arabian Sea and the Bay
of Bengal branches of the monsoon merge over
the northwestern part of the Ganga plains.
Delhi generally receives the monsoon showers
from the Bay of Bengal branch by the end of
June (tentative date is 29th of June). By the first
week of July, western Uttar Pradesh, Punjab,
Haryana and eastern Rajasthan experience the
monsoon. By mid-July, the monsoon reaches
Himachal Pradesh and the rest of the country
(Figure 4.3).
Withdrawal or the retreat of the monsoon
is a more gradual process (Figure 4.4). The
withdrawal of the monsoon begins in
northwestern states of India by early
September. By mid-October, it withdraws
completely from the northern half of the
peninsula. The withdrawal from the southern
half of the peninsula is fairly rapid. By early
December, the monsoon has withdrawn from
the rest of the country.
The islands receive the very first monsoon
showers, progressively from south to north,
from the last week of April to the first week of
May. The withdrawal, takes place progressively
from north to south from the first week of
December to the first week of January. By this
time the rest of the country is already under
the influence of the winter monsoon.
THE SEASONS
The monsoon type of climate is characterised
by a distinct seasonal pattern. The weather
conditions greatly  change from one season to
the other. These changes are particularly
noticeable in the interior parts of the country.
The coastal areas do not experience much
variation in temperature though there is
variation in rainfall pattern. How many seasons
are experienced in your place? Four main
seasons can be identified in India – the cold
weather season, the hot weather season, the
advancing monsoon and the retreating
monsoon with some regional variations.
The Cold Weather Season (Winter)
The cold weather season begins from mid-
November in northern India and stays till
February. December and January are the coldest
months in the northern part of India. The
temperature decreases from south to the north.
The average temperature of Chennai, on the
eastern coast, is between 24° - 25° Celsius, while
in the northern plains, it ranges between 10° -
15° Celsius. Days are warm and nights are cold.
Frost is common in the north and the higher
slopes of the Himalayas experience snowfall.
During this season, the northeast trade
winds prevail over the country. They blow from
land to sea and hence, for most part of the
country, it is a dry season. Some amount of
rainfall occurs on the Tamil Nadu coast from
these winds as, here they blow from sea to land.
In the northern part of the country, a feeble
high-pressure region develops, with light winds
moving outwards from this area. Influenced by
the relief, these winds blow through the Ganga
valley from the west and the northwest. The
weather is normally marked by clear sky, low
temperatures and low humidity and feeble,
variable winds.
A characteristic feature of the cold weather
season over the northern plains is the inflow of
cyclonic disturbances from the west and the
northwest. These low-pressure systems,
originate over the Mediterranean Sea and
western Asia and move into India, along with
the westerly flow. They cause the much-needed
winter rains over the plains and snowfall in the
mountains. Although the total amount of
winter rainfall locally known as ‘mahawat’ is
small, they are of immense importance for the
cultivation of ‘rabi’ crops.
The peninsular region does not have a well-
defined cold season. There is hardly any
noticeable seasonal change in temperature
pattern during winters due to the moderating
influence of the sea.
The Hot Weather Season (Summer)
Due to the apparent northward movement of the
sun, the global heat belt shifts northward. As
such, from March to May, it is hot weather season
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Figure 4.4 : Advancing Monsoon
2015-16
CLIMATE
in India. The influence of the shifting of the heat
belt can be seen clearly from temperature
recordings taken during March-May at different
latitudes. In March, the highest temperature is
about 38° Celsius, recorded on the Deccan
plateau. In April, temperatures in Gujarat and
Madhya Pradesh are around 42° Celsius. In May,
temperature of 45° Celsius is common in the
northwestern parts of the country. In peninsular
India, temperatures remain lower due to the
moderating influence of the oceans.
The summer months experience rising
temperature and falling air pressure in the
northern part of the country. Towards the end
of May, an elongated low-pressure area
develops in the region extending from the Thar
Desert in the northwest to Patna and
Chotanagpur plateau in the east and
southeast. Circulation of air begins to set in
around this trough.
A striking feature of the hot weather season
is the ‘loo’. These are strong, gusty, hot, dry
winds blowing during the day over the north and
northwestern India. Sometimes they even
continue until late in the evening. Direct exposure
to these winds may even prove to be fatal. Dust
storms are very common during the month of
May in northern India. These storms bring
temporary relief as they lower the temperature
and may bring light rain and cool breeze. This is
also the season for localised thunderstorms,
associated with violent winds, torrential
downpours, often accompanied by hail. In West
Bengal, these storms are known as the ‘Kaal
Baisakhi’.
Towards the close of the summer season,
pre-monsoon showers are common especially,
in Kerala and Karnataka. They help in the early
ripening of mangoes, and are often referred to
as ‘mango showers’.
Advancing Monsoon (The Rainy Season)
By early June, the low-pressure condition over
the northern plains intensifies. It attracts, the
trade winds of the southern hemisphere. These
south-east trade winds originate over the
warm subtropical areas of the southern oceans.
They cross the equator and blow in a south-
westerly direction entering the Indian peninsula
as the south-west monsoon. As these winds
blow over warm oceans, they bring abundant
moisture to the subcontinent. These winds are
strong and blow at an average velocity of 30
km per hour. With the exception of the extreme
north-west, the monsoon winds cover the
country in about a month.
The inflow of the south-west monsoon into
India brings about a total change in the
weather. Early in the season, the windward
side of the Western Ghats receives very heavy
rainfall, more than 250 cm. The Deccan
Plateau and parts of Madhya Pradesh also
receive some amount of rain in spite of lying
in the rain shadow area. The maximum rainfall
of this season is received in the north-eastern
part of the country. Mawsynram in the
southern ranges of the Khasi Hills receives the
highest average rainfall in the world. Rainfall
in the Ganga valley decreases from the east to
the west. Rajasthan and parts of Gujarat get
scanty rainfall.
Another phenomenon associated with the
monsoon is its tendency to have ‘breaks’ in
rainfall. Thus, it has wet and dry spells. In
other words, the monsoon rains take place
only for a few days at a time. They are
interspersed with rainless intervals. These
breaks in monsoon are related to the
movement of the monsoon trough. For
various reasons, the trough and its axis keep
on moving northward or southward, which
determines the spatial distribution of rainfall.
When the axis of the monsoon trough lies over
the plains, rainfall is good in these parts. On
the other hand, whenever the axis shifts closer
to the Himalayas, there are longer dry spells
in the plains, and widespread rain occur in
the mountainous catchment areas of the
Himalayan rivers. These heavy rains bring in
their wake, devastating floods causing
damage to life and property in the plains. The
frequency and intensity of tropical
depressions too, determine the amount and
duration of monsoon rains. These
depressions form at the head of the Bay of
Bengal and cross over to the mainland. The
depressions follow the axis of the “monsoon
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Figure 4.5 : Retreating Monsoon
2015-16
CLIMATE
Mawsynram, the wettest
place on the earth is also reputed for its
stalagmite and stalactite caves.
trough of low pressure”. The monsoon is
known for its uncertainties. The alternation
of dry and wet spells vary in intensity,
frequency and duration. While it causes heavy
floods in one part, it may be responsible for
droughts in the other.  It is often irregular in
its arrival and its retreat. Hence, it sometimes
disturbs the farming schedule of millions of
farmers all over the country.
Retreating/Post Monsoons
(The Transition Season)
During October-November, with the apparent
movement of the sun towards the south, the
monsoon trough or the low-pressure trough
over the northern plains becomes weaker. This
is gradually replaced by a high-pressure
system.  The south-west monsoon winds
weaken and start withdrawing gradually. By
the beginning of October, the monsoon
withdraws from the Northern Plains.
The months of October-November form a
period of transition from hot rainy season to
dry winter conditions. The retreat of the
monsoon is marked by clear skies and rise in
deltas of the Godavari, the Krishna and the
Kaveri are frequently struck by cyclones, which
cause great damage to life and property.
Sometimes, these cyclones  arrive at the coasts
of Orissa, West Bengal and Bangladesh. The
bulk of the rainfall of the Coromandel Coast is
derived from depressions and cyclones.
DISTRIBUTION OF RAINFALL
Parts of western coast and northeastern India
receive over about 400 cm of rainfall annually.
However, it is less than 60 cm in western
Rajasthan and adjoining parts of Gujarat,
Haryana and Punjab. Rainfall is equally low
in the interior of the Deccan plateau, and east
of the Sahyadris. Why do these regions receive
low rainfall? A third area of low precipitation
is around Leh in Jammu and Kashmir. The rest
of the country receives moderate rainfall.
Snowfall is restricted to the Himalayan region.
Owing to the nature of monsoons, the
annual rainfall is highly variable from year to
year. Variability is high in the regions of low
rainfall such as parts of Rajasthan, Gujarat and
the leeward side of the Western Ghats. As such,
while areas of high rainfall are liable to be
affected by floods, areas of low rainfall are
drought-prone (Figure 4.6 and 4.7).
MONSOON AS A UNIFYING BOND
You have already known the way the
Himalayas protect the subcontinent from
extremely cold winds from central Asia. This
enables northern India to have uniformly
higher temperatures when compared to other
areas on the same latitudes. Similarly, the
peninsular plateau, under the influence of the
sea from three sides, has moderate
temperatures. Despite such moderating
influences, there are great variations in the
temperature conditions. Nevertheless, the
unifying influence of the monsoon on the
Indian subcontinent is quite perceptible. The
seasonal alteration of the wind systems and
the associated weather conditions provide a
rhythmic cycle of seasons. Even the
uncertainties of rain and uneven distribution
temperature. While day temperatures are
high, nights are cool and pleasant. The land
is still moist. Owing to the conditions of high
temperature and humidity, the weather
becomes rather oppressive during the day.
This is commonly known as ‘October heat’. In
the second half of October, the mercury begins
to fall rapidly in northern India.
The low-pressure conditions, over north-
western India, get transferred to the Bay of
Bengal by early November. This shift is
associated with the occurrence of cyclonic
depressions, which originate over the
Andaman Sea. These cyclones generally cross
the eastern coasts of India cause heavy and
widespread rain. These tropical cyclones are
often very destructive. The thickly populated
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Figure 4.6 : Seasonal Rainfall (June-September)
2015-16
CLIMATE
Figure 4.7 : Annual Rainfall
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Activity
(i) On the basis of the news items above, find out the names of places and the seasons described.
(ii) Compare the rainfall description of Chennai and Mumbai and explain the reasons for the difference
(iii) Evaluate flood as a disaster with the help of a case study.
2015-16
CLIMATE
are very much typical of the monsoons. The
Indian landscape, its animal and plant life,
its entire agricultural calendar and the life of
the people, including their festivities, revolve
around this phenomenon. Year after year,
people of India from north to south and from
Choose the correct answer from the four alternatives given below.
Which one of the following places receives the highest rainfall in the world?
Silchar
(c) Cherrapunji
Mawsynram
(d) Guwahati
The wind blowing in the northern plains in summers is known as:
Kaal Baisakhi
(c) Trade Winds
(d) None of the above
(iii)
Which one of the following causes rainfall during winters in north-western
part of India.
Cyclonic depression
(c) Western disturbances
Retreating monsoon
(d) Southwest monsoon
Monsoon arrives in India approximately in:
Early May
(c) Early June
Early July
(d) Early August
Which one of the following characterises the cold weather season in India?
Warm days and warm nights
Warm days and cold nights
Cool days and cold nights
Cold days and warm nights
Answer the following questions briefly.
What are the controls affecting the climate of India?
Why does India have a monsoon type of climate?
(iii)
Which part of India does experience the highest diurnal range of temperature
and why?
Which winds account for rainfall along the Malabar coast?
What are Jet streams and how do they affect the climate of India?
Define monsoons. What do you understand by “break” in monsoon?
(vii)
Why is the monsoon considered a unifying bond?
Why does the rainfall decrease from the east to the west in Northern India.
Give reasons as to why.
Seasonal reversal of wind direction takes place over the Indian
subcontinent?
The bulk of rainfall in India is concentrated over a few months.
(iii)
The Tamil Nadu coast receives winter rainfall.
The delta region of the eastern coast is frequently struck by cyclones.
Parts of Rajasthan, Gujarat and the leeward side of the Western Ghats are
drought-prone.
east to west, eagerly await the arrival of the
monsoon. These monsoon winds bind the
whole country by providing water to set the
agricultural activities in motion. The river
valleys which carry this water also unite as a
single river valley unit.
EXERCISE
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Describe the regional variations in the climatic conditions of India with the help
of suitable examples.
Discuss the mechanism of monsoons.
Give an account of weather conditions and characteristics of the cold season.
Give the characteristics and effects of the monsoon rainfall in India.
MAP SKILLS
On an outline map of India, show the following.
Areas receiving rainfall over 400 cm.
Areas receiving less than 20 cm of rainfall.
(iii)
The direction of the south-west monsoon over India.
PROJECT/ACTIVITY
Find out which songs, dances, festivals and special food preparations are
associated with certain seasons in your region. Do they have some
commonality with other regions of India?
Collect photographs of typical rural houses, and clothing of people from
different regions of India. Examine whether they reflect any relationship
with the climatic condition and
relief of the area.
FOR DOING IT YOURSELF
1. In Table-I the average mean monthly
temperatures and amounts of rainfall of ten
representative stations have been given.  It is
for you to study on your own and convert them
into ‘temperature and rainfall’ graphs.  A
glance at these visual representations will help
you to grasp instantly the smilarities and
differences between them. One such graph
(Figure 1) is already prepared for you.  See if
you can arrive at some broad generalisations
about our diverse climatic conditions. We hope
you are in for a great joy of learning. Do the
following activities.
Figure 1 : Temperature and Rainfall of Delhi
2. Re-arrange the ten stations in two different sequences:
(i) According to their distance from the equator.
(ii) According to their altitude above mean sea-level.
(i) Name two rainiest stations.
(ii) Name two driest stations.
(iii) Two stations with most euqable climate.
(iv) Two stations with most extreme climate.
(v) Two stations most influenced by the Arabian branch of southwest monsoons.
(vi) Two stations most influenced by the Bay of Bengal branch of south-west monsoons.
(vii) Two stations influenced by both branches of the south-west monsoons
(viii) Two stations influenced by retreating and north-east monsoons.
(ix) Two stations receiving winter showers from the western disturbances.
(x) The two hottest stations in the months of
(a) February
(b) April
(c) May
(d) June
2015-16
CLIMATE
4. Now find out
(i) Why are Thiruvananthapuram and Shillong rainier in June than in July?
(ii) Why is July rainier in Mumbai than in Thiruvananthapuram?
(iii) Why are southwest monsoons less rainy in Chennai?
(iv) Why is Shillong rainier than Kolkata?
(v) Why is Kolkata rainier in July than in June unlike Shillong which is rainier in June than
in July?
(vi) Why does Delhi receive more rain than Jodhpur?
5. Now think why
— Thiruvananthapuram has equable climate?
— Chennai has more rains only after the fury of monsoon is over in most parts of the country?
— Jodhpur has a hot desert type of climate?
— Leh has moderate  precipitation almost throughut the year?
— while in Delhi and Jodhpur most of the rain is confined to nearly three  months, in
Thiruvananthapuram and Shillong it is almost nine months of the year?
In spite of these facts see carefully if there are strong evidences to conclude that the monsoons
still provide a very strong framework lending overall climatic unity to the whole country.
Stations
LatitudeAltitude
Nov. Dec. Annual
(Metres)
Rainfall
Temperature (°C)
18.9 20.2
Bengaluru
12°58'N
Rainfall (cm)
Temperature (°C)
27.2 25.0
Mumbai
19° N
Rainfall (cm)
183.4
Temperature (°C)
23.4 19.7
Kolkata
22°34' N
Rainfall (cm)
162.5
Temperature (°C)
19.4 15.6
Delhi
29° N
Rainfall (cm)
Temperature (°C)
20.1 14.9
Jodhpur
26°18' N
Rainfall (cm)
Temperature (°C)
25.9 24.7
Chennai
13°4' N
Rainfall (cm)
35.0 13.9
128.6
Temperature (°C)
23.1 20.7
Nagpur
21°9' N
Rainfall (cm)
124.2
Temperature (°C)
13.3 10.4
Shillong
24°34' N
Rainfall (cm)
225.3
Temperature (°C)
26.2 2.6.2
26.6 26.5
Thiruvananthapuram 8°29' N
Rainfall (cm)
181.2
Temperature (°C)
– 8.5
– 7.2
– 0.6
– 5.6
Leh34° N
Rainfall (cm)
Table I
2015-16
ave you observed the type of trees,
bushes, grasses and birds in the fields
and parks in and around your school?
Are they similar or there are variations? India
being a vast country you can imagine the
types of bio-forms available throughout the
country.
Our country India is one of the twelve
mega bio-diversity countries of the  world.
With about 47,000 plant species India
occupies tenth place in the world and fourth
in Asia in plant diversity. There are about
15,000 flowering plants in India which
account for 6 per cent in the world’s total
number of flowering plants. The country has
many non-flowering plants such as ferns,
algae and fungi. India also has approximately
90,000 species of animals as well as a rich
variety of fish in its fresh and marine waters.
Natural vegetation refers to a plant
community which has grown naturally without
human aid and has been left undisturbed by
humans for a long time. This is termed as a
virgin vegetation. Thus, cultivated crops and
fruits, orchards form part of vegetation but not
natural vegetation.
The virgin vegetation, which
are purely Indian are known as endemic or
indigenous species but those which have come
from outside India are termed as exotic plants.
The term flora is used to denote plants of
a particular region or period. Similarly, the
species of animals are referred to as fauna. This
huge diversity in flora and fauna kingdom is
due to the following factors.
NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILD LIFE
RELIEF
Land affects the natural vegetation directly
and indirectly. Do you expect the same type
of vegetation in mountainous, plateau and
plain areas or in dry and wet regions? The
nature of land influences the type of
vegetation. The fertile level is generally devoted
to agriculture. The undulating and rough
terrains are areas where grassland and
woodlands develop and give shelter to a
variety of wild life.
The soils also vary over space. Different types
of soils provide basis for different types of
vegetation. The sandy soils of the desert
support cactus and thorny bushes while wet,
marshy, deltaic soils support mangroves and
deltaic vegetation. The hill slopes with some
depth of soil have conical trees.
CLIMATE
Temperature
The character and extent of vegetation are
mainly determined by temperature along with
humidity in the air, precipitation and soil. On
the slopes of the Himalayas and the hills of the
Peninsula above the height of 915 metres, the
fall in the temperature affects the types of
vegetation and its growth, and changes it from
tropical to subtropical temperate and alpine
vegetation.
2015-16
NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILD LIFE
Photoperiod (Sunlight )
The variation in duration of sunlight at different
places is due to differences in latitude, altitude,
season and duration of the day. Due to longer
duration of sunlight, trees grow faster in
summer.
Why are the southern slopes in Himalayan
region covered with thick vegetation cover as compared
to northern slopes of  the same hills?
Precipitation
In India almost the entire rainfall is brought in
by the advancing southwest monsoon (June to
September) and retreating northeast monsoons.
Areas of heavy rainfall have more dense vegetation
as compared to other areas of less rainfall.
Why have the western stopes of the
Western Ghats covered with thick forests and not
the eastern slopes?
Have you ever thought as to why forests
are important for human beings? Forests are
renewable resources and play a major role in
enhancing the quality of environment. They
modify local climate, control soil erosion,
regulate stream flow, support a variety of
industries, provide livelihood for many
communities and offer panoramic or scenic
view for recreation. It controls wind force and
temperature and causes rainfall. It provides
humus to the soil and shelter to the wild life.
India’s natural vegetation has undergone
many changes due to several factors such as
the growing demand for cultivated land,
development of industries and mining,
urbanisation and over-grazing of pastures.
Activity
Celebrate Van Mahotsav in your school/locality
and plant few spalings and notice their growth
The vegetation cover of India in large parts
is no more natural in the real sense. Except in
some inaccessible regions like the Himalayas,
the hilly region of central India and the
marusthali, the vegetation of most of the areas
has been modified at some places, or replaced
or degraded by human occupancy.
Activity
Study the bar graph (Figure 5.1) and
answer the following questions.
Name the state having maximum area under
forest cover.
(ii) Name the union territory having minimum
area under forest cover and why?
According to India State of
Forest Report 2011, the forest cover in India is
21.05 per cent.
ECOSYSTEM
Plants occur in distinct groups of communities
in areas having similar climatic conditions. The
nature of the plants in an area, to a large extent,
determines the animal life in that area. When
the vegetation is altered, the animal life also
changes. All the plants and animals in an area
are interdependent and interrelated to each
other in their physical environment, thus,
Source : Environment Atlas of India, June 2001, Central Pollution Control Board Delhi
Table  5.1 : Temperature Characteristics of the Vegetation Zones
Vegetation Zones
Mean annual
Mean Temp.
Remarks
Average Temp.
in January
(in degree C)
(in degrees C)
Tropical
Above 24°C
Above 18°
No Frost
Sub-tropical
17°C to 24°C
10°C to 18°C
Frost is rare
Temperate
7°C to 17° C
-1°C to (-10 ) °C
Frost some snow
Alpine
Below 7°C
Below–1°C
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
forming an ecosystem. Human beings are
also an integral part of the ecosystem. How
do the human beings influence the ecology
of a region? They utilise the vegetation and
wild life. The greed of human beings leads to
over utilisation of these resources. They cut
the trees and kill the animals creating
ecological imbalance. As a result some of the
plants and animals have reached the verge
of extinction.
Do you know that a very large ecosystem
on land having distinct types of vegetation and
animal life is called a biome. The biomes are
identified on the basis of plants.
TYPES OF VEGETATION
The following major types of vegetation may
be identified in our country (Figure 5.3).
Tropical Evergreen Forests
Tropical Deciduous Forests
(iii) Tropical Thorn Forests and Scrubs
(iv) Montane Forests
Mangrove Forests
Tropical Evergreen Forests
These forests are restricted to heavy rainfall
Figure 5.1 Area under Forest Cover
areas of the Western Ghats and the island
groups of Lakshadweep, Andaman and Nicobar,
upper parts of Assam and Tamil Nadu coast.
Source : India State of Forest Report 2013–14
AREA IN PERCENT
STATE/UT
Figure 5.2 : Tropical Evergreen Forest
2015-16
NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILD LIFE
Study the given map for the forest cover and try to find the reasons as to why certain states have more area under
forest as compared to others?
Figure 5.3 : Natural Vegetation
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Figure 5.4 : Tropical Deciduous Forest
In these forests, the common animals found
are lion, tiger, pig, deer and elephant. A huge
variety of birds, lizards, snakes, and tortoises
are also found here.
The Thorn Forests and Scrubs
In regions with less than 70 cm of rainfall,
the natural vegetation consists of thorny trees
and bushes. This type of vegetation is found
in the north-western part of the country
including semi-arid areas of Gujarat,
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Uttar Pradesh and Haryana. Acacias, palms,
euphorbias and cacti are the main plant
species. Trees are scattered and have long roots
penetrating deep into the soil in order to get
moisture. The stems are succulent to conserve
water. Leaves are mostly thick and small to
minimize evaporation. These forests give way
to thorn forests and scrubs in arid areas.
Figure 5.5 : Thorn Forests and Scrubs
They are at their best in areas having more than
200 cm of rainfall with a short dry season. The
trees reach great heights up to 60 metres or even
above. Since the region is warm and wet
throughout the year, it has a luxuriant
vegetation of all kinds – trees, shrubs, and
creepers giving it a multilayered structure. There
is no definite time for trees to shed their leaves.
As such, these forests appear green all the year
round.
Some of the commercially important trees
of this forest are ebony, mahogany, rosewood,
rubber and cinchona.
The common animals found in these forests
are elephants, monkey, lemur and deer. The
one horned rhinoceros are found in the jungles
of Assam and West Bengal. Besides these
animals plenty of birds, bats, sloth, scorpions
and snails are also found in these jungles.
Tropical Deciduous Forests
These are the most widespread forests of India.
They are also called the monsoon forests and
spread over the region receiving rainfall
between 200 cm and 70 cm. Trees of this
forest-type shed their leaves for about six to
eight weeks in dry summer.
On the basis of the availability of water,
these forests are further divided into moist and
dry deciduous. The former is found in areas
receiving rainfall between 200 and 100 cm.
These forests exist, therefore, mostly in the
eastern part of the country – northeastern
states, along the foothills of the Himalayas,
Jharkhand, West Orissa and Chhattisgarh, and
on the eastern slopes of the Western Ghats.
Teak is the most dominant species of this forest.
Bamboos, sal, shisham, sandalwood, khair,
kusum, arjun, mulberry are other commercially
important species.
The dry deciduous forests are found in areas
having rainfall between 100 cm and 70 cm.
These forests are found in the rainier parts of
the peninsular plateau and the plains of Bihar
and Uttar Pradesh. There are open stretches
in which Teak, Sal, Peepal, Neem grow. A large
part of this region has been cleared for
cultivation and some parts are used for grazing.
2015-16
NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILD LIFE
Figure 5.7 : Mangrove Forests
In these forests, the common animals are
rats, mice, rabbits, fox, wolf, tiger, lion, wild
ass, horses and camels.
Montane Forests
In mountainous areas, the decrease in
temperature with increasing altitude leads to
the corresponding change in natural
vegetation. As such, there is a succession of
natural vegetation belts in the same order as
we see from the tropical to the tundra region.
The  wet temperate type of forests are found
between a height of 1000 and 2000 metres.
Evergreen broad-leaf trees such as oaks and
chestnuts predominate. Between 1500 and
3000 metres, temperate forests containing
coniferous trees like pine, deodar, silver fir,
spruce and cedar, are found. These forests
cover mostly the southern slopes of the
Himalayas, places having high altitude in
southern and north-east India. At higher
elevations, temperate grasslands are common.
At high altitudes, generally more than 3,600
metres above sea-level, temperate forests and
grasslands give way to the Alpine vegetation.
Silver fir, junipers, pines and birches are the
common trees of these forests. However, they
get progressively stunted as they approach
the snow-line. Ultimately through shrubs and
scrubs, they merge into the Alpine
grasslands. These are used extensively for
grazing by nomadic tribes like the Gujjars
and the Bakarwals. At higher altitudes,
mosses and lichens form part of tundra
vegetation.
The common animals found in these forests
are Kashmir stag, spotted dear, wild sheep, jack
rabbit, Tibetan antelope, yak, snow leopard,
squirrels, Shaggy horn wild ibex, bear and rare
red panda, sheep and goats with thick hair.
Mangrove Forests
The mangrove tidal forests are found in the
areas of coasts influenced by tides. Mud and
silt get accumutated on such coasts. Dense
mangroves are the common varieties with roots
of the plants submerged under water. The
deltas of the Ganga, the Mahanadi, the
Krishana, the Godavari and the Kaveri are
covered by such vegetation. In the Ganga-
Brahamaputra delta, sundari trees are
found, which provide durable hard timber.
Palm, coconut, keora, agar,  also grow in
some parts of the delta.
Royal Bengal Tiger is the famous animal
in these forests. Turtles, crocodiles, gharials
and snakes are also found in these forests.
Let us discuss :  What will happen if plants and
animals disappear from the earth’s surface? can
the human beings survive under such a situation?
Why is bio-diversity necessary and why should it
be conserved?
Figure 5.6 : Montane Forests
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
MEDICINAL PLANTS
India is known for its herbs and spices from ancient times. Some 2,000 plants have been described in Ayurveda
and atleast 500 are in regular use. The World Conservation Union’s Red list has named 352 medicinal plants of
which 52 are critically threatened and 49 endangered. The commonly used plants in India are:
Sarpagandha
: Used to treat blood pressure; it is found only in India.
Jamun
: The juice from ripe fruit is used to prepare vinegar which is carminative and diuretic, and
has digestive properties. The powder of the seed is used for controlling diabetes.
Arjun
: The fresh juice of leaves is a cure for earache. It is also used to regulate blood pressure.
Babool
: Leaves are used as a cure for eye sores. Its gum is used as a tonic.
: Has high antibiotic and antibacterial properties.
Tulsi Plant
: Is used to cure cough and cold.
Kachnar
: Is used to cure asthma and ulcers. The buds and roots are good for digestive problems.
Identify more medicinal plants in your area. Which plants are used as medicines by local
people to cure some diseases?
WILD LIFE
Like its flora, India is also rich in its fauna.  It
has approximately 90,000 animal species.
The country has about 2,000 species of birds.
They constitute 13% of the world’s total.  There
are 2,546 species of fish, which account for
nearly 12% of the world’s stock.  It also shares
between 5 and 8 per cent of the world’s
amphibians, reptiles and mammals.
The elephants are the most majestic
animals among the mammals.  They are found
in the hot wet forests of Assam, Karnataka and
Kerala.  One-horned rhinoceroses are the other
animals,  which live in swampy and marshy
lands of Assam and West Bengal.  Arid areas
of the Rann of Kachchh and the Thar Desert
are the habitat for wild ass and camels
respectively.  Indian bison, nilgai (blue bull),
chousingha (four horned antelope), gazel and
different species of deer are some
other animals found in India.  It also
has several species of monkeys.
Wildlife Protection Act
was implemented in 1972 in India.
India is the only country in the
world that has both tigers and lions.
The natural habitat of the Indian lion
is the Gir forest in Gujarat.  Tigers are
found in the forests of Madhya Pradesh,
the Sundarbans of West Bengal and the
Himalayan region.  Leopards too are
members of the cat family. They are
important among animals of prey.
The Himalayas harbour a hardy range of
animals, which survive in extreme cold.
Ladakh’s freezing high altitudes are a home to
yak, the shaggy horned wild ox weighing
around one tonne, the Tibetan antelope, the
bharal (blue sheep), wild sheep, and the kiang
(Tibetan wild ass).  Furhtermore, the ibex, bear,
snow-leopard and very rare red panda are
found in certain pockets.
In the rivers, lakes and coastal areas,
turtles, crocodiles and gharials are found.  The
Source : Medicinal Plants by Dr. S.K. Jain, 5th edition 1994, National Book Trust of India
Activity
Can you identify the type of forest shown in this picture?
Identify some trees in it.  What type of similarity/
dissimilarity you notice in this type of vegetation from
the one found in your region?
Do you know
The Gir Forest is the
last remaining habitat
of the Asiatic lion.
2015-16
NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILD LIFE
Figure 5.8 : Wildlife Reserves
Dampara
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
latter is the only representative of a variety of
crocodile, found in the world today.
Bird life in India is colourful.  Peacocks,
pheasants, ducks, parakeets, cranes and
pigeons are some of the birds inhabiting the
forests and wetlands of the country.
We have selected our crops from a bio-
diverse environment i.e. from the reserve of
edible plants. We also experimented and
selected many medicinal plants. The animals
were selected from large stock provided by
nature as milch animal. They also provided
us draught power, transportation, meat,
eggs. The fish provide nutritive food. Many
insects help in pollination of crops and fruit
trees and exert biological control on such
insects, which are harmful. Every species has
a role to play in the ecosystem. Hence,
conservation is essential. As has been
mentioned earlier due to excessive
exploitation of the plants and animal
resources by human beings, the ecosystem
has been disturbed. About 1,300 plant
species are endangered and 20 species are
extinct. Quite a few animal species are also
endangered and some have become extinct.
The main causes for this major threat to
nature are hunting by greedy hunters for
commercial purposes. Pollution due to
chemical and industrial waste, acid deposits,
introduction of alien species and reckless
cutting of the forests to bring land under
cultivation and inhabitation, are also
responsible for the imbalance.
To protect the flora and fauna of the
country, the government has taken many steps.
Fourteen biosphere reserves have been set
up in the country to protect flora and fauna.
Four out of these, the Sunderbans in the
West Bengal, Nanda Devi in Uttarakhand,
the Gulf of Mannar in Tamil Nadu and the
Nilgiris (Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil
Nadu) have been included in the world
network of Biosphese reserves.
Activity
Find out from the above newspaper cuttings, the main concern highlighted in the given news items.
Collect more information about various endangered species from newspapers and  magazines.
(iii)
Find out various steps taken by the Indian government to protect them.
Discribe how you can contribute to the protection of endangered animals and birds?
2015-16
NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILD LIFE
Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below:
To which one of the following types of vegetation does rubber belong to?
Tundra
(c) Himalayan
Tidal
(d) Tropical Evergreen
Cinchona trees are found in the areas of rainfall more than
100 cm
(c) 70 cm
50 cm
(d) less than 50 cm
(iii)
In which of the following state is the Simlipal bio-reserve located?
Punjab
(b) Delhi
Odisha
(d) West Bengal
Which one of the following bio-reserves of India is not included in the world
network of bioreserve?
Manas
(c) Gulf of Mannar
Nilgiri
(d) Nanda devi
Fourteen Bio-reserves
• Sunderbans
• Simlipal
• Gulf of Mannar
• Dihang-Dibang
• The Nilgiris
• Dibru Saikhowa
• Nanda Devi
• Agasthyamalai
• Nokrek
• Kanchenjunga
• Great Nicobar
• Pachmari
• Manas
• Achanakmar-Amarkantak
(ii) Financial and technical assistance is
provided to many Botanical Gardens by the
government since 1992.
Migratory Birds
Some of the wetlands of India are popular
with migratory birds. During winter,
birds, such as Siberian Crane come
in large numbers. One such place
favourable with birds is the Rann of
Kachchh.  At a place where the desert
merges with the sea, flamingo with their
brilliant, pink plumage, come in
thousands to build nest mounds from the
salty mud and raise their young ones.  It
is one among many extraordinary sights
in the country.  Is it not a rich natural
heritage of ours?
(iii) Project Tiger, Project Rhino, Project Great
Indian Bustard and many other eco-
developmental projects have been
introduced.
(iv) 89 National Parks, 490 Wildlife sanctuaries
and Zoological gardens are set up to take
care of Natural heritage.
All of us must realise the importance of
the natural ecosystem for our own survival.
It is possible if indiscriminate destruction of
natural environment is put to an immediate
EXERCISE
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Answer the following questions briefly.
Define an ecosystem.
What factors are responsible for the distribution of plants and animals in
India?
(iii)
What is a bio-reserve? Give two examples.
Name two animals having habitat in tropical and montane type of vegetation.
Distinguish between
Flora and Fauna
Tropical Evergreen and Deciduous forests
Name different types of Vegetation found in India and describe the vegetation of
high altitudes.
Quite a few species of plants and animals are endangered in India. Why?
Why has India a rich heritage of flora and fauna?
Map Skills
On an outline map of India, label the following.
Areas of Evergreen Forests
Areas of Dry Deciduous Forests
(iii)
Two national parks each in Northern, Southern, Eastern and Western parts
of the Country
Project/Activity
Find some trees in your neighbourhood having medicinal values.
Find ten occupations getting raw material from forests and wild life.
(iii)
Write a poem or paragraph showing the importance of wild life.
Write the script of a street play giving the importance of tree plantation and
try to enact it in your locality.
Plant a tree either on your birthday or one of your family member’s birthday.
Note the growth of the tree and notice in which season it grows faster.
2015-16
POPULATION*
an you imagine a world without human
beings? Who would have utilised
resources and created the social and
cultural environment? The people are
important to develop the economy and society.
The people make and use resources and are
themselves resources with varying quality.
Coal is but a piece of rock, until people were
able to invent technology to obtain it and make
it a ‘resource’. Natural events like a river flood
or Tsunami becomes a ‘disaster’ only when
they affect a crowded village or a town.
Hence, population is the pivotal element in
social studies. It is the point of reference from
which all other elements are observed and from
which they derive significance and meaning.
‘Resources’, ‘calamities’ and ‘disasters’ are all
meaningful only in relation to human beings.
Their numbers, distribution, growth and
characteristics or qualities provide the basic
background for understanding and
appreciating all aspects of the environment.
Human beings are producers and
consumers of earth’s resources. Therefore, it
is important to know how many people are
there in a country, where do they live, how and
why their numbers are increasing and what
are their characteristics.  The census of India
provides us with information regarding the
population of our country.
We are primarily concerned with three
major questions about the population:
Population size and distribution: How
many people are there and where are they
located?
Population growth and processes of
population change: How has the
population grown and changed through
time?
(iii)
Characteristics or qualities of the
population: What are their age, sex-
composition, literacy levels, occupational
structure and health conditions?
POPULATION SIZE AND DISTRIBUTION
India’s Population Size and Distribution by
Numbers
India’s population as on March 2001 stood at
1,028 million, which account for 16.7 per cent
of the world’s population. These 1.02 billion
people are unevenly distributed over our
country’s vast area of 3.28 million square km,
which accounts for 2.4 per cent of the world’s
area (Figure 6.1).
The 2001 Census data reveals that Uttar
Pradesh with a population size of 166 million
people is the most populous state of India. Uttar
Pradesh accounts for about 16 per cent of the
Census
A census is an official enumeration of population done periodically. In India the first census was held in the year
1872. The first complete census, however was taken in the year 1881. Since then censuses have been held
regularly every tenth year.
The Indian Census is the most comprehensive source of demographic, social and economic data. Have you
ever seen a census report? Check in your library if it has one.
* Kindly see appendix for Census 2011 provisional data
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Do You Know
Only Bangladesh and Japan have
higher average population densities
than India. Find out the population densities of
Bangladesh and Japan.
is calculated as the number of persons per unit
area. India is one of the most densely populated
countries of the world.
The population density of India in the year
2001 was 324 persons per sq km. Densities
vary from 904 persons per sq km in West
Bengal to only 13 persons per sq km in
Arunachal Pradesh. A study of the figure 6.3
shows the pattern of uneven distribution of
population densities at the state level.
Activity
Study the figure 6.3 and compare it with
figure 2.4 and figure 4.7. Do you find any
corelation between these maps?
Note the states with population densities
below 250 persons per square km. Rugged
terrain and unfavourable climatic conditions
are primarily responsible for sparse population
in these areas.  Which states have density below
100 persons per square km?
Assam and most of the Peninsular states
have moderate population densities. Hilly,
dissected and rocky nature of the terrain,
moderate to low rainfall, shallow and less
fertile soils have influenced population
densities in these areas.
The Northern Plains and Kerala in the
south have high to very high population
densities because of the flat plains with fertile
soils and abundant rainfall. Identify the three
states of the Northern Plains with high
population densities.
POPULATION GROWTH AND PROCESSES OF
POPULATION CHANGE
Population is a dynamic phenomenon. The
numbers, distribution and composition of the
population are constantly changing. This is the
influence of the interaction of the three processes,
namely-births, deaths and migrations.
India, 16.7%
Rest of the world, 83.3%
Rest of the world, 97.6%
India, 2.4%
POPULATION
Fig 6.1 : India’s share of world’s area and population
Others 51.2%
Uttar
Pradesh 16.16%
Maharashtra
9.42%
Bihar
8.02%
W. Bengal
7.79%
Andhra
Pradesh 7.41%
country’s population.  On the other hand, the
Himalayan state Sikkim has a population of
just about 0.5 million and Lakshadweep has
only 60 thousand people.
Almost half of India’s population lives in
just five states. These are Uttar Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Bihar, West Bengal, and Andhra
Pradesh. Rajasthan, the biggest state in terms
of area, has only 5.5 per cent of the total
population of India (Figure 6.2)
•  What could be the reason of uneven
distribution of population in India?
India’s Population Distribution by Density
Population density provides a better picture
of the uneven distribution. Population density
Figure 6.2 : Distribution of Population
2015-16
POPULATION
Figure 6.3 : Density of Population in India
HARYANA
* Note:
Telangana became the 29th State of India on the 2nd June 2014 after the reorganisation of the state of
Andhra Pradesh
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Population in Millions
Total Pupulation
Annual Growth
Annual Growth Rate %
Table 6.1 and figure 6.4 reveal that from
1951 to 1981, the annual rate of population
growth was steadily increasing; which
explains the rapid increase in population
from 361 million in 1951 to 683 million in
1981.
•  Table 6.1 reveals that despite the
decline in growth rates, the number of people being
added every decade is steadily increasing. Why?
Since 1981, however, the rate of growth
started declining gradually. During this
period, birth rates declined rapidly. Still 182
million people were added to the total
population in the 1990s alone (an annual
addition larger than ever before).
It is essential to realise that India has a very
large population. When a low annual rate is
applied to a very large population, it yields a
large absolute increase. When more than a
billion people increase even at a lower rate, the
total numbers being added becomes very large.
India’s current annual increase in population
of 15.5 million is large enough to neutralise
efforts to conserve the resource endowment
and environment.
The declining trend of the growth rate is
indeed a positive indicator of the efforts of birth
control. Despite that, the total additions to the
population base continue to grow, and India
may overtake China in 2045 to become the
most populous country in the world.
Population Growth
Growth of population refers to the change in
the number of inhabitants of a country/territory
during a specific period of time, say during the
last ten years.  Such a change can be expressed
in two ways: in terms of absolute numbers and
in terms of percentage change per year.
The absolute numbers added each year or
decade is the magnitude of increase.  It is
obtained by simply subtracting the earlier
population (e.g. that of 1991) from the later
population (e.g. that of 2001).  It is referred to
as the absolute increase.
The rate or the pace of population increase
is the other important aspect.  It is studied in
per cent per annum, e.g. a rate of increase of 2
per cent per annum means that in a given year,
there was an increase of two persons for every
100 persons in the base population.  This is
referred to as the annual growth rate.
India’s population has been steadily
increasing from 361 million in 1951 to 1028
million in 2001.
Table 6.1 : The Magnitude and Rate of India’s
Population Growth
Total
Absolute
Annual
Population
Increase in
Growth
(in millions)
the decade
(in million)
( % )
361.0
42.43
439.2
78.15
548.2
108.92
683.3
135.17
846.4
163.09
1028.7
182.32
Figure 6.4 : India’s Population and Population Growth Rates during 1951-2001
2015-16
POPULATION
Processes of Population Change/Growth
There are three main processes of change of
population : birth rates, death rates and
migration.
The natural increase of population is the
difference between birth rates and death rates.
Birth rate is the number of live births per
thousand persons in a year. It is a major
component of growth because in India, birth
rates have always been higher than death
rates.
Death rate is the number of deaths per
thousand persons in a year. The main cause
of the rate of growth of the Indian population
has been the rapid decline in death rates.
Till 1980, high birth rates and declining
death rates led to a large difference between
birth rates and death rates resulting in higher
rates of population growth. Since 1981, birth
rates have also started declining gradually,
resulting in a gradual decline in the rate of
population growth. What are the reasons for
this trend?
The third component of population growth
is migration. Migration is the movement of
people across regions and territories. Migration
can be internal (within the country) or
international (between the countries).
Internal migration does not change the size
of the population, but influences the distribution
of population within the nation. Migration plays
a very significant role in changing the composition
and distribution of population.
Activity
On a map, trace the migration of each
of your grandparents and parents
since their birth. Try and analyse the
reasons for each move.
In India, most migrations have been from
rural to urban areas because of the “push”
factor in rural areas. These are adverse
conditions of poverty and unemployment in the
rural areas and the “pull” of the city in terms
of increased employment opportunities and
better living conditions.
Migration is an important determinant of
population change. It changes not only the
population size but also the population
composition of urban and rural populations
in terms of age and sex composition. In India,
the rural-urban migration has resulted in a
steady increase in the percentage of population
in cities and towns. The urban population has
increased from 17.29 per cent of the total
population in 1951 to 27.78 per cent in 2001.
There has been a significant increase in the
number of ‘million plus cities’ from 23 to 35 in
just one decade i.e. 1991 to 2001.
Age Composition
The age composition of a population refers to
the number of people in different age groups
in a country. It is one of the most basic
characteristics of a population. To an important
degree, a person’s age influences what he
needs, buys, does and his capacity to perform.
Consequently, the number and percentage of
a population found within the children,
working age and aged groups are notable
determinants of the population’s social and
economic structure.
The population of a nation is generally
grouped into three broad categories:
Children (generally below 15 years)
They are economically unproductive and need
to be provided with food, clothing, education
and medical care.
Figure 6.5: India: Age Composition
Adults, 58.7%
Aged, 6.9%
Children, 34.4%
India : Age Structure
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Working Age (15-59 years)
They are economically productive and
biologically reproductive. They comprise the
working population.
Aged (Above 59 years)
They can be economically productive though
they may have retired. They may be working
voluntarily but they are not available for
employment through recruitment.
The percentage of children and the aged
affect the dependency ratio because these
groups are not producers. The proportion of
the three groups in India’s population is
already presented in figure 6.5 .
Activity :
How many children do you know who are
engaged as household helpers, labourers in
your locality?
How many adults do you know in your locality
who are unemployed?
(iii)
What do you feel are the reasons for this?
Sex Ratio
Sex ratio is defined as the number of females
per 1000 males in the population. This
information is an important social indicator
to measure the extent of equality between
males and females in a society at a given time.
The sex ratio in the country has always
remained unfavourable to females.  Find out
why this is so? Table 6.2 shows the sex ratio
from 1951-2001.
Table 6.2 : India : Sex Ratio 1951-2001
Census year
Sex ratio
(Females per 1000 males)
•  Kerala has a sex ratio of 1058
females per 1000 males, Pondicherry has 1001
females for every 1000 males, while Delhi has
only 821 females per 1000 males and Haryana
has just 861.
•   What could be the reasons for such
variations?
Literacy Rates
Literacy is a very important quality of a
population. Obviously, only an informed and
educated citizen can make intelligent choices
and undertake research and development
projects. Low levels of literacy are a serious
obstacle for economic improvement.
According to the Census of 2001, a person
aged 7 years. and above who can read and
write with understanding in any language, is
treated as literate.
There has been a steady improvement in
the literacy levels in India.  The literacy rate in
the country as per the Census of 2001 is 64.84
per cent; 75.26 per cent for males and 53.67
per cent for females. Why do such differences
exist?
Occupational Structure
The percentage of population that is
economically active is an important index of
development. The distribution of the
population according to different types of
occupation is referred to as the occupational
structure. An enormous variety of occupations
are found in any country. Occupations are
generally classified as primary, secondary, and
tertiary.
Primary activities include agriculture,
animal husbandry, forestry, fishing, mining
and quarrying etc. Secondary activities include
manufacturing industry, building and
construction work etc. Tertiary activities
include
transport,
communications,
commerce, administration and other services.
The proportion of people working in
different activities varies in developed and
developing countries. Developed nations have
a high proportion of people in secondary, and
tertiary activities.  Developing countries tend
to have a higher proportion of their workforce
engaged in primary activities. In India, about
64 per cent of the population is engaged only
in agriculture. The proportion of population
dependent on secondary and tertiary sectors
2015-16
POPULATION
is about 13 and  20 per cent respectively.  There
has been an occupational shift in favour of
secondary and tertiary sectors because of
growing industrialisation and urbanisation in
recent times.
Health
Health is an important component of
population composition, which affects the
process of development. Sustained efforts of
government programmes have registered
significant improvements in the health
conditions of the Indian population. Death
rates have declined from 25 per 1000
population in 1951 to 8.1 per 1000 in 2001
and life expectancy at birth has increased from
36.7  years in 1951 to 64.6 years in 2001.
The substantial improvement is the result
of many factors including improvement in
public health, prevention of infectious diseases
and application of modern medical practices
in diagnosis and treatment of ailments.
Despite considerable achievements, the
health situation is a matter of major concern
for India. The per capita calorie consumption
is much below the recommended levels and
malnutrition afflicts a large percentage of our
population. Safe drinking water and basic
sanitation amenities are available to only one-
third of the rural population. These problems
need to be tackled through an appropriate
population policy.
Adolescent Population
The most significant feature of the Indian
population is the size of its adolescent
population.  It constitutes one-fifth of the total
population of India.  Adolescents are generally
grouped in the age-group of 10 to 19 years.
They are the most important resource for the
future.  Nutrition requirements of adolescents
are higher than those of a normal child or adult.
Poor nutrition can lead to deficiency and
stunted growth.  But in India,  the diet available
to adolescents is inadequate in all nutrients. A
large number of adolescent girls suffer from
anaemia. Their problems have so far not
received adequate attention in the process of
development.  The adolescent girls have to be
sensitised to the problems they confront.  Their
awareness can be improved through the spread
of literacy and education among them.
National Population Policy
Recognising that the planning of families would
improve individual health and welfare, the
Government
India
initiated
comprehensive Family Planning Programme in
1952. The Family Welfare Programme has
sought to promote responsible and planned
parenthood on a voluntary basis. The National
Population Policy 2000 is a culmination of
years of planned efforts.
The NPP 2000 provides a policy framework
for imparting free and compulsory school
education up to 14 years of age, reducing
infant mortality rate to below 30 per 1000 live
births, achieving universal immunisation of
children against all vaccine preventable
diseases, promoting delayed marriage for girls,
and making family welfare a people-centered
programme.
NPP 2000 and Adolescents
NPP 2000 identified adolescents as one of the
major sections of the population that need
greater attention. Besides nutritional
requirements, the policy put greater emphasis
on other important needs of adolescents
including protection from unwanted
pregnancies and sexually transmitted diseases
(STD). It called for programmes that aim
towards encouraging delayed marriage and
child-bearing, education of adolescents about
the risks of unprotected sex, making
contraceptive services accessible and
affordable, providing food supplements,
nutritional services, strengthening legal
measures to prevent child marriage.
People are the nation’s most valuable
resource. A well- educated healthy population
provides potential power.
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
Migrations change the number, distribution and composition of the
population in
the area of departure
(c) both the area of departure and arrival
the area of arrival
(d) none of the above
A large proportion of children in a population is a result of
high birth rates
(c) high death rates
high life expectancies
(d) more married couples
(iii)
The magnitude of population growth refers to
the total population of an area
the number of persons added each year
the rate at which the population increases
the number of females per thousand males
According to the Census 2001, a “literate” person is one who
can read and write his/her name
can read and write any language
is 7 years old and can read and write any language with understanding
knows the 3 ‘R’s (reading, writing, arithmetic)
Answer the following questions briefly.
Why is the rate of population growth in India declining since 1981?
Discuss the major components of population growth.
(iii)
Define age structure, death rate and birth rate.
How is migration a determinant factor of population change?
Distinguish between population growth and population change.
What is the relation between occupational structure and development?
What are the advantages of having a healthy population?
What are the significant features of the National Population Policy 2000?
PROJECT/ACTIVITY
Conduct a class census by preparing a questionnaire. The questionnaire should
contain minimum five questions.  Questions should relate to students, their
family members, their class performance, their health etc.  Each student is
required to fill up the questionnaire. Compile the information in numerical terms
(in terms of percentage).  Present the information through pie-chart, bar-diagram
or in any other way.
EXERCISE
2015-16
POPULATION
GLOSSARY
Adolescence
: Adolescence is a period in which a person is no longer a child and
not yet an adult.  Such persons are grouped in the age group of
10 to 19 years.
Alluvial plain
: A level tract of land made up of alluvium or fine rock material
brought down by a river.
Base population
: The total population of an area at the beginning of a given time
period.
Biome
: Plant communities occuring in distinct groups in areas having
similar climatic conditions.
Birth rate
: The number of live births for every 1000 persons in a year.
Depression
: In meteorology; it denotes an area of relatively low atmospheric
pressure, which is found mainly in temperate regions.  In geology,
it refers to a hollow sunken area of the earth’s surface.
Death rate
: The number of deaths per 1000 persons in year.
Density of population
: The average number of persons per unit area, such as a square
kilometre.
Dependency ratio
: The ratio of people of dependent age (below 15 and above 60 years)
to people of economically active ages (15-59 years).
Ecosystem
: A system which comprises the physical environment and the
organisms living therein.
Environment
: Surroundings or the conditions under which a person or thing
exists and develops his or its character.  It covers both physical
and cultural elements.
Fault
: A linear break in rocks of the earth’s crust along which there has
been displacement in a horizontal, vertical or oblique direction.
Fauna
: The animal life of a given area.
Flora
: The total vegetation or plant cover of a region.
:  A bend in the rock strata resulting from compression of an area of
the earth’s crust.
Geosyncline
: A narrow, shallow,  elongated basin with a sinking bottom in which
a considerable thickness of sediments was deposited by the rivers
coming from Angara and Gondwanaland.
Glacier
: A mass of snow and ice that moves slowly under the influence of
gravity along a confined course away from its place of accumulation.
Growth rate of population
: The growth rate of population indicates the rate at which the
population is growing.  In estimating the growth rate the increase
in population is compared with the base population.  It can be
measured annually or over a decade.
Indian Mainland
: It refers to the contiguous stretch of landmass from Jammu and
Kashmir to Kanniyakumari and from Gujarat to Arunachal Pradesh.
Indian Standard Time
: The local time along the Standard Meridian of India (82°30'E).
Inland drainage
: A drainage system in which the waters of the rivers do not reach
the oceans but fall into an inland sea or lake.
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Igneous rocks
: Rocks formed as a result of solidification of magma either below
the earth’s surface or above it.
Lagoon
: A salt-water lake separated from the sea by the sandbars and spits.
: A body of water that lies in a hollow in the earth’s surface and is
entirely surrounded by land.
Lithospheric Plates
: Large segments of the earth’s crust composed of continental and
oceanic lithospheric parts, floating above the asthenosphere.
Life expectancy
: The average number of years one is expected to live.
Local Time
: The time of a place determined by the  midday sun is called the
local time.
Metamorphic rocks
: Deformation and alteration of pre-existing igneous and
sedimentary rocks as a result of changes in physical and chemical
conditions due to intense heat or pressure.
Migration
: Movement of people from one place to another.  Internal migration
means movement of people within a country and external migration
means movement of people between countries.  When people come
to a country from another country, it is called immigration and
when they leave that country, it is called emigration.
Million Plus cities
: Cities with a population of more than one million or 10 lakh.
Monsoon
: A complete reversal of winds over a large area leading to a change
of seasons.
Mountain
: An upward projected features of the earth’s surface that rises to
high altitude and usually possesses steep slopes.
National park
: A reserved area for preserving its natural vegetation, wild life and
the natural environment.
Plain
: An extensive area of flat or gently undulating land.
Plateau
: An extensive elevated area of relatively flat land.
Plate Tectonics
: The scientific concept that explains the movements of the crustal
plates.
Relief
: The differences in elevation or the physical outline of the land
surface or ocean floor.
Subsidence
: In meteorology, it is the downward movement of the air. In geology,
it refers to the sinking of a portion of the earth’s surface.
Sedimentary rocks
: Rocks composed of sediments and generally having a layered
structure.
Sex-ratio
: Sex-ratio is defined as the number of females per thousand males.
Sub-Continent
: A big landmass, which stands out as a distinct geographical unit
from the rest of the continent.
Tectonic
: Forces originating within the earth and responsible for bringing
widespread changes in the landform features.
Young mountains
: The fold mountains formed during the most recent major phase
of folding in the earth’s crust.
2015-16
POPULATION
APPENDIX
Chapter 6: Population*
Page no.53, column 2, line 17– 20
India’s population as on March 2011 stood at 1,210 million, which accounts for 17.5 per
cent of the world population. These 1.21 billion people are unevenly distributed…
Page no.53, column 2, line 24 – 25
The 2011 Census data reveals that Uttar Pradesh with a population size of 199 million…
Page no.54, Figure 6.1
India’s share of population – 17.5
Rest of the world – 82.5
Page no.54, column 1, line 2 – 4
…Sikkim has a population of just 0.6 million and Lakshadweep has only 64,429 people.
Page no.54, column 1, line 8–10
Rajasthan, the biggest state in terms of area has only 6 per cent of the total population of
India.
Page no.54, column 1, Figure 6.2: Distribution of Population
For 2011 only provisional data is available. Hence, data/analysis are provisional.
Source: Census of India 2011
Fig. 6.2: Distribution of Population
APPENDIX
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Page no.54, column 2, line 8 – 12
The population density of India in the year 2011 was 382 persons per square km.
Densities vary from 1,102 persons per square km in Bihar to only 17 persons per square
km in Arunachal Pradesh.
Page no.55, Figure 6.3: Density of Population in India
Fig. 6.3: Density of Population 2011
* Note:
Telangana became the 29th State of India on the 2nd June 2014 after the reorganisation of the
state of Andhra Pradesh
2015-16
APPENDIX
Page no.56 , column 1, line 20-22
India’s population has been steadily increasing from 361 million in 1951 to 1,210 million
in 2011.
Page no.56 , column 1, Table 6.1: The Magnitude and Rate of India’s Population Growth
Census
Population
Decadal growth
Change in decadal
Average annual
Progressive growth
Years
Growth
exponential
rate over 1901
Absolute
Percent
Absolute
Percent
growth rate (%)
238396327
252093390
13697063
251321213
-772177
(0.31)
-14469240
-6.05
-0.03
278977238
27656025
11.00
28428202
11.31
17.02
318660580
39683342
14.22
12027317
33.67
361088090
42427510
13.31
2744168
-0.91
51.47
439234771
78146681
21.64
35719171
84.25
548159652
108924881
24.80
30778200
129.94
683329097
135169445
24.66
26244564
-0.14
186.64
846421039
163091942
23.87
27922497
17.12
255.05
1028737436
182316397
21.54
19224455
10.54
331.52
1210193422
181455986
17.64
-860411
-0.47
407.64
In chapter 6, page no.56, Figure 6.4: India’s Population  and Population Growth Rates
during 1951-2011
Fig. 6.4(a): India’s  Population Growth Rates during 1951-2011
Table 6.1: The Magnitude and Rate of India’s Population Growth
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Fig. 6.4(b): India’s Population 1901-2011
Page no.57, column 2,  line 6-11
The urban population has increased from
17.29 per cent of the total population in
1951 to 31.80 per cent in 2011. There has
been a significant increase in the number
of million plus cities from 35 to 53 in just
one decade, i.e. 2001 to 2011.
Source: Census of India, 2011
Page no.58, column 1, line 30-31
Table  6.2 shows the sex ratio from 1951-
2011.
Page no.58, column 1,  Table 6.2: India :
Sex Ratio 1901-2011.
Page no.58, column 1,  Do You Know?
Kerala has a sex ratio of 1084 females per
1000 males, Puducherry has 1038
females per every 1000 males, while Delhi has only 866 females per thousand males and
Haryana has just 877 females per thousand males.
Page no.58, column 2, line 15-18
The literacy rate in the country as per the Census of 2011 is 74.04 per cent; 82.14 per
cent for males and 65.46 per cent for females.
Page no.59, column 1,  line 14-16
….1951 to 7.2* per 1000 in 2011 and life expectancy at birth has increased from 36.7
years in 1951 to 64.7** years in 2011.
Census year
Sex ratio
(Females per 1000 males)
Table 6.2: India : Sex Ratio 1901-2011
*Source: SRS bulletin,Volume 46, No.1 December, 2011
**United Nations World Fact Book (September 17, 2009)
2015-16
