Business Studies Class XI
Chapter 9 Small Business Pg. 209
Insert a paragraph after 8th line, Ist column.  Replace uptill village industries.
The emergence of a large services sector has necessitated the government to
include other enterprises covering both small scale industries sector (SSI) and
related service entities under the same umbrella. Expansion of the small scale
enterprises was taking place growing into medium scale enterprises and they were
required to adopt higher levels of technologies in order to remain competitive in a
fast globalizing world. Thus, it was necessary to address the concerns of such
enterprises micro, small and medium and provide them with a single legal
framework. The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED)
Act, 2006 addresses these issues relating to definition, credit, marketing and
technology upgradation.  Medium scale enterprises and service related enterprises
also come under the purview of this Act. The MSMED Act 2006 came into force
w.e.f. October, 2006. Accordingly, enterprises are classified into two major
categories viz manufacturing and services.
Manufacturing
In the case of enterprises engaged in the manufacture or production of goods
pertaining to any industries specified in the first schedule to the Industries
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, there are 3 types of enterprises.
Micro Enterprises, where the investment in plant and machinery does
not exceed twenty-five lakh rupees.
Small Enterprise, where the investment in plant to machinery is more
than twenty five lakh rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees.
(iii)
Medium Enterprise, where the investment in plant to machinery is more
then five crore rupees but does not exceed ten crores rupees.
Services
In the case of enterprises engaged in providing or rendering of services there
are three types of enterprises.
Micro Enterprises, where the investment in equipment does not exceed
ten lakh rupees.
Small enterprise, where the investment in equipment is more then ten
lakh rupees but does not exceed two crore rupees.
(iii)
Medium enterprise, where the investment in equipment is more then two
crore rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees.
Business Studies Class XI
Chapter 9 Small Business Pg. 210
Replace box as given below:
Category
Manufacturing
Investment limit
Providing of  services
Investment limt
Micro enterprise
25 lakh
10 lakh
Small enterprise
Between 25 lakh and 5
crores
Between 10 lakh and 2
crores
Medium enterprise
Between 5 crores and
10 crores
Between 2 crores and 5
crores.
While calculating the investment in plant and machinery, the cost of pollution
control, research and development, industrial safety devices and such other
items shall be excluded.
Page 210
Paragraph to be added at the end of page.
The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises designs policies,
programme and schemes for promotion and growth of SSIs.  The National
Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) a public sector enterprise of the
Ministry has been providing marketing support to the medium and small
enterprises under the Marketing Assistance Scheme.
The Khadi and Village Industries Commission may include the micro or tiny
enterprises or the village enterprises as part of small enterprises depending
upon the criteria or standards in respect of employment or turnover of the
enterprise.
Business Studies Class XI
Chapter 11 International Business Pg. 270
Additional Table
Table 11.2 A    India’s exports &  imports 2004-05 to 2011-12
Exports
Imports
Trade balance
2004-05
375340
501065
-125725
2005-06
456418
660409
-203991
2006-07
571779
840506
-268727
2007-08
655864
1012312
-356448
2008-09
840755
1374436
-533681
2009-10
845534
1363736
-518202
2010-11
1142649
1683467
-540818
2011-12(P)
1024707
1651240
-626533
Source: DGCIS, Calcutta, as reported in Govt. of India, Economic Survey:
2011-12. New Delhi.
• From 2004-05 to 2011-12 there has been an increase in exports from
Rs.375340, to Rs. 10, 24,707 which is almost 3 times in 7 years.
• Imports during the same period have increased more than 3 times,
from Rs. 5,01,065 in 2004-05 to 16,51,240to 2011-12. However, the
trade balance had decreased to Rs. 5,18,202 in 2009-10.
Business Studies Class XI
Chapter 11 International Business Pg. 271
Additional Table
Table 11.3 A    Commodity composition of India’s Exports
Products
Percentage share
2009-10         2010-11
Agriculture & allied
Ores and Minerals
Manufactured Goods
Textiles
Gems & Jewellery
Engineering  goods
Chemicals & related products
Leathers & Manufactures
Petroleum, Crude & related Products
Others
Source: DGCIS, Calcutta, as reported in Govt. of India, Economic Survey:
2011-12. New Delhi.
• In 2009-10 and 2010-11, India’s exports of agricultural and allied
products, ores and minerals, engineering goods, chemicals, leather &
manufactures have declined considerably. (Only petroleum products
have increased. See table 11.3A)
Business Studies Class XI
Chapter 11 International Business Pg. 271
Additional Table
Table 11.4 A          Commodity composition of India’s Imports
Products
Percentage share
2009-10         2010-11
Petroleum, Oil & Lubricates (POL)
Pearl, Precious and Semi-precious stones
Capital goods
Electronic goods
Gold and Silver
Chemicals
Edible Oils
Iron & steel
Professional instruments
Source: DGCIS, Calcutta, as reported in Govt. of India, Economic Survey:
2011-12. New Delhi.
From table 11.4 A it can be seen that in 2009-10 and 2010-11 imports
of all items are generally on the increase. Only import of edible oils,
chemicals and electronic goods as a share in that total imports has declined
slightly.
Business Studies Class XI
Chapter 11 International Business Pg. 272
Additional Table
Table 11.5 A          India’s Major Trading Partners
Country
Percentage share in India’s total trade
(exports imports)
2008-09
2009-10
2010-11
10.81
China
10.16
Saudi Arabia
Switzerland
Hong Kong
Germany
Singapore
Indonesia
Belgium
Korea
Japan
Nigeria
Total of  top 15 countries
60.54
59.45
61.45
Others
49.46
50.55
48.55
Total trade
100.00
100.00
100.00
Source: DGCIS, Calcutta, as reported in Govt. of India, Economic Survey:
2011-12. New Delhi.
In 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11, India’s major trading partners have
changed, UAE and China top the list, USA has come down to number 3 and
UK to number 15 if compared to 2003-04 data.
Business Studies Class XI
Chapter 11 International Business Pg.273
Additional Table
Table 11.7 A Percentage Shares of Major Services to Total Services Exports
Travel
Transportation
Software
Miscellaneous
1995-96
2000-01
2001-02
2002-03
2003-04
2010-11
Compiled from data as reported in Govt. of India, Economic Survey, 2011-
12, New Delhi.
From Table 11.7A . it is seen that in 2010-11, the percentage share of travel,
transportation and software services to total services has gone down in
comparison to the trend in earlier years.
BUSINESS STUDIES
Textbook for Class XI
© NCERT
not to be republished
First Edition
March 2006  Phalguna 1927
Reprinted
October 2006  Kartika 1928
December 2007  Agrahayana 1929
March 2009  Phalguna 1930
January 2010  Magha 1931
January 2011 Magha 1932
January 2012 Magha 1933
March 2013 Phalguna 1934
November 2013 Kartika 1935
PD 120T RNB
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006
` 90.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with
NCERT watermark
Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council
Educational
Research
Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New
Delhi 110 016 and printed at
Saharanpur Electric Press, Bomanji
Road, Saharanpur 247 001 (UP)
ISBN  81-7450-530-X
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior
permission of the publisher.
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of
trade,  be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the
publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in
which it is published.
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any
revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other
means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.
Publication Team
Head, Publication
Ashok Srivastava
Division
Chief Production
Kalyan Banerjee
Officer
Chief Business
Gautam Ganguly
Manager
Chief Editor
Naresh Yadav
(Contractual Service)
Editor
R.N.Bhardwaj
Production Assistant
Prakash Veer Singh
Cover
Karan Chadha
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021
Phone :  0361-2674869
© NCERT
not to be republished
FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that
children’s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This
principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning which
continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the school, home
and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF
signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt to
discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between
different subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantly
further in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined in
the National Policy of Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals
and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning
and to pursue imaginative activities and questions.  We must recognise
that, given space, time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by
engaging with the information passed on to them by adults. Treating the
prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one of the key
reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.  Inculcating
creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as
participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of teaching
days are actually devoted to teaching.  The methods used for teaching and
evaluation will also determine how effective this book proves for making
children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress
or boredom.  Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of
curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different
stages with greater consideration for child psychology and the time available
for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving
higher priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering,
discussion in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committee
responsible for this book.  We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory
group in Social Sciences, Professor Hari Vasudevan and the Chief Advisor
for this book, Prof. Sanjay K. Jain, for guiding the work of this committee.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we are
grateful to their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the
institutions and organisations which have generously permitted us to draw
upon their resources, materials and personnel. We are especially grateful
to the members of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the
Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human
Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri
and Professor G.P. Deshpande for their valuable time and contribution. As
an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement
in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions
which will enable us to undertake further revision and refinements.
Director
New Delhi
National Council of Educational
20 December 2005
Research and Training
© NCERT
not to be republished
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT
COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR SOCIAL SCIENCE TEXTBOOKS AT THE
HIGHER SECONDARY LEVEL
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Calcutta,
Kolkata
CHIEF ADVISOR
Sanjay K. Jain, Professor, Delhi School of Economics, University of Delhi,
Delhi
MEMBERS
Anand Saxena, Reader, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya College, University of Delhi
Davinder K. Vaid, Professor, DESSH, NCERT, New Delhi
Garima Gupta, Lecturer, PGDAV College, University of Delhi, New Delhi
G.L. Tayal, Reader, Ramjas College, University of Delhi
J.K. Parida, Professor, Department of Commerce, Utkal University,
Bhubaneswar, Orissa
K.V. Achalapati, Professor and Head, Department of Commerce, Osmania
University, Hyderabad
M.M. Goyal, Reader, PGDAV College, University of Delhi
M. Usha, Associate Professor, University College of Commerce and Business
Management, Osmania University, Hyderabad
Pooja Dasani, PGT, Convent of Jesus and Mary School, Gol Dakkhana,
New Delhi
Shailendra Nigam, NIILM Centre for Management Studies, Sher Shah Suri
Marg, New Delhi
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Minoo Nandrajog, Reader, DESSH, NCERT, New Delhi
© NCERT
not to be republished
© NCERT
not to be republished
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges
the valuable comments and suggestions of the following, while preparing
the textbook: Professor D.P. Sharma, Former Vice Chancellor, Barkatullah
University, Bhopal; S.K. Bansal, PGT Commerce (Retired), Commercial
Senior Secondary School, Darya Ganj, Delhi; Vijay Kumar Yadav, PGT
Commerce, Kendriya Vidyalaya, Jawaharlal Nehru Campus, New Delhi;
K. Vasudeva Murthy, Lecturer in Commerce, Mahajana’s Pre-University
College, Jayalaxmipuram, Mysore; Dwarikanath Mishra, PGT Commerce,
DAV School, Unit-8, Bhubaneswar, Orissa.
Special thanks are due to Savita Sinha, Professor and Head, Department
of Education in Social Sciences and Humanities for her constant support
and guidance at every stage of the textbook development process.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contributions of
Dinesh Kumar, Incharge, Computer Station; Ritu Sharma and Mahesh Singh
Bhandari, DTP Operator; and Bharati Guleria, Copy Editor and Sukeshni
Julka, Proof Reader in shaping this book. Last but not the least, the efforts
of the Publication Department, NCERT are also duly acknowledged.
© NCERT
not to be republished
NOTE TO THE TEACHER
This textbook is expected to provide a good understanding of the environment
in which a business operates. A manager has to analyse the complex, dynamic
situations in which a business is placed. Therefore, content enrichment in
the form of business news and abstracts of articles from business journals
and magazines has been given as inset material (boxes). This will encourage
students to be observant about all business activity and discover what is
happening in business organisations with the expection that they will update
their knowledge through the use of libraries, newspapers, business oriented
TV programmes and the internet. Various types of question are given and
case problems, multiple choice questions have been introduced to test the
application of subject knowledge to realistic business situations.
© NCERT
not to be republished
CONTENTS
FOREWORD
PART  I   FOUNDATIONS OF BUSINESS
CHAPTER
Nature and Purpose of Business
CHAPTER
Forms of Business Organisation
CHAPTER
Private, Public and Global Enterprises
CHAPTER
Business Services
CHAPTER
Emerging Modes of Business
CHAPTER
Social Responsibilities of Business
and Business Ethics
PART  II   CORPORATE ORGANISATION, FINANCE AND TRADE
CHAPTER
Formation of a Company
CHAPTER
Sources of Business Finance
CHAPTER
Small Business
CHAPTER
Internal Trade
CHAPTER
International Business - I
CHAPTER
International Business - II
© NCERT
not to be republished
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Part III (Articles 12 – 35)
(Subject to certain conditions, some exceptions
and reasonable restrictions)
guarantees these
Fundamental Rights
Right to Equality
• before law and equal protection of laws;
• irrespective of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth;
• of opportunity in public employment;
• by abolition of untouchability and titles.
Right to Freedom
• of expression, assembly, association, movement, residence and profession;
• of certain protections in respect of conviction for offences;
• of protection of life and personal liberty;
• of free and compulsory education for children between the age of six and fourteen years;
• of protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.
Right against Exploitation
• for prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour;
• for prohibition of employment of children in hazardous jobs.
Right to Freedom of Religion
• freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion;
• freedom to manage religious affairs;
• freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion;
• freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in educational
institutions wholly maintained by the State.
Cultural and Educational Rights
• for protection of interests of minorities to conserve their language, script and culture;
• for minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
Right to Constitutional Remedies
• by issuance of directions or orders or writs by the Supreme Court and High
Courts for enforcement of these Fundamental Rights.
© NCERT
not to be republished
PART I
Foundations of Business
© NCERT
not to be republished
CHAPTER 1
NATURE AND PURPOSE OF BUSINESS
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
explain the concept and characteristics of business;
compare the distinctive features of business, profession and
employment;
classify business activities and clarify the meaning of industry and
commerce;
state various types of industry;
explain the activities relating to commerce;
analyse the objectives of business;
describe the nature of business risks and their causes; and
discuss the basic factors to be considered while starting a business.
© NCERT
not to be republished
NATURE AND PURPOSE OF BUSINESS
that we understand the concept, nature
and purpose of business.
1.2 CONCEPT OF BUSINESS
The term business is derived from the
word ‘busy’. Thus, business means
being busy. However, in a specific
sense, business refers to an occupation
in which people regularly engage in
activities related to purchase,
production and/or sale of goods and
services with a view to earning profits.
The activity may consist of production
or purchase of goods for sale, or
exchange of goods or supply of services
to satisfy the needs of other people.
In every society people undertake
various activities to satisfy their needs.
These activities may be broadly
classified into two groups — economic
and non-economic. Economic activities
are those by which we can earn our
livelihood whereas non-economic
activities are those performed out of
love, sympathy, sentiments, patriotism,
etc. For example, a worker working in
1.1 INTRODUCTION
The conversation among the four
classmates is obviously focused on the
meaning, nature and purpose of
business. All human beings, wherever
they may be, require different types of
goods and services to satisfy their needs.
The necessity of supplying goods and
services has led to certain activities being
undertaken by people to produce and
sell what is needed by others. Business
is a major economic activity in all
modern societies concerned as it is with
the production and sale of goods and
services required by people. The
purpose behind most business activities
is to earn money by meeting people’s
demands for goods and services.
Business is central to our lives. Although
our lives are influenced by many other
institutions in modern society such as
schools, colleges, hospitals, political
parties and religious bodies, business
has the major influence on our daily
lives. It, therefore, becomes important
Imran, Manpreet, Joseph and Priyanka have been classmates in Class X. After
their exams are over, they happen to meet at a common friend Ruchika’s house.
Just when they are sharing their experiences of examination days, Ruchika’s
father, Mr. Raghuraj Chaudhury intervenes and asks about their well-being. He
also enquires from each one of them about their career plans. But none of them
has a definite reply. Mr. Raghuraj, who himself is a businessman, suggests to
them that they can opt for business as a promising and challenging career.
Joseph gets excited by the idea and says, “Yes, business is really good for making
lots of money even more than is possible by becoming an engineer or a doctor.”
Mr. Raghuraj opines, “Let me tell you, young man, there is a lot more to business
than merely money”. He then gets busy with some other guests. However, the
four classmates begin raising many questions: What exactly business is all about?
What else is there in business besides money? How is business different from
non-business activities? What does one require to start a business? And, so on.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
a factory, a doctor operating in his
clinic, a manager working in the office
and a teacher teaching in a school—
are doing so to earn their livelihood and
are, therefore, engaged in an economic
activity. On the other hand, a housewife
cooking food for her family or a boy
helping an old man cross the road are
performing non-economic activities
since they are doing so out of love or
sympathy. Economic activities may be
further divided into three categories,
namely business, profession and
employment. Business may be defined
as an economic activity involving the
production and sale of goods and
services undertaken with a motive of
earning profit by satisfying human
needs in society.
1.3 CHARACTERISTICS OF BUSINESS
ACTIVITIES
In order to appreciate how business
activity is different from other activities
in society, the nature of business or its
fundamental character must be
explained in terms of its distinguishing
characteristics, which are as follows:
(i) An economic activity: Business is
considered to be an economic activity
because it is undertaken with the object
of earning money or livelihood and not
because of love, affection, sympathy or
any other sentimental reason. It may
be mentioned here that this activity
can be undertaken either at small and
individual level, e.g. (purchase and sale
by a shopkeeper) or on large scale in a
more formal and organised level
(purchase and sale by a cooporative
society or company).
(ii) Production or procurement of
goods and services: Before goods are
offered to people for consumption, these
must be either produced or procured by
business enterprises. Thus, every
business enterprise either manu-
factures the goods it deals in or it acquires
them from producers, to be further sold
to consumers or users. Goods may
consist of consumable items of daily use
such as sugar, ghee, pen, notebook, etc.
or capital goods like machinery,
furniture, etc. Services may include
facilities offered to consumers, business
firms and organisations in the form of
transportation, banking, electricity, etc.
(iii) Sale or exchange of goods and
services: Directly or indirectly, business
involves transfer or exchange of goods
and services for value. If goods are
produced not for the purpose of sale but
say for personal consumption, it cannot
be called a business activity. Cooking
food at home for the family is not
business, but cooking food and selling
it to others in a restaurant is business.
Thus, one essential characteristic of
business is that there should be sale or
exchange of goods or services between
the seller and the buyer.
(iv) Dealings in goods and services
on a regular basis: Business involves
dealings in goods or services on a
regular basis. One single transaction
of sale or purchase, therefore, does not
constitute business. Thus, for example,
if a person sells his/her domestic radio
set even at a profit, it will not be
considered a business activity. But if
he/she sells radio sets regularly either
through a shop or from his/her
© NCERT
not to be republished
NATURE AND PURPOSE OF BUSINESS
residence, it will be regarded as a
business activity.
(v) Profit earning: One of the main
purpose of business is to earn income
by way of profit. No business can
survive for long without earning profit.
That is why businessmen make all
possible efforts to maximise profits, by
increasing the volume of sales or
reducing costs.
(vi) Uncertainty of return: Uncertainty
of return refers to the lack of knowledge
relating to the amount of money that
the business is going to earn in a given
period. Every business invests money
(capital) to run its activities with the
objective of earning profit. But it is not
certain as to what amount of profit will
be earned. Also, there is always a
possibility of losses being incurred, in
spite of the best efforts put into the
business.
(vii) Element of risk: Risk is the
uncertainty associated with an
exposure to loss. It is caused by some
unfavourable or undesirable event. The
risks are related with certain factors like
Business refers to those economic
activities, which are connected with the
production or purchase and sale of
goods or supply of services with the
main object of earning profit. People
engaged in business earn income in the
form of profit.
Profession includes those activities,
which require special knowledge and
skill to be applied by individuals in
changes in consumer tastes and
fashions, changes in methods of
production, strike or lockout in the
work place, increased competition in
the market, fire, theft, accidents,
natural calamities, etc. No business
can altogether do away with risks.
1.4 COMPARISON OF BUSINESS,
PROFESSION AND EMPLOYMENT
As has been mentioned earlier,
economic activities may be divided into
three major categories viz.,
Business
Profession
(iii)
Employment
Business Functions at Enterprise Level
Business includes a wide variety of functions performed by many different kinds
of organisations called business enterprises or firms. Financing, production
marketing and human resource management are the four major functions which
are performed by business enterprises to carry on business. Financing is
concerned with mobilising and utilising funds for running a business  enterprise.
Production involves the conversion of raw materials into finished products or
generation of services. Marketing refers to all those activities which facilitate
exchange of goods and services from producers to the people who need them, at
a place they want, at a time they require and at a price they are prepared to pay.
Human resource management aims at ensuring the availability of working people
who have necessary skills to perform various tasks in enterprises.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
their occupation. Such activities are
generally subject to guidelines or codes
of conduct laid down by professional
bodies. Those engaged in professions
are known as professionals. For
example, doctors are engaged in the
medical profession and are subject to
the regulations of the Medical Council
of India, the concerned professional
body. Similarly, lawyers are engaged
in the legal profession, governed by the
Bar Council of India and Chartered
Accountants belong to the accounting
profession and are subject to the
regulations of the Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India.
Employment
refers
occupation in which people work for
others and get remunerated in return.
Those who are employed by others are
known as employees. Thus, people who
work in factories and receive wages and
COMPARISON OF BUSINESS, PROFESSION AND EMPLOYMENT
lttil
© NCERT
not to be republished
NATURE AND PURPOSE OF BUSINESS
salaries are in the employment of
factory owners and are employees of
the factory. Similarly, people who work
in the offices of banks, insurance
companies or government department,
as managers, assistants, clerks, peons
or security guards are the employees
of these organisations.
1.5 CLASSIFICATION OF BUSINESS
ACTIVITIES
Various business activities may be
classified into two broad categories —
industry and commerce. Industry is
concerned with the production or
processing of goods and materials.
Commerce includes all those activities
which are necessary for facilitating the
exchange of goods and services. On the
basis of these two categories, we may
classify business firms into industrial
and commercial enterprises.
Let us examine in detail the
activities relating to business.
1.6 INDUSTRY
Industry refers to economic activities,
which are connected with conversion of
resources into useful goods. Generally,
the term industry is used for activities
in which mechanical appliances and
technical skills are involved. These
include activities relating to producing
or processing of goods as well as
breeding and raising of animals. The
term industry is also used to mean
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
groups of firms producing similar or
related goods. For example, cotton
textile industry refers to all
manufacturing units producing textile
goods from cotton. Similarly, electronic
industry would include all firms
producing electronic goods, and so on.
Further, in common parlance, certain
services like banking and insurance
are also referred to as industry,
say banking industry, insurance
industry etc.
Industries may be divided into
three broad categories namely primary,
secondary and tertiary.
(a) Primary industries: These include
all those activities which are
connected with the extraction and
production of natural resources and
reproduction and development of
living organisms, plants etc. These
industries may be further sub-
divided as follows:
Extractive industries: These
industries extract or draw out
products from natural sources.
Extractive industries supply
some basic raw materials that
are mostly  products of
geographical
natural
environment. Products of these
industries
usually
transformed into many other
useful goods by manufacturing
industries. Important extractive
industries include farming,
mining, lumbering, hunting and
fishing operations.
Genetic industries: These
industries remain engaged in
breeding plants and animals
for their use in further
reproduction. For the breeding
of plants, the seeds and nursery
companies are typical examples
of genetic industries. In
addition, activities of cattle-
breeding farms, poultry farms,
and fish hatchery come under
the class of genetic industries.
(b) Secondary industries: These are
concerned with using the materials,
which have already been extracted at
the primary stage. These industries
process such materials to produce
goods for final consumption or for
further processing by other
industrial units. For example,
mining of an iron ore is a primary
industry, but manufacturing of steel
by way of further processing of raw
irons is a secondary industry.
Secondary industries may be further
divided as follows:
(i) Manufacturing industries: These
industries are engaged in
producing
goods
through
processing of raw materials and
thus creating form utilities. They
bring out diverse finished
products, that we consume, or use
through the conversion of raw
materials or partly finished
materials in their manufacturing
operations.
Manufacturing
industries may be further divided
into four categories on the basis of
method of operation for production.
Analytical industry which
analyses and separates
different elements from the
same materials, as in the case
of oil refinery.
© NCERT
not to be republished
NATURE AND PURPOSE OF BUSINESS
Synthetical industry which
combines various ingredients
into a new product, as in the
case of cement.
Processing industry which
involves successive stages for
manufacturing
finished
products, as in the case of
sugar and paper.
Assembling industry which
assembles different compo-
nent parts to make a new
product, as in the case of
television, car, computer, etc.
(ii) Construction industries: These
industries are involved in the
construction of buildings, dams,
bridges, roads as well as tunnels
and canals. Engineering and
architectural skills are an important
part in construction industries.
Tertiary industries: These are
concerned with providing support
services to primary and secondary
industries as well as activities
relating to trade. These industries
provide service facilities. As
business activities, these may be
considered part of commerce
because as auxiliaries to trade
these activities assist trade.
Included in this category are
transport, banking, insurance,
warehousing, communication,
packaging and advertising.
1.7 COMMERCE
Commerce includes two types of acti-
vities, viz., (i) trade and (ii) auxiliaries
to trade. Buying and selling of goods is
termed as trade. But there are a lot of
activities that are required to facilitate
the purchase and sale of goods. These
are called services or auxiliaries to trade
and include transport, banking,
insurance, communication, advertise-
ment, packaging and warehousing.
Commerce, therefore, includes both,
buying and selling of goods i.e., trade,
as well as auxiliaries such as
transport, banking, etc.
Commerce provides the necessary
between
producers
consumers. It embraces all those
activities, which are necessary for
maintaining a free flow of goods and
services. Thus, all activities involving
the removal of hindrances in the
process of exchange are included in
commerce. The hindrances may be in
respect of persons, place, time, risk,
finance, etc. The hindrance of persons
is removed by trade, thereby making
goods available to the consumers from
the possession or ownership producers.
Transport removes the hindrances of
place by moving goods from the places
of production to the markets for sale.
Storage and warehousing activities
remove the hindrance of time by
facilitating holding of stocks of goods
to be sold as and when required. Goods
held in stock as well as goods in course
of transport are subject to the risk of
loss or damage due to theft, fire,
accidents, etc. Protection against these
risks is provided by insurance of goods.
Capital required to undertake the
above activities is provided by banking
and financing institutions. Advertising
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
makes it possible for producers and
traders to inform consumers about the
goods and services available in the
market. Hence, commerce is said to
consist of activities of removing the
hindrances of persons, place, time, risk,
finance and information in the process
of exchange of goods and services.
1.7.1 Trade
Trade is an essential part of commerce.
It refers to sale, transfer or exchange of
goods. It helps in making the goods
produced available to ultimate
consumers or users. These days goods
are produced on a large scale and it is
difficult for producers to themselves
reach individual buyers for sale of their
products. Businessmen are engaged in
trading activities as middlemen to make
the goods available to consumers in
different markets. In the absence of trade,
it would not be possible to undertake
production activities on a large scale.
Trade may be classified into two
broad categories — internal and
external. Internal, domestic or home
trade is concerned with the buying and
selling of goods and services within the
geographical boundaries of a country.
This may further be divided into
wholesale and retail trade. When goods
are purchased and sold in bulk, it is
known as wholesale trade. When goods
purchased
comparatively smaller quantities, for
final consumption it is referred to as
retail trade. External or foreign trade
consists of the exchange of goods and
services
between
persons
organisations operating in two or more
countries. If goods are purchased from
another country, it is called import
trade. If they are sold to other countries,
it is known as export trade. When goods
are imported for export to other
countries, it is known as entrepot trade.
1.7.2 Auxiliaries to Trade
Activities which are meant for assisting
trade are known as auxiliaries to trade.
These activities are generally referred to
as services because these are in the
nature of facilitating the activities relating
to industry and trade. Transport,
banking, insurance, warehousing, and
advertising are regarded as auxiliaries to
trade, i.e., activities playing a supportive
role. In fact, these activities support not
only  trade, but also industry and hence,
the entire business activity. Auxiliaries
are an integral part of commerce in
particular and business activity in
general. These activities help in removing
various hindrances which arise in
connection with the production and
distribution of goods. Transport
facilitates movement of goods from one
place to another. Banking provides
financial assistance to the manufacturer
and trader. Insurance covers various
kinds of business risks. Warehousing
creates time utility by way of storage
facilities.
Advertising
provides
information to the consumers. In other
words, these activities facilitate
movement, storage, financing, risk
coverage and sales promotion of goods.
Auxiliaries to trade are briefly discussed
below:
© NCERT
not to be republished
NATURE AND PURPOSE OF BUSINESS
(i) Transport and Communication:
Production of goods generally takes
place in particular locations. For
instance, tea is mainly produced in
Assam; cotton in Gujarat and
Maharashtra; jute in West Bengal and
Orissa; sugar in U.P, Bihar and
Maharashtra and so on. But these
goods are required for consumption in
different parts of the country. The
obstacle of place is removed by
transport through road, rail or coastal
shipping. Transport facilitates
movement of raw material to the place
of production and the finished
products from factories to the place of
consumption. Along with the transport
facility, there is also a need for
communication facilities so that
producers, traders and consumers
may exchange information with one
another. Thus, postal services and
telephone facilities may also be
regarded as auxiliaries to business
activities.
(ii) Banking and Finance: Business
activities cannot be undertaken unless
funds are available for acquiring assets,
purchasing raw materials and meeting
other expenses. Necessary funds can
be obtained by businessmen from a
bank. Thus, banking helps business
activities to overcome the problem of
finance. Commercial banks generally
lend money by providing overdraft and
cash credit facilities, loans and
advances. Banks also undertake
collection of cheques, remittance of
funds to different places, and
discounting of bills on behalf of traders.
In foreign trade, commercial banks
help exporters in collecting money from
importers. Commercial banks also help
promoters of companies to raise capital
from the public.
(iii) Insurance: Business involves
various types of risks. Factory building,
machinery, furniture etc. must be
protected against fire, theft and other
risks. Materials and goods held in stock
or in transit are subject to the risk of
loss or damage. Employees are also
required to be protected against the
risks of accident and occupational
hazards. Insurance provides protection
in all such cases. On payment of a
nominal premium, the amount of loss
or damage and compensation for
injury, if any, can be recovered from
the insurance company.
(iv) Warehousing: Usually, goods are
not sold or consumed immediately after
production. They are held in stock to
make them available as and when
required. Special arrangement must be
made for storage of goods to prevent loss
or damage. Warehousing helps
business firms to overcome the problem
of storage and facilitates the availability
of goods when needed. Prices are
thereby maintained at a reasonable level
through continuous supply of goods.
(v) Advertising: Advertising is one of
the most important methods of
promoting the sale of products,
particularly, consumers goods like
electronic goods, automobiles, soaps,
detergents etc. Most of these goods are
manufactured and supplied in the
market by numerous firms — big or
small. It is practically impossible for
producers and traders to contact each
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
and every customer. Thus, for
promoting sales, information about the
goods and services available, their
features, price, etc., must reach
potential buyers. Also there is a need
to persuade potential buyers about the
uses, quality, prices, competitive
information about the goods and
services etc. Advertising helps in
providing information about available
goods and services and inducing
customers to buy particular items.
1.8 OBJECTIVES OF BUSINESS
An objective is the starting point of
business. Every business is directed to
the achievement of certain objectives.
Objectives refer to all that the business
people want to get in return for what
they do. It is generally believed that
business activity is carried on only for
profit. Business persons themselves
proclaim that their primary objective is
to produce or distribute goods or
services for a profit. Every business is
said to be an attempt on the part of
business people to get more than what
has been spent or invested or, in other
words, to earn profit which is the excess
of revenue over cost. However, it is being
increasingly realised nowadays that
business enterprises are part of society
and need to have several objectives,
including social responsibility to
survive and prosper in the long run.
Profit is found to be a leading objective
but not the only one.
Although earning profit cannot be
the only objective of business, its
importance cannot be ignored. Every
business is an attempt to reap more
than what has been invested, and profit
is the excess of revenue over cost. Profit
may be regarded as an essential
objective of business for various
reasons: (i) it is a source of income for
business persons, (ii) it can be a source
of finance for meeting expansion
requirements of business, (iii) it
indicates the efficient working of
business, (iv) it can be taken as society’s
approval of the utility of business, and
(v) it builds up the reputation of a
business enterprise.
However, too much emphasis on
profit to the exclusion of other objectives
can be dangerous for good business.
Obsessed with profit, business
managers may neglect all other
responsibilities towards customers,
employees, investors and society at
large. They may even be inclined to
exploit various sections of society to earn
immediate profit. This may result in the
non-cooperation or even opposition from
the affected people against the
malpractices of business enterprises.
The enterprises might lose business and
may be unable to earn profit. That is
the reason why there is hardly any
sizable business enterprise whose only
objective is maximisation of profit.
1.8.1
Multiple Objectives of Business
Objectives are needed in every area
that influences the survival and
prosperity of business. Since a
business has to balance a number
of needs and goals, it requires
multiple objectives. It cannot follow
only one objective and expect to
achieve excellence. Objectives have
© NCERT
not to be republished
NATURE AND PURPOSE OF BUSINESS
to be specific in every area and
sphere of business. For example,
sales targets have to be set, the
amount of capital to be raised has to
be estimated and the target number
of units to be produced needs to be
defined. The objectives define in
concrete terms what the business is
going to do. Objectives also enable the
business to analyse their own
performance and take steps as
neccessary
improve
their
performance in future.
Objectives are needed in every area
where performance and results affect
the survival and prosperity of
business. Some of these areas are
described below:
(a) Market standing: Market standing
refers to the position of an enterprise
in relation to its competitors. A
business enterprise must aim at
standing on stronger footing in
terms of offering competitive
products to its customers and
serving them to their satisfaction.
(b) Innovation: Innovation is the
introduction of new ideas or
methods in the way something is
done or made. There are two kinds
of innovation in every business i.e.,
(i) innovation in product or service;
and (ii) innovation in various skills
and activities needed to supply
products and services. No business
enterprise can flourish in a
competitive
world
without
innovation. Therefore, innovation
becomes an important objective.
(c) Productivity: Productivity is
ascertained by comparing the value
of output with the value of inputs.
It is used as a measure of efficiency.
In order to ensure continuous
survival and progress, every
enterprise must aim at greater
productivity through the best use
of available resources.
(d) Physical and financial resources:
Any business requires physical
resources like plants, machines,
offices, etc., and financial resources,
i.e., funds to be able to produce and
supply goods and services to its
customers. The business enterprise
must aim at acquiring these
resources according to their
requirements and use them
efficiently.
(e) Earning profits: One of the
objectives of business is to earn profits
on the capital employed. Profitability
refers to profit in relation to capital
investment. Every business must
earn a reasonable profit which is so
important for its survival and growth.
(f) Manager performance and
development: Business enterprises
need managers to conduct
and coordinate business activity.
Various programmes for motivating
managers need to be implemented.
Manager
performance
development, therefore, is an
important objective. The enterprises
must actively work for this
purpose.
(g) Worker performance and attitude:
Worker’s performance and attitudes
determine their contribution towards
productivity and profitability of any
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
enterprise.
Therefore,
every
enterprise must aim at improving its
workers performance. It should also
try to ensure a positive attitude on
the part of workers.
(h)Social responsibility: Social
responsibility refers to the obligation
of business firms to contribute
resources for solving social problems
and work in a socially desirable
manner.
Thus, a business enterprise must have
multiple objectives to satisfy different
individuals and groups. This is essential
for its own survival and prosperity.
1.8.2 Business Risks
The term ‘business risks’ refers to the
possibility of inadequate profits or even
losses due to uncertainties or
unexpected events. For example,
demand for a particular product may
decline due to change in tastes and
preferences of consumers or due to
increased competition from other
producers. Lower demand results in
long sales and profits. In another
situation, the shortage of raw materials
in the market may shoot up its price.
The firm using these raw materials will
have to pay more for buying them. As
a result, cost of production may
increase which, in turn, may reduce
profits.
Business enterprises constantly
face two types of risk: speculative and
pure. Speculative risks involve both the
possibility of gain as well as the
possibility of loss. Speculative risks
arise due to changes in market
conditions including fluctuations in
demand and supply, changes in prices
or changes in fashion and tastes of
customers. Favourable market
conditions are likely to result in gains
whereas unfavourable ones may result
in losses. Pure risks involve only the
possibility of loss or no loss. The chance
of fire, theft or strike are examples of
pure risks. Their occurrence may result
in loss, whereas non-occurrence may
explain absence of loss, instead of gain.
1.9 NATURE OF BUSINESS RISKS
Nature of business risks can be
understood in terms of their peculiar
characteristics:
(i) Business risks arise due to
uncertainties: Uncertainty refers to
the lack of knowledge about what is
going to happen in the future. Natural
calamities, change in demand and
prices, changes in government policy,
improvement in technology, etc., are
some of the examples of uncertainty
which create risks for business because
the outcome of these future events is
not known in advance.
(ii) Risk is an essential part of every
business: Every business has some
risk. No business can avoid risk,
although the amount of risk may vary
from business to business. Risk can be
minimised, but cannot be eliminated.
(iii) Degree of risk depends mainly
upon the nature and size of
business: Nature of business (i.e., type
of goods and services produced and
sold) and size of business (i.e., volume
of production and sale) are the main
© NCERT
not to be republished
NATURE AND PURPOSE OF BUSINESS
factors which determine the amount of
risk in a business. For example, a
business dealing in fashionable items
has a high degree of risk. Similarly, a
large-scale business generally has a
higher risk than what a small scale has.
(iv) Profit is the reward for risk
taking: ‘No risk, no gain’ is an age-old
principle which applies to all types of
business. Greater the risk involved in
a business, higher is the chance of
profit. An entrepreneur undertakes
risks under the expectation of higher
profit. Profit is thus the reward for
risk taking.
1.9.1 Causes of Business Risks
Business risks arise due to a variety of
causes, which are classified as follows:
power
failure,
strikes,
riots,
management inefficiency, etc.
(iii) Economic causes: These include
uncertainties relating to demand for
goods, competition, price, collection of
dues from customers, change of
technology or method of production,
etc. Financial problems like rise in
interest rate for borrowing, levy of higher
taxes, etc., also come under these type
of causes as they result in higher
unexpected cost of operation of
business.
(iv) Other causes: These are
unforeseen events like political
disturbances, mechanical failures such
as the bursting of boiler, fluctuations
in exchange rates, etc., which lead to
the possibility of business risks.
Methods of Dealing with Risks
Although no business enterprise can escape the presence of risk, there are
many methods it can use to deal with risk situations. For instance, the enterprise
may (a) decide not to enter into too risky transaction; (b) take preventive measures
like firefighting devices to reduce risk; (c) take insurance policy to transfer risk
to insurance company; (d) assume risk by making provisions in the current
earnings as is the case of provision for bad and doubtful debts; or (e) share risks
with other enterprises as manufacturers and wholesalers may do by agreeing to
share losses which may be caused by falling prices.
(i) Natural causes: Human beings
have little control over natural
calamities like flood, earthquake,
lightning, heavy rains, famine, etc.
These result in heavy loss of life,
property and income in business.
(ii) Human causes: Human causes
include such unexpected events like
dishonesty, carelessness or negligence
of employees, stoppage of work due to
1.9.2 Starting a Business — Basic
Factors
Starting a business enterprise is similar
to any other human effort in which
resources are employed to achieve
certain objectives. Successful results in
business depend largely upon the
ability of the entrepreneurs or the
starters of a new business to anticipate
problems and solve them with
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
minimum cost. This is especially true
of the modern business world where
competition is very tough and risks are
high. Some of the problems, which
business firms encounter, are of a basic
nature. For example, to start a factory,
plans must be made and implemented
about such problems as the location
of the business, the possible number
of customers, the kind and amount of
equipment, the shop layout,  purchasing
and financing needs, and hiring of
workers. These problems become more
complex in a big business. However,
some of the basic factors, which must
be considered by anybody who is to
start the business are as follows:
(i) Selection of line of business: The
first thing to be decided by any
entrepreneur of a new business is the
nature and type of business to be
undertaken. He will obviously like to
enter that branch of industry and
commerce, which has the possibility of
greater amount of profits. The decision
will be influenced by the customer
requirements in the market and also
the kind of technical knowledge and
interest the entrepreneur has for
producing a particular product.
(ii) Size of the firm: Size of the firm
or scale of its operation is another
important decision to be taken at the
start of the business. Some factors
favour a large size whereas others tend
to restrict the scale of operation. If the
entrepreneur is confident that the
demand for the proposed product is
likely to be good over time and he can
arrange the necessary capital for
business, he will start the operation at
a large scale. If the market conditions
are uncertain and risks are high, a
small size business would be better
choice.
(iii) Choice of form of ownership:
With respect to ownership, the
business organisation may take the
form of a sale proprietorship,
partnership, or a joint stock company.
Each form has its own merits and
demerits. The choice of the suitable
form of ownership will depend on such
factors as the line of business, capital
requirements, liability of owners,
division of profit, legal formalities,
continuity of business, transferability
of interest and so on.
(iv) Location of business enterprise:
An important factor to be considered
at the start of the business is the place
where the enterprise will be located.
Any mistake in this regard can result
production,
inconvenience in getting right kind of
production inputs or serving the
customers in the best possible way.
Availability
materials
and labour; power supply and
services like banking, transportation,
communication, warehousing, etc., are
important factors while making a
choice of location.
(v) Financing the proposition:
Financing is concerned with providing
the necessary capital for starting as well
as for continuing the proposed
business. Capital is required for
investment in fixed assets like land,
building, machinery and equipment
© NCERT
not to be republished
NATURE AND PURPOSE OF BUSINESS
and in current assets like raw materials,
book debts, stock of finished goods, etc.
Capital is also required for meeting
day-to-day expenses. Proper financial
planning must be done to determine
(a) the requirement of capital,
(b) source from which capital will be
raised and (c) the best ways of utilising
the capital in the firm.
(vi) Physical facilities: Availability of
physical facilities including machines
and equipment, building and
supportive services is a very important
factor to be considered at the start of
the business. The decision relating to
this factor will depend on the nature
and size of business, availability of
funds and the process of production.
(vii) Plant layout: Once the
requirement of physical facilities has
been determined, the entrepreneur
should draw a layout plan showing the
arrangement of these facilities. Layout
means the physical arrangement of
machines and equipment needed to
manufacture a product.
(viii) Competent and committed
worked force: Every enterprise needs
competent and committed work force
to perform various activities so that
physical and financial resources are
converted into desired outputs. Since
no individual entrepreneur can do
everything himself, he must identify the
requirement of skilled and unskilled
workers and managerial staff. Plans
should also be made about how the
employees will be trained and motivated
to give their best performance.
(ix) Tax planning: Tax planning has
become necessary these days because
there are a number of tax laws in the
country and they influence almost
every aspect of the functioning of
modern business. The founder of the
business has to consider in advance
the tax liability under various tax laws
and its impact on business decisions.
(x) Launching the enterprise: After
the decisions relating to the above
mentioned factors have been taken,
the entrepreneur can go ahead with
actual launching of the enterprise
which would mean mobilising various
resources, fulfilling necessary legal
formalities, starting the production
process and initiating the sales
promotion campaign.
Key Terms
Business
Profession
Primary
Innovation
Warehousing
Profit
Employment
Secondary
Insurance
Social responsibility
Industry
Tertiary
Mining
Manufacturing
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
SUMMARY
Concept and characteristics of business: Business may be defined as an
economic activity involving the production and sale of goods and services
undertaken with the motive of earning profit by satisfying human needs in
society. It’s distinguished characteristics are: (i) an economic activity,
(ii) production or procurement of goods and services, (iii) sale or exchange
of goods and services for the satisfaction of human needs, (iv) dealings in
goods and services on a regular basis, (v) profit earning, (vi) uncertainty of
return, and (vii) element of risk.
Comparison of business, profession and employment: Business refers
to those economic activities which are connected with the production or
purchase and sale of goods or supply of services with the main object of
earning profit. Profession includes those activities, which require special
knowledge and skill to be applied by individuals in their occupation.
Employment refers to the occupation in which people work for others and
get remunerated in return. The three can be compared on the basis of
mode of establishment, nature of work, qualification required, reward or
return, capital investment, risk, transfer of interest and code of conduct.
Classification of business activities: Business activities may be classified
into broad categories: industry and commerce. Industry refers to economic
activities which are connected with conversion of resources into useful
goods. Industries may be: primary, secondary or tertiary. Primary industries
are connected with the extraction and production of natural resources and
reproduction and development of living organisms, plants, etc. Primary
industries may be: extractive (like mining) or genetic (like poultry farms).
Secondary industries are concerned with using the materials which have
already been extracted at the primary stage. These industries could be:
manufacturing or construction. Manufacturing industries may be further
classified into analytical, synthetical, processing and assembling industries.
Tertiary industries are concerned with providing support services to primary
and secondary industries as well as activities relating to trade.
Commerce includes activities relating to trade and auxiliaries to trade.
Trade refers to sale, transfer or exchange of goods. It could be classified as
internal (domestic) and external (foreign) trade. Internal trade may be
wholesale trade or retail trade. External trade could be import, export or
entrepot trade. Auxiliaries to trade are activities which assist trade. These
include transport and communication, banking and finance, insurance,
warehousing, and advertising.
Objectives of business: Although earning of profit is considered to be the
primary objective, objectives are needed in every area where performance
results affect the survival and prosperity of business. Some of these areas
are: market standing, innovation, productivity, physical and financial
© NCERT
not to be republished
NATURE AND PURPOSE OF BUSINESS
resources, earning profits manager performance and development, worker
performance and attitude, and social responsibility.
Business risks: The term ‘risk’ refers to the possibility of inadequate profits
or even losses due to uncertainties or unexpected events. Its nature can be
explained with the help of its peculiar characteristics which are:
(i) Business risks arise due to uncertainties,
(ii) Risk is an essential part of every business,
(iii) Degree of risk depends mainly upon the nature and size of business,
(iv) Profit is the reward for risk taking. Business risks arise due to a variety
of causes including natural, human, economic and other causes.
Starting a business — basic factors: Some of the basic factors which must
be considered by anybody who is to start the business are: selection of line
of business, size of the firm, choice of form of ownership, location of business
enterprise, financing the proposition, physical facilities, plant layout
competent and committed workforce, tax planning and launching the
enterprise.
EXERCISES
Multiple Choice Questions
Which of the following does not characterise business activity?
Production of goods
Presence of risk
and services
Sale or exchange of
Salary or wages
goods and services
Which of the broad categories of industries covers oil refinery and sugar
mills?
Primary
Secondary
Tertiary
None of them
Which of the following cannot be classified as an auxilliary to trade?
Mining
Insurance
Warehousing
Transport
The occupation in which people work for others and get remunerated in
return is known as
Business
Employment
Profession
None of them
The industries which provide support services to other industries are
known as
Primary industries
Secondary industries
Commercial industries
Tertiary industries
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Which of the following cannot be classified as an objective of business?
Investment
Productivity
Innovation
Profit earning
Business risk is not likely to arise due to
Changes in government policy
Good management
Employee dishonesty
Power failure
Short Answer Questions
State the different types of economic activities.
Why is business considered an economic activity?
Explain the concept of business.
How would you classify business activities?
What are various types of industries?
Explain any two business activities which are auxiliaries to trade.
What is the role of profit in business?
What is business risk? What is its nature?
Long Answer Questions
Explain the characteristics of business.
Compare business with profession and employment.
Explain with examples the various types of industries.
Describe the activities relating to commerce.
Why does business need multiple objective? Explain any five such
objectives.
Explain the concept of business risk and its causes.
What factors are important to be considered while starting a business?
Explain.
Projects/Assignments
Choose a locally operated trading or business unit. Find out the kind of
risks it faces in business and the way it deals with them.
Select a local business enterprise and find out the objectives it pursues.
Check why it does not pursue other objectives.
© NCERT
not to be republished
CHAPTER 2
FORMS OF BUSINESS
ORGANISATION
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
identify different forms of business organisation;
explain features, merits and limitations of select forms of business
organisation;
distinguish between various forms of organisation; and
analyse factors determining choice of an appropriate form of
business organisation.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
2.1 INTRODUCTION
If one is planning to start a business or
is interested in expanding an existing
one, an important decision relates to
the choice of the form of organisation.
The most appropriate form is
determined
weighing
advantages and disadvantages of each
type of organisation against one’s own
requirements.
Various forms of business
organisations from which one can
choose the right one include:
(a) Sole proprietorship,
(b) Joint Hindu family business,
(c) Partnership,
(d) Cooperative societies, and
(e) Joint stock company.
Let us start our discussion with
sole proprietorship — the simplest form
of business organisation, and then
move on to analysing more complex
forms of organisations.
2.2 SOLE PROPRIETORSHIP
Do you often go in the evenings to buy
registers, pens, chart papers, etc., from
a small neighbourhood stationery
store? Well, in all probability in the
course of your transactions, you have
interacted with a sole proprietor.
Sole proprietorship is a popular
form of business organisation and is
the most suitable form for small
businesses, especially in their initial
years of operation. Sole proprietorship
Neha, a bright final year student was waiting for her results to be declared.
While at home she decided to put her free time to use. Having an aptitude for
painting, she tried her hand at decorating clay pots and bowls with designs.
She was excited at the praise showered on her by her friends and acquaintances
on her work. She even managed to sell a few pieces of unique hand pottery from
her home to people living in and around her colony. Operating from home, she
was able to save on rental payments. She gained a lot of popularity by word of
mouth publicity as a sole proprietor. She further perfected her skills of painting
pottery and created new motifs and designs. All this generated great interest
among her customers and provided a boost to the demand for her products. By
the end of summer, she found that she had been able to make a profit of Rs.
2500 from her paltry investment in colours, pottery and drawing sheets. She felt
motivated to take up this work as a career. She has, therefore, decided to set up
her own artwork business. She can continue running the business on her own
as a sole proprietor, but she needs more money for doing business on a larger
scale. Her father has suggested that she should form a  partnership with her
cousin to meet the need for additional funds and for sharing the responsibilities
and risks. Side by side, he is of the opinion that it is possible that the business
might grow further and may require the formation of a company. She is in a fix
as to what form of business organisation she should go in for?
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION
refers to a form of business organisation
which is owned, managed and
controlled by an individual who is the
recipient of all profits and bearer of all
risks. This is evident from the term
itself. The word “sole” implies “only”,
and “proprietor” refers to “owner”.
Hence, a sole proprietor is the one who
is the only owner of a business.
This form of business is particularly
common in areas of personalised
services such as beauty parlours, hair
saloons and small scale activities like
running a retail shop in a locality.
payment of debts in case the assets of
the business are not sufficient to meet
all the debts. As such the owner’s
personal possessions such as his/her
personal car and other assets could be
sold for repaying the debt. Suppose the
total outside liabilities of XYZ dry
cleaner, a sole proprietorship firm, are
Rs. 80,000 at the time of dissolution, but
its assets are Rs. 60,000 only. In such a
situation the proprietor will have to bring
in Rs. 20,000 from her personal sources
even if she has to sell her personal
property to repay the firm’s debts.
Features
Salient characteristics of the sole
proprietorship form of organisation are
as follows:
(i) Formation and closure: Hardly
any legal formalities are required to
start a sole proprietary business,
though in some cases one may require
a license. There is no separate law that
governs sole proprietorship. Closure of
the business can also be done easily.
Thus, there is ease in formation as well
as closure of business.
(ii) Liability: Sole proprietors have
unlimited liability. This implies that the
owner is personally responsible for
(iii) Sole risk bearer and profit
recipient: The risk of failure of
business is borne all alone by the sole
proprietor. However, if the business is
successful, the proprietor enjoys all the
benefits. He receives all the business
profits which become a direct reward
for his risk bearing.
(iv) Control: The right to run the
business and make all decisions lies
absolutely with the sole proprietor. He
can carry out his plans without any
interference from others.
(v) No separate entity: In the eyes of
the law, no distinction is made between
the sole trader and his business, as
business does not have an identity
Sole trader is a type of business unit where a person is solely responsible for
providing the capital, for bearing the risk of the enterprise and for the management
of business.
J.L. Hansen
The individual proprietorship is the form of business organisation at the head of
which stands an individual as one who is responsible, who directs its operations
and who alone runs the risk of failure.
L.H. Haney
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
separate from the owner. The owner is,
therefore, held responsible for all the
activities of the business.
(vi) Lack of business continuity:
Since the owner and business are one
and the same entity, death, insanity,
imprisonment, physical ailment or
bankruptcy of the sole proprietor will
have a direct and detrimental effect on
the business and may even cause
closure of the business.
consult others. This may lead to timely
capitalisation of market opportunities
as and when they arise.
(ii) Confidentiality of information:
Sole decision making authority enables
the proprietor to keep all the
information related to business
operations confidential and maintain
secrecy. A sole trader is also not bound
by law to publish firm’s accounts.
(iii) Direct incentive: A sole
proprietor directly reaps the benefits
Merits
Sole proprietorship offers many
advantages. Some of the important ones
are as follows:
(i) Quick decision making: A sole
proprietor enjoys considerable degree
of freedom in making business
decisions. Further the decision making
is prompt because there is no need to
of his/her efforts as he/she is the sole
recipient of all the profit. The need to
share profits does not arise as he/she
is the single owner. This provides
maximum incentive to the sole trader
to work hard.
(iv) Sense of accomplishment: There
is a personal satisfaction involved in
working for oneself. The knowledge
that one is responsible for the success
A Refreshing Start: Coca Cola Owes its Origin to a Sole Proprietor!
The product that has given the world its best-known taste was born in Atlanta,
Georgia, on May 8, 1886. Dr. John Stith Pemberton, a local pharmacist, produced
the syrup for Coca-Cola®, and carried a jug of the new product down the street to
Jacobs’ Pharmacy, where it was sampled, pronounced “excellent” and placed on
sale for five cents a glass as a soda fountain drink. Dr. Pemberton never realised
the potential of the beverage he created. He gradually sold portions of his business
to various partners and, just prior to his death in 1888, sold his remaining interest
in Coca-Cola to Asa G. Candler. An Atlantan with great business acumen, Mr.
Candler proceeded to buy additional business rights and acquire complete control.
On May 1, 1889, Asa Candler published a full-page advertisement in The Atlanta
Journal, proclaiming his wholesale and retail drug business as “sole proprietors
of Coca-Cola ... Delicious. Refreshing. Exhilarating. Invigorating.” Sole
ownership, which Mr. Candler did not actually achieve until 1891, needed an
investment of $ 2,300.
It was only in 1892 that Mr. Candler formed a company called The Coca-Cola
Corporation.
Source: Website of Coca Cola company.
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION
of the business not only contributes to
self-satisfaction but also instils in the
individual a sense of accomplishment
and confidence in one’s abilities.
(v) Ease of formation and closure:
important
merit
proprietorship is the possibility of
entering into business with minimal
legal formalities. There is no separate
law that governs sole proprietorship. As
sole proprietorship is the least
regulated form of business, it is easy
to start and close the business as per
the wish of the owner.
Limitations
Notwithstanding various advantages,
the sole proprietorship form of
organisation is not free from
limitations. Some of the major
limitations of sole proprietorship are
as follows:
(i) Limited resources: Resources of
a sole proprietor are limited to his/her
personal savings and borrowings from
others. Banks and other lending
institutions may hesitate to extend a
long term loan to a sole proprietor.
Lack of resources is one of the major
reasons why the size of the business
rarely grows much and generally
remains small.
(ii) Limited life of a business
concern: In the eyes of the law the
proprietorship and the owner are
considered one and the same. Death,
insolvency or illness of a proprietor
affects the business and can lead to
its closure.
(iii) Unlimited liability: A major
disadvantage of sole proprietorship is
that the owner has unlimited liability. If
the business fails, the creditors can
recover their dues not merely from the
business assets, but also from the
personal assets of the proprietor. A
poor decision or an unfavourable
circumstance can create serious
financial burden on the owners. That is
why a sole proprietor is less inclined to
take risks in the form of innovation
or expansion.
(iv) Limited managerial ability: The
owner has to assume the responsibility
of varied managerial tasks such as
purchasing, selling, financing, etc. It is
rare to find an individual who excels in
all these areas. Thus decision making
may not be balanced in all the cases.
Also, due to limited resources, sole
proprietor may not be able to employ
and retain talented and ambitious
employees.
Though sole proprietorship suffers
from various shortcomings, many
entrepreneurs opt for this form of
organisation because of its inherent
advantages. It requires less amount of
capital. It is best suited for businesses
which are carried out on a small scale
and where customers demand
personalised services.
2.3 JOINT HINDU FAMILY BUSINESS
Joint Hindu family business is a
specific form of business organisation
found only in India. It is one of the
oldest forms of business organisation
in the country. It refers to a form of
organisation wherein the business is
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
owned and carried on by the members
of the Hindu Undivided Family (HUF).
It is governed by the Hindu Law. The
basis of membership in the business is
birth in a particular family and three
successive generations can be members
in the business.
The business is controlled by the
head of the family who is the eldest
member and is called karta. All
members have equal ownership right
over the property of an ancestor and
they are known as co-parceners.
systems. Dayabhaga system prevails
in West Bengal and allows both the
male and female members of the family
to be co-parceners. Mitakashara
system, on the other hand, prevails all
over India except West Bengal and
allows only the male members to be
co-parceners in the business.
Features
The following points highlight the
essential characteristics of the joint
Hindu family business.
There are two systems which govern
membership in the family business,
viz., Dayabhaga and Mitakashara
(i) Formation: For a joint Hindu family
business, there should be at least two
members in the family and ancestral
Gender Equality in the Joint Hindu Family a Reality
With the introduction of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Bill 2004 in
Parliament on December 20, 2004, the Government has gone a step further in
fulfilling its commitment towards gender equality made in National Common
Minimum Programme (NCMP). The Bill to amend the Hindu Succession Act of
1956 gives women equal rights in the inheritance of ancestral wealth, something
reserved only for male heirs earlier. It, indeed, is a significant step in bringing
the Hindu Law of inheritance in accord with the constitutional principle of
equality. The enactment of the proposed legislation would also implement the
recommendations of the National Commission for Women (NCW) substantially
to help bring social change in society. The Bill seeks to remove the discrimination
as contained in section 6 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 by giving equal
rights to daughters in the Hindu Mitakshara coparcenary property as the
sons have.
In what is known as the Kerala model, the concept of coparcenary was abolished
and according to the Kerala Joint Family System (Abolition) Act, 1975, the heirs
(male and female) do not acquire property by birth but only hold it as tenants as
if a partition has taken place. Andhra Pradesh (1986), Tamil Nadu (1989),
Karnataka (1994) and Maharashtra (1994) also enacted laws, where daughters
were granted ‘coparcener’ rights or a claim on ancestral property by birth as
the sons.
Equality for women is not just a matter of equity for the so-called weaker sex,
but a measure of the modernity of Indian society and the pragmatic nature of
our civilisation. (PIB Features)
Source: Adapted from E C Thomas, “The Road to Gender Equality”.
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION
property to be inherited by them. The
business does not require any
agreement as membership is by birth.
It is governed by the Hindu Succession
Act, 1956.
(ii) Liability: The liability of all
members except the karta is limited to
their share of co-parcenery property of
the business. The karta, however, has
unlimited liability.
(iii) Control: The control of the family
business lies with the karta. He takes
all the decisions and is authorised to
manage the business.  His decisions are
binding on the other members.
(iv) Continuity: The business
continues even after the death of the
karta as the next eldest member takes
up the position of karta, leaving the
business stable. The business can,
however, be terminated with the
mutual consent of the members.
(v) Minor Members: The inclusion of
an individual into the business occurs
due to birth in a Hindu Undivided
Family. Hence, minors can also be
members of the business.
Merits
The advantages of the joint Hindu
family business are as follows:
(i) Effective control: The karta has
absolute decision making power. This
avoids conflicts among members as no
one can interfere with his right to
decide.  This also leads to prompt and
flexible decision making.
(ii) Continued business existence:
The death of the karta will not affect
the business as the next eldest member
will then take up the position. Hence,
operations are not terminated and
continuity of business is not
threatened.
(iii) Limited liability of members:
The liability of all the co-parceners
except the karta is limited to their share
in the business, and consequently their
risk is well-defined and precise.
(iv) Increased
loyalty
cooperation: Since the business is run
by the members of a family, there is a
greater sense of loyalty towards one
other. Pride in the growth of business
is linked to the achievements of the
family. This helps in securing better
cooperation from all the members.
Limitation
The following are some of the
limitations of a joint Hindu family
business.
(i) Limited resources: The joint Hindu
family business faces the problem of
limited capital as it depends mainly on
ancestral property.  This limits the
scope for expansion of business.
(ii) Unlimited liability of karta: The
karta is burdened not only with the
responsibility of decision making and
management of business, but also
suffers from the disadvantage of
having unlimited liability. His personal
property can be used to repay business
debts.
(iii) Dominance of karta: The karta
individually manages the business
which may at times not be acceptable
to other members. This may cause
conflict amongst them and may even
lead to break down of the family unit.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(iv) Limited managerial skills: Since
the karta cannot be an expert in all
areas of management, the business
may suffer as a result of his unwise
decisions. His inability to decide
effectively may result into poor profits
or even losses for the organisation.
The joint Hindu family business is
on the decline because of the
diminishing number of joint Hindu
families in the country.
2.4 PARTNERSHIP
The inherent disadvantage of the sole
proprietorship in financing and
managing an expanding business paved
the way for partnership as a viable option.
Partnership serves as an answer to the
needs of greater capital investment,
varied skills and sharing of risks.
(i) Formation: The partnership form
of business organisation is governed by
the Indian Partnership Act, 1932. It
comes into existence through a legal
agreement wherein the terms and
conditions governing the relationship
among the partners, sharing of profits
and losses and the manner of
conducting the business are specified.
It may be pointed out that the business
must be lawful and run with the motive
of profit. Thus, two people coming
together for charitable purposes will
not constitute a partnership.
(ii) Liability: The partners of a firm
have unlimited liability. Personal assets
may be used for repaying debts in case
the business assets are insufficient.
Further, the partners are jointly and
individually liable for payment of debts.
The Indian Partnership Act, 1932
defines partnership as “the relation
between persons who have agreed to
share the profit of the business
carried on by all or any one of them
acting for all.”
Features
Definitions given above point to the
following major characteristics of
the partnership form of business
organisation.
Jointly, all the partners are responsible
for the debts and they contribute in
proportion to their share in business
and as such are liable to that extent.
Individually too, each partner can be
held responsible repaying the debts of
the business. However, such a partner
can later recover from other partners
an amount of money equivalent to the
shares in liability defined as per the
partnership agreement.
Partnership is the relation between persons competent to make contracts who
have agreed to carry on a lawful business in common with a view to private gain.
L H Haney
Partnership is the relation which subsists between persons who have agreed to
combine their property, labour or skill in some business and to share the profits
therefrom between them.
The Indian Contract Act
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION
(iii) Risk bearing: The partners bear
the risks involved in running a business
as a team. The reward comes in the
form of profits which are shared by the
partners in an agreed ratio. However,
they also share losses in the same ratio
in the event of the firm incurring losses.
(iv) Decision making and control:
The partners share amongst themselves
the responsibility of decision making
and control of day to day activities.
Decisions are generally taken with
mutual consent. Thus, the activities of
a partnership firm are managed
through the joint efforts of all the
partners.
(v) Continuity: Partnership is
characterised by lack of continuity of
business since the death, retirement,
insolvency or insanity of any partner
can bring an end to the business.
However, the remaining partners may
if they so desire continue the business
on the basis of a new agreement.
(vi) Membership: The minimum
number of members needed to start a
partnership firm is two, while the
maximum number, in case of banking
industry is ten and in case of other
businesses it is twenty.
(vii) Mutual agency: The definition of
partnership highlights the fact that it
is a business carried on by all or any
one of the partners acting for all. In
other words, every partner is both an
agent and a principal. He is an agent of
other partners as he represents them
and thereby binds them through his
acts.  He is a principal as he too can be
bound by the acts of other partners.
Merits
The following points describe the
advantages of a partnership firm.
(i) Ease of formation and closure:
A partnership firm can be formed
easily by putting an agreement
between the prospective partners into
place whereby they agree to carryout
the business of the firm and share
risks. There is no compulsion with
respect to registration of the firm.
Closure of the firm too is an easy task.
(ii) Balanced decision making: The
partners can oversee different
functions according to their areas of
expertise. Because an individual is not
forced to handle different activities, this
not only reduces the burden of work
but also leads to fewer errors in
judgements. As a consequence,
decisions are likely to be more
balanced.
(iii) More funds: In a partnership, the
capital is contributed by a number of
partners. This makes it possible to
raise larger amount of funds as
compared to a sole proprietor and
undertake additional operations when
needed.
(iv) Sharing of risks: The risks
involved in running a partnership firm
are shared by all the partners. This
reduces the anxiety, burden and
stress on individual partners.
(v) Secrecy: A partnership firm is not
legally required to publish its
accounts and submit its reports.
Hence it is able to maintain
confidentiality of information relating
to its operations.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Limitations
A partnership firm of business
organisation suffers from the following
limitations:
(i) Unlimited liability: Partners are
liable to repay debts even from their
personal resources in case the business
assets are not sufficient to meet its debts.
The liability of partners is both joint and
several which may prove to be a
drawback for those partners who have
greater personal wealth. They will have
to repay the entire debt in case the other
partners are unable to do so.
(ii) Limited resources: There is a
restriction on the number of partners,
and hence contribution in terms of
capital investment is usually not
sufficient to support large scale business
operations. As a result, partnership firms
face problems in expansion beyond a
certain size.
(iii) Possibility
conflicts:
Partnership is run by a group of persons
wherein decision making authority is
shared. Difference in opinion on some
issues may lead to disputes between
partners. Further, decisions of one
partner are binding on other partners.
Thus an unwise decision by some one
may result in financial ruin for all others.
In case a partner desires to leave the
firm, this can result in termination of
partnership as there is a restriction on
transfer of ownership.
(iv) Lack of continuity: Partnership
comes to an end with the death,
retirement, insolvency or lunacy of any
partner. It may result in lack of
continuity. However, the remaining
partners can enter into a fresh agreement
and continue to run the business.
(v) Lack of public confidence: A
partnership firm is not legally required
to publish its financial reports or make
other related information public. It is,
therefore, difficult for any member of the
public to ascertain the true financial
status of a partnership firm. As a result,
the confidence of the public in
partnership firms is generally low.
2.4.1 Types of Partners
A partnership firm can have different
types of partners with different roles and
liabilities. An understanding of these
types is important for a clear
understanding of their rights and
responsibilities. These are described as
follows:
(i) Active partner: An active partner is
contributes
capital,
participates in the management of the
firm, shares its profits and losses, and
is liable to an unlimited extent to the
creditors of the firm. These partners
take actual part in carrying out
business of the firm on behalf of other
partners.
(ii) Sleeping or dormant partner:
Partners who do not take part in the day
to day activities of the business are
called sleeping partners. A sleeping
partner, however, contributes capital to
the firm, shares its profits and losses,
and has unlimited liability.
(iii) Secret partner: A secret partner is
one whose association with the firm is
unknown to the general public. Other
than this distinct feature, in all other
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION
aspects he is like the rest of the partners.
He contributes to the capital of the firm,
takes part in the management, shares
its profits and losses, and has unlimited
liability towards the creditors.
(iv) Nominal partner: A nominal
partner is one who allows the use of
his/her name by a firm, but does not
contribute to its capital. He/she does
not take active part in managing the
firm, does not share its profit or losses
but is liable, like other partners, to the
third parties, for the repayments of the
firm’s debts.
(v) Partner by estoppel: A person is
considered a partner by estoppel if,
through his/her own initiative, conduct
or behaviour, he/she gives an
impression to others that he/she is a
partner of the firm. Such partners are
held liable for the debts of the firm
because in the eyes of the third party
they are considered partners, even
though they do not contribute capital
or take part in its management.
Suppose Rani is a friend of Seema who
is a partner in a software firm —
Simplex Solutions. On Seema’s request,
Rani accompanies her to a business
meeting with Mohan Softwares and
actively participates in the negotiation
process for a business deal and gives
the impression that she is also a partner
in Simplex Solutions. If credit is
extended to Simplex Solutions on the
basis of these negotiations, Rani would
also be liable for repayment of such
debt, as if she is a partner of the firm.
(vi) Partner by holding out: A partner
by ‘holding out’ is a person who though
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
is not a partner in a firm but
knowingly allows himself/herself to be
represented as a partner in a firm.
Such a person becomes liable to
outside creditors for repayment of any
debts which have been extended to the
basis
representation. In case he is not really
a partner and wants to save himself
from such a liability, he should
immediately issue a denial, clarifying
his position that he is not a partner in
the firm. If he does not do so, he will
be responsible to the third party for
any such debts.
2.4.2 Types of Partnerships
Partnerships can be classified on the
basis of two factors, viz., duration and
liability. On the basis of duration, there
can be two types of partnerships :
‘partnership at will’ and ‘particular
partnership’. On the basis of liability,
the two types of partnership include:
one ‘with limited liability’ and the other
one ‘with unlimited liability’. These types
are described in the following sections.
Classification on the basis of
duration
(i) Partnership at will: This type of
partnership exists at the will of the
partners. It can continue as long as
the partners want and is terminated
when any partner gives a notice of
withdrawal from partnership to the
firm.
(ii) Particular partnership: Partner-
ship formed for the accomplishment of
a particular project say construction
of a building or an activity to be carried
on for a specified time period is called
particular partnership. It dissolves
automatically when the purpose for
which it was formed is fulfilled or when
the time duration expires.
Minor as a Partner
Partnership is based on legal contract between two persons who agree to share
the profits or losses of a business carried on by them. As such a minor is
incompetent to enter into a valid contract with others, he cannot become a
partner in any firm. However, a minor can be admitted to the benefits of a
partnership firm with the mutual consent of all other partners. In such cases,
his liability will be limited to the extent of the capital contributed by him and in
the firm. He will not be eligible to take an active part in the management of the
firm. Thus, a minor can share only the profits and can not be asked to bear the
losses. However, he can if he wishes, inspect the accounts of the firm. The status
of a minor changes when he attains majority. In fact, on attaining majority, the
minor has to decide whether he would like to become a partner in the firm. He
has to give a public notice of his decision within six months of attaining majority.
If he fails to do so, within the stipulated time, he will be treated as a full-fledged
partner and will become liable to the debts of the firm to an unlimited extent, in
the same way as other active partners are.
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION
Classification on the basis of
liability
(i) General Partnership: In general
partnership, the liability of partners is
unlimited and joint. The partners enjoy
the right to participate in the
management of the firm and their acts
are binding on each other as well as
on the firm. Registration of the firm is
optional. The existence of the firm is
affected by the death, lunacy,
insolvency or retirement of the partners.
(ii) Limited Partnership: In limited
partnership, the liability of at least one
partner is unlimited whereas the rest
may have limited liability. Such a
partnership does not get terminated
with the death, lunacy or insolvency of
the limited partners. The limited
partners do not enjoy the right of
management and their acts do not bind
the firm or the other partners.
Registration of such partnership is
compulsory.
This form of partnership was not
permitted in India earlier. The
permission to form partnership firms
with limited liability has been granted
after introduction of New Small
Enterprise Policy in 1991. The idea
behind such a move has been to enable
the partnership firms to attract equity
capital from friends and relatives of
small scale entrepreneurs who were
earlier reluctant to help, due to the
existence of unlimited liability clause
in the partnership form of business.
2.4.3 Partnership Deed
A partnership is a voluntary association
of people who come together for
achieving common objectives. In order
to enter into partnership, a clear
agreement with respect to the terms,
conditions and all aspects concerning
the partners is essential so that there
is no misunderstanding later among
the partners. Such an agreement can
be oral or written. Even though it is not
essential to have a written agreement,
it is advisable to have a written
agreement as it constitutes an evidence
of the conditions agreed upon. The
written agreement which specifies the
terms and conditions that govern the
partnership is called the partnership
deed.
The partnership deed generally
includes the following aspects:
Price Waterhouse Coopers was a Partnership Firm earlier
Price Waterhouse Coopers, one of the world’s top accountancy firms has been
created in 1998 by the merger of two companies, Price Waterhouse and Coopers
and Lybrand — each with historical roots going back some 150 years to the
19th century Great Britain. In 1850, Samuel Lowell Price set up his accounting
business in London. In 1865, he was joined in partnership by William H. Holyland
and Edwin Waterhouse. As the firm grew, qualified members of its professional
staff were admitted to the partnership. By the late 1800s, Price Waterhouse had
gained significant recognition as an accounting firm.
Source: Price Waterhouse Coopers archives in Columbia University.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
• Name of firm
• Nature of business and location of
business
• Duration of business
• Investment made by each partner
• Distribution of profits and losses
• Duties and obligations of the
partners
• Salaries and withdrawals of the
partners
• Terms governing admission,
retirement and expulsion of a
partner
• Interest on capital and interest on
drawings
• Procedure for dissolution of the
• Preparation of accounts and their
auditing
• Method of solving disputes
2.4.4 Registration
Registration of a partnership firm
means the entering of the firm’s name,
along with the relevant prescribed par-
ticulars, in the Register of firms kept
with the Registrar of Firms. It provides
conclusive proof of the existence of a
partnership firm.
It is optional for a partnership firm
to get registered. In case a firm does
not get registered, it is deprived of
many benefits. The consequences of
non-registration of a firm are as follows:
(a) A partner of an unregistered firm
cannot file a suit against the firm
or other partners,
(b) The firm cannot file a suit against
third parties, and
(c) The firm cannot file a case against
the partners.
In view of these consequences, it is
therefore advisable to get the firm reg-
istered. According to the Indian Part-
nership Act 1932, the partners may get
the firm registered with the Registrar
of firms of the state in which the firm is
situated. The registration can be at the
time of formation or at any time during
its existence. The procedure for getting
a firm registered is as follows:
1. Submission of application in the
prescribed form to the Registrar of
firms. The application should
contain the following particulars:
• Name of the firm
• Location of the firm
• Names of other places where the
firm carries on business
• The date when each partner joined
the firm
• Names and addresses of the
partners
• Duration of partnership
This application should be signed by
all the partners.
2. Deposit of required fees with the
Registrar of Firms.
3. The Registrar after approval will
make an entry in the register of
firms and will subsequently issue
a certificate of registration.
2.5   COOPERATIVE SOCIETY
The word cooperative means working
together and with others for a common
purpose.
The cooperative society is a
voluntary association of persons, who
join together with the motive of welfare
of the members. They are driven by the
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION
need to protect their economic interests
in the face of possible exploitation at
the hands of middlemen obsessed with
the desire to earn greater profits.
The cooperative society is
compulsorily required to be registered
under the Cooperative Societies Act
1912. The process of setting up a
cooperative society is simple enough
and at the most what is required is the
consent of at least ten adult persons
to form a society. The capital of a
society is raised from its members
through issue of shares. The society
acquires a distinct legal identity after
its registration.
Features
The characteristics of a cooperative
society are listed below.
(i) Voluntary membership: The
membership of a cooperative society
is voluntary. A person is free to join a
cooperative society, and can also leave
anytime as per his desire. There
cannot be any compulsion for him to
join or quit a society. Although
procedurally a member is required to
serve a notice before leaving the
society, there is no compulsion to
remain a member. Membership is open
to all, irrespective of their religion,
caste, and gender.
(ii) Legal status: Registration of a
cooperative society is compulsory. This
accords a separate identity to the society
which is distinct from its members. The
society can enter into contracts and
hold property in its name, sue and be
sued by others. As a result of being a
separate legal entity, it is not affected
by the entry or exit of its members.
(iii) Limited liability: The liability of
the members of a cooperative society is
limited to the extent of the amount
contributed by them as capital. This
defines the maximum risk that a
member can be asked to bear.
(iv) Control: In a cooperative society,
the power to take decisions lies in the
hands of an elected managing
committee. The right to vote gives the
members a chance to choose the
members who will constitute the
managing committee and this lends the
cooperative society a democratic
character.
(v) Service motive: The cooperative
society through its purpose lays
emphasis on the values of mutual help
and welfare. Hence, the motive of service
dominates its working. If any surplus
is generated as a result of its
operations, it is distributed amongst
the members as dividend in conformity
with the bye-laws of the society.
Cooperative is a form of organisation wherein persons voluntarily associate
together as human beings on the basis of equality for the promotion of an economic
interest for themselves.
E. H. Calvert
Cooperative organisation is “a society which has its objectives for the promotion
of economic interests of its members in accordance with cooperative principles.
The Indian Cooperative Societies Act 1912
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Merits
The cooperative society offers many
benefits to its members. Some of the
advantages of the cooperative form of
organisation are as follows.
(i) Equality in voting status:  The
principle of ‘one man one vote’ governs
the cooperative society. Irrespective of
the amount of capital contribution by
a member, each member is entitled to
equal voting rights.
(ii) Limited liability: The liability of
members of a cooperative society is
limited to the extent of their capital
contribution. The personal assets of the
members are, therefore, safe from being
used to repay business debts.
(iii) Stable existence: Death,
bankruptcy or insanity of the members
do not affect continuity of a cooperative
society. A society, therefore, operates
unaffected by any change in the
membership.
(iv) Economy in operations: The
members generally offer honorary
services to the society. As the focus is
on elimination of middlemen, this helps
in reducing costs. The customers or
producers themselves are members of
the society, and hence the risk of bad
debts is lower.
(v) Support from government: The
cooperative society exemplifies the idea
of democracy and hence finds support
from the Government in the form of low
taxes, subsidies, and low interest rates
on loans.
(vi) Ease
formation:
cooperative society can be started with
a minimum of ten members. The
registration procedure is simple
involving a few legal formalities. Its
formation is governed by the provisions
of Cooperative Societies Act 1912.
Limitations
The cooperative form of organisation
suffers from the following limitations:
(i) Limited resources: Resources of a
cooperative society consists of capital
contributions of the members with
limited means. The low rate of dividend
offered on investment also acts as a
deterrent in attracting membership or
more capital from the members.
(ii) Inefficiency in management:
Cooperative societies are unable to
attract and employ expert managers
because of their inability to pay them
high salaries. The members who offer
honorary services on a voluntary basis
are generally not professionally
equipped to handle the management
functions effectively.
(iii) Lack of secrecy: As a result of
open discussions in the meetings of
members as well as disclosure
obligations as per the Societies Act (7),
it is difficult to maintain secrecy about
the operations of a cooperative society.
(iv) Government control: In return of
the privileges offered by the
government, cooperative societies have
to comply with several rules and
regulations related to auditing of
accounts, submission of accounts, etc.
Interference in the functioning of the
cooperative organisation through the
control exercised by the state
cooperative departments also negatively
affects its freedom of operation.
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION
(v) Differences of opinion: Internal
quarrels arising as a result of contrary
viewpoints may lead to difficulties in
decision making. Personal interests
may start to dominate the welfare
motive and the benefit of other
members may take a backseat if
personal gain is given preference by
certain members.
2.5.1 Types of Cooperative
Societies
Various types of cooperative societies
based on the nature of their operations
are described below:
(i) Consumer’s cooperative societies:
The consumer cooperative societies are
formed to protect the interests of
consumers. The members comprise of
consumers desirous of obtaining good
quality products at reasonable prices.
The society aims at eliminating
middlemen to achieve economy in
operations. It purchases goods in bulk
directly from the wholesalers and sells
goods to the members, thereby
eliminating the middlemen. Profits, if
any, are distributed on the basis of
either their capital contributions to the
society or purchases made by
individual members.
(ii) Producer’s cooperative societies:
These societies are set up to protect the
interest of small producers. The
members comprise of producers
desirous of procuring inputs for
production of goods to meet the
demands of consumers. The society
aims to fight against the big capitalists
and enhance the bargaining power of
the small producers. It supplies raw
materials, equipment and other inputs
to the members and also buys their
output for sale. Profits among the
members are generally distributed on
Amul’s amazing Cooperative ventures!
Every day Amul collects 4,47,000 litres of milk from 2.12 million farmers (many
illiterate), converts the milk into branded, packaged products, and delivers goods
worth Rs. 6 crore (Rs. 60 million) to over 5,00,000 retail outlets across the country.
It all started in December 1946 with a group of farmers keen to free themselves
from intermediaries, gain access to markets and thereby ensure maximum returns
for their efforts. Based in the village of Anand, the Khera District Milk Cooperative
Union (better known as Amul) expanded exponentially. It joined hands with other
milk cooperatives, and the Gujarat network now covers 2.12 million farmers, 10,411
village level milk collection centres and fourteen district level plants (unions).
Amul is the common brand for most product categories produced by various unions:
liquid milk, milk powder, butter, ghee, cheese, cocoa products, sweets, ice-cream
and condensed milk. Amul’s sub-brands include variants such as Amulspray,
Amulspree, Amulya and Nutramul. The edible oil products are grouped around
Dhara and Lokdhara, mineral water is sold under the Jal Dhara brand while
fruit drinks bear the name Safal.
Source: Adapted from Pankaj Chandra, “Rediff.com”, Business Special, September 2005.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
the basis of their contributions to the
total pool of goods produced or sold
by the society.
(iii) Marketing cooperative societies:
Such societies are established to help
small producers in selling their
products. The members consist of
producers who wish to obtain
reasonable prices for their output. The
society aims to eliminate middlemen
and improve competitive position of its
members by securing a favourable
market for the products. It pools the
output of individual members and
performs marketing functions like
(iv) Farmer’s cooperative societies:
These societies are established to
protect the interests of farmers by
providing better inputs at a reasonable
cost. The members comprise of farmers
who wish to jointly take up farming
activities. The aim is to gain the benefits
of large scale farming and increase the
productivity. Such societies provide
better quality seeds, fertilisers,
machinery and other modern
techniques for use in the cultivation of
crops. This helps not only in improving
the yield and returns to the farmers,
but also solves the problems associated
transportation, warehousing, packaging,
etc., to sell the output at the best
possible price. Profits are distributed
according
member’s
contribution to the pool of output.
with the farming on fragmented land
holdings.
(v) Credit cooperative societies:
Credit cooperative societies are
established for providing easy credit
Table 2.2    Indian Companies in League of
FORTUNE GLOBAL 500 Organisations
Source: Adapted from The Fortune Global 500, July 25, 2005.
.lir.
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION
on reasonable terms to the members.
The members comprise of persons who
seek financial help in the form of loans.
The aim of such societies is to protect
the members from the exploitation of
lenders who charge high rates of
interest on loans. Such societies provide
loans to members out of the amounts
collected as capital and deposits from
the members and charge low rates
of interest.
(vi) Cooperative housing societies:
Cooperative housing societies are
established to help people with limited
income to construct houses at
reasonable costs. The members of these
societies consist of people who are
desirous of procuring residential
accommodation at lower costs. The aim
is to solve the housing problems of the
members by constructing houses and
giving the option of paying in
instalments. These societies construct
flats or provide plots to members on
which the members themselves can
construct the houses as per their choice.
2.6 JOINT STOCK COMPANY
A company is an association of persons
formed for carrying out business
activities and has a legal status
independent of its members. The
company form of organisation is
governed by The Companies Act, 1956.
A company can be described as an
artificial person having a separate legal
entity, perpetual succession and a
common seal.
The shareholders are the owners of
the company while the Board of
Directors is the chief managing body
elected by the shareholders. Usually,
the owners exercise an indirect control
over the business. The capital of the
company is divided into smaller parts
called ‘shares’ which can be transferred
freely from one shareholder to another
person (except in a private company).
Features
The definition of a joint stock company
highlights the following features of a
company.
(i) Artificial person: A company is a
creation of law and exists independent
of its members. Like natural persons,
a company can own property, incur
debts, borrow money, enter into
contracts, sue and be sued but unlike
them it cannot breathe, eat, run, talk
and so on. It is, therefore, called an
artificial person.
(ii) Separate legal entity: From the
day of its incorporation, a company
acquires an identity, distinct from its
members. Its assets and liabilities are
separate from those of its owners. The
law does not recognise the business
and owners to be one and the same.
(iii) Formation: The formation of a
company is a time consuming,
expensive and complicated process. It
Joint stock company is a voluntary association of individuals for profit, having
a capital divided into transferable shares, the ownership of which is the condition
of membership.
Prof. Haney
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
involves the preparation of several
documents and compliance with several
legal requirements before it can start
functioning.  Registration of a company
is compulsory as provided under the
Indian Companies Act, 1956.
(iv) Perpetual succession: A company
being a creation of the law, can be
brought to an end only by law. It will
only cease to exist when a specific
procedure for its closure, called winding
up, is completed. Members may come
From Strength to Strength — Tata Group of Companies
The Tata Group comprises 91 operating companies in seven business sectors:
information systems and communications, engineering, materials, services, energy,
consumer products, and chemicals. The Group was founded by Jamsetji Tata in
the last quarter of the 19th century — a period when India had just set out on the
road to gaining independence from British rule. Consequently, Jamsetji Tata and
those who followed him aligned business opportunities with the objective of nation
building. This approach remains enshrined in the Group’s ethos to this day.
The Tata Group is one of India’s largest and most respected business
conglomerates, with revenues to the tune of $ 17.6 billion (Rs. 769, 296 million)
in the year 2004-05, the equivalent of about 2.9 per cent of the country’s GDP.
Tata companies together employ some 2,20,000 people. The Tata Group has
operations in more than 40 countries across six continents, and its companies
export products and services to 140 nations.
Five core values
The Tata Group has always sought to be a value-driven organisation. These values
continue to direct the Group’s growth and businesses. The five core Tata values
underpinning the way we do business are:
• Integrity: We must conduct our business fairly, with honesty and transparency.
Everything we do must stand the test of public scrutiny.
• Understanding: We must be caring, show respect, compassion and humanity
towards our colleagues and customers around the world, and always work for
the benefit of the communities we serve.
• Excellence: We must constantly strive to achieve the highest possible standards
in our day-to-day work and in the quality of the goods and services we provide.
• Unity: We must work cohesively with our colleagues across the Group and with
our customers and partners around the world, building strong relationships
based on tolerance, understanding and mutual cooperation.
• Responsibility: We must continue to be responsible, sensitive to the countries,
communities and environments in which we work, always ensuring that what
comes from the people goes back to the people many times over.
The Tata Group’s business activities are conducted through 91 companies
operating in seven business sectors. It has a presence in six continents and
holds leadership positions in many industry segments, among them tea, software,
automobiles, energy and hospitality. The Tata Group is headed by Group chairman
Ratan Tata.
Source: Website of the Tata Group.
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION
and members may go, but the company
continues to exist.
(v) Control: The management and
control of the affairs of the company is
undertaken by the Board of Directors,
which appoints the top management
officials for running the business. The
directors hold a position of immense
significance as they are directly
accountable to the shareholders for the
working of the company. The
shareholders, however, do not have the
right to be involved in the day-to-day
running of the business.
(vi) Liability: The liability of the
members is limited to the extent of the
capital contributed by them in a
company. The creditors can use only the
assets of the company to settle their
claims since it is the company and not
the members that owes the debt. The
members can be asked to contribute to
the loss only to the extent of the unpaid
amount of share held by them.  Suppose
Akshay is a shareholder in a company
holding 2,000 shares of Rs.10 each on
which he has already paid Rs. 7 per
share. His liability in the event of losses
or company’s failure to pay debts can
be only up to Rs. 6,000 — the unpaid
amount of his share capital (Rs. 3 per
share on 2,000 shares held in the
company). Beyond this, he is not liable
to pay anything towards the debts or
losses of the company.
(vii) Common seal: The company
being an artificial person acts through
its Board of Directors. The Board of
Directors enters into an agreement with
others by indicating the company’s
approval through a common seal. The
common seal is the engraved equivalent
of an official signature. Any agreement
which does not have the company seal
put on it is not legally binding on
the company.
(viii) Risk bearing: The risk of losses
in a company is borne by all the share
holders. This is unlike the case of sole
proprietorship or partnership firm
where one or few persons respectively
bear the losses. In the face of financial
difficulties, all shareholders in a
company have to contribute to the
debts to the extent of their shares in
the company’s capital. The risk of loss
thus gets spread over a large number
of shareholders.
Merits
The company form of organisation
offers a multitude of advantages, some
of which are discussed below.
(i) Limited liability: The shareholders
are liable to the extent of the amount
unpaid on the shares held by them.
Also, only the assets of the company
can be used to settle the debts, leaving
the owner’s personal property free from
any charge. This reduces the degree of
risk borne by an investor.
(ii) Transfer of interest: The ease of
transfer of ownership adds to the
advantage of investing in a company
as the share of a public limited
company can be sold in the market and
as such can be easily converted into
cash in case the need arises. This
avoids blockage of investment and
presents the company as a favourable
avenue for investment purposes.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(iii) Perpetual existence: Existence of
a company is not affected by the death,
retirement, resignation, insolvency or
insanity of its members as it has a
separate entity from its members. A
company will continue to exist even if
all the members die. It can be liquidated
only as per the provisions of the
Companies Act.
(iv) Scope for expansion: As
compared to the sole proprietorship and
partnership forms of organisation, a
company has large financial resources.
Further, capital can be attracted from
the public as well as through loans from
banks and financial institutions. Thus
there is greater scope for expansion. The
investors are inclined to invest in shares
because of the limited liability,
transferable ownership and possibility
of high returns in a company.
(v) Professional management: A
company can afford to pay higher
salaries to specialists and professionals.
It can, therefore, employ people who
are experts in their area of
specialisations. The scale of operations
in a company leads to division of work.
Each department deals with a
particular activity and is headed by an
expert. This leads to balanced decision
making as well as greater efficiency in
the company’s operations.
Limitations
The major limitations of a company
form of organisation are as follows:
(i) Complexity in formation: The
formation of a company requires
greater time, effort and extensive
knowledge of legal requirements and
the procedures involved. As compared
Pen is mightier than the Sword:
The Case of Luxor Writing Instruments Pvt. Ltd.
In the year 1963, a young gentleman armed with the power of hard work and
ambition, started a new era in the field of writing instruments. At a tender age of
19, he started a small manual assembly shop in Sadar Bazaar area in Delhi
where he manufactured fountain pens under the name Luxor Writing
Instruments Pvt. Ltd. (LWIPL).
Being awarded the coveted ‘Number One Writing Instruments Exporter’ award
consecutively for three years, LWIPL has been given the exclusive rights of
manufacturing and distributing four international brands in India, viz., Pilot,
Papermate, Parker and Waterman.
Luxor Writing Instruments Pvt. Ltd. has the largest share of this market of over
20 percent, with a turnover pushing way beyond the Rs. 150 crore mark. As of
today Luxor is a leading manufacturer and exporter of writing instruments
from India. It is currently exporting over 15 percent of the output and has
four manufacturing facilities in New Delhi and three at Mumbai. It employs over
600 people. It is the leader in most segments of the market, manufacturing and
distributing a wide variety of pens for various applications and needs.
Source: http://www.luxorparker.com
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION
to sole proprietorship and partnership
form of organisations, formation of a
company is more complex.
(ii) Lack of secrecy: The Companies
Act requires each public company to
provide from time-to-time a lot of
information to the office of the registrar
of companies. Such information is
available to the general public also. It
is, therefore, difficult to maintain
complete secrecy about the operations
of company.
(iii) Impersonal work environment:
Separation of ownership and
management leads to situations in
which there is lack of effort as well as
personal involvement on the part of the
officers of a company. The large size of
a company further makes it difficult for
the owners and top management to
maintain personal contact with the
employees, customers and creditors.
(iv) Numerous regulations: The
functioning of a company is subject to
many legal provisions and compulsions.
A company is burdened with numerous
restrictions in respect of aspects
including audit, voting, filing of reports
and preparation of documents, and is
required to obtain various certificates
from different agencies, viz., registrar,
SEBI, etc. This reduces the freedom of
operations of a company and takes away
a lot of time, effort and money.
(v) Delay in decision making:
Companies are democratically managed
through the Board of Directors which is
followed by the top management, middle
management
lower
level
management. Communication as well as
approval of various proposals may
cause delays not only in taking
decisions but also in acting upon them.
(vi) Oligarchic management: In
theory, a company is a democratic
institution wherein the Board of
Directors are representatives of the
shareholders who are the owners. In
practice, however, in most large sized
organisations having a multitude of
shareholders; the owners have minimal
influence in terms of controlling or
running the business. It is so because
the shareholders are spread all over the
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
country and a very small percentage
attend the general meetings. The Board
of Directors as such enjoy considerable
freedom in exercising their power which
they sometimes use even contrary to
the interests of the shareholders.
Dissatisfied shareholders in such a
situation have no option but to sell their
shares and exit the company. As the
directors virtually enjoy the rights to
take all major decisions, it leads to rule
by a few.
(vii) Conflict in interests: There may
be conflict of interest amongst various
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited — A Public Company’s Journey in Quality
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) is the largest engineering and
manufacturing enterprise in India today in the energy-related/infrastructure sector.
BHEL was established more than 40 years ago, ushering in the indigenous heavy
electrical equipment industry in India — a dream that has been more than realised
with a well-recognised track record of performance. The company has been earning
profits continuously since 1971-72 and paying dividends since 1976-77.
BHEL manufactures over 180 products under 30 major product groups and caters
to core sectors of the Indian economy, viz., power generation and transmission,
transportation, telecommunication, renewable energy, etc.
BHEL has acquired certifications to Quality Management Systems (ISO 9001),
Environmental Management Systems (ISO 14001) and Occupational Health and
Safety Management Systems (OHSAS 18001) and is also well on its journey towards
Total Quality Management.
Major achievements of BHEL include:
• Installed equipment for over 90,000 MW of power generation — for utilities,
captive and industrial users.
• Supplied over 2,25,000 MVA transformer capacity and other equipment
operating in transmission and distribution network up to 400 kV (AC and DC).
• Supplied over 25,000 motors with Drive Control System to power projects,
petrochemicals, refineries, steel, aluminium, fertiliser, cement plants, etc.
• Supplied traction electrics and AC/DC locos to power over 12,000 kms railway
network.
• Supplied over one million valves to power plants and other industries.
BHEL’s vision is to become a world-class engineering enterprise, committed to
enhancing stakeholder value. The company is striving to give shape to its aspirations
and fulfil the expectations of the country to become a global player.
The greatest strength of BHEL is its highly skilled and committed 43,500 employees.
Every employee is given an equal opportunity to develop himself and grow in his
career. Continuous training and retraining, career planning, a positive work culture
and participative style of management — all these have engendered development
of a committed and motivated workforce setting new benchmarks in terms of
productivity, quality and responsiveness.
Source: website of BHEL
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION
stakeholders of a company. The
employees, for example, may be
interested in higher salaries, consumers
desire higher quality products at lower
prices, and the shareholders want
higher returns in the form of dividends
and increase in the intrinsic value of
their shares. These demands pose
problems in managing the company as
it often becomes difficult to satisfy such
diverse interests.
2.6.1 Types of Companies
A company can be either a private or a
public company. These two types of
companies are discussed in detail in the
following paragraphs.
Private Company
A private company means a company
which:
restricts the right of members to
transfer its shares;
(b) has a minimum of 2 and a
maximum of 50 members,
excluding the present and past
employees;
does not invite public to subscribe
to its share capital; and
(d) must have a minimum paid up
capital of Rs.1 lakh or such higher
amount which may be prescribed
from time-to-time.
It is necessary for a private company
to use the word private limited after its
name. If a private company contravenes
any of the aforesaid provisions, it ceases
to be a private company and loses all
the exemptions and privileges to which
it is entitled.
The following are some of the privileges
of a private limited company as against
a public limited company:
A private company can be formed
by only two members whereas
seven people are needed to form a
public company.
There is no need to issue a
prospectus as public is not invited
to subscribe to the shares of a
private company.
Allotment of shares can be done
without receiving the minimum
subscription.
A private company can start
business as soon as it receives the
certificate of incorporation. The
public company, on the other
hand, has to wait for the receipt of
certificate of commencement before
it can start a business.
A private company needs to have
only two directors as against the
minimum of three directors in the
case of a public company.
A private company is not required
to keep an index of members while
the same is necessary in the case
of a public company.
There is no restriction on the
amount of loans to directors in a
private company. Therefore, there
is no need to take permission from
the government for granting the
same, as is required in the case of
a public company.
Public Company
A public company means a company
which is not a private company. As per
the Indian Companies Act, a public
company is one which:
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
has a minimum paid-up capital of
Rs. 5 lakhs or a higher amount
which may be prescribed from
time-to-time;
(b) has a minimum of 7 members and
no limit on maximum members;
has no restriction on transfer of
shares; and
(d) is not prohibited from inviting the
public to subscribe to its share
capital or public deposits.
A private company which is a subsid-
iary of a public company is also treated
as a public company.
2.7 CHOICE OF FORM OF BUSINESS
ORGANISATION
After studying various forms of
business organisations, it is evident
that each form has certain advantages
as well as disadvantages. It, therefore,
becomes vital that certain basic
considerations are kept in mind while
choosing an appropriate form of
organisation. The important factors
determining the choice of organisation
are listed in Table 2.4 and are discussed
below:
(i) Cost and ease in setting up the
organisation: As far as initial business
setting-up costs are concerned, sole
proprietorship is the most inexpensive
way of starting a business. However, the
legal requirements are minimum and
the scale of operations is small. In case
of partnership also, the advantage of
less legal formalities and lower cost is
there because of limited scale of
operations. Cooperative societies and
companies have to be compulsorily
registered. Formation of a company
involves a lengthy and expensive legal
procedure. From the point of view of
initial cost, therefore, sole proprietorship
is the preferred form as it involves least
expenditure. Company form of
organisation, on the other hand, is more
complex and involves greater costs.
Table 2.4
Factors influencing the choice of
form of Business Organisation
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(ii) Liability: In case of sole
proprietorship and partnership firms, the
liability of the owners/partners is
unlimited. This may call for paying the
debt from personal assets of the owners.
In joint Hindu family business, only the
karta has unlimited liability. In
cooperative societies and companies,
however, liability is limited and creditors
can force payment of their claims only to
the extent of the company’s assets.
Hence, from the point of view of investors,
the company form of organisation is more
suitable as the risk involved is limited.
(iii) Continuity: The continuity of sole
proprietorship and partnership firms is
affected by such events as death,
insolvency or insanity of the owners.
However, such factors do not affect the
continuity of business in the case of
organisations like joint Hindu family
business, cooperative societies and
companies. In case the business needs
a permanent structure, company form
is more suitable. For short term
ventures, proprietorship or partnership
may be preferred.
(iv) Management ability: A sole
proprietor may find it difficult to have
expertise in all functional areas of
management. In other forms of
organisations like partnership and
company, there is no such problem.
Division of work among the members
in such organisations allows the
managers to specialise in specific areas,
leading to better decision making. But
this may lead to situations of conflicts
because of differences of opinion
amongst people. Further, if the
organisation’s operations are complex
in nature and require professionalised
management, company form of
organisation is a better alternative.
Proprietorship or partnership may be
suitable, where simplicity of operations
allow even people with limited skills to
run the business. Thus, the nature of
operations and the need for
professionalised management affect the
choice of the form of organisation.
(v) Capital considerations: Companies
are in a better position to collect large
amounts of capital by issuing shares
to a large number of investors.
Partnership firms also have the
advantage of combined resources of all
partners. But the resources of a sole
proprietor are limited. Thus, if the scale
of operations is large, company form
may be suitable whereas for medium
and small sized business one can opt
for partnership or sole proprietorship.
Further, from the point of view of
expansion, a company is more suitable
because of its capability to raise more
funds and invest in expansion plans.
It is precisely for this purpose that in
our opening case Neha’s father
suggested she should consider
switching over to the company form of
organisation.
(vi) Degree of control: If direct control
over operations and absolute decision
making
power
required,
proprietorship may be preferred. But
if the owners do not mind sharing
control and decision making,
partnership or company form of
organisation can be adopted. The
added advantage in the case of
company form of organisation is that
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION
there is complete separation of
ownership and management and it is
professionals who are appointed to
independently manage the affairs of
a company.
(vii) Nature of business: If direct
personal contact is needed with the
customers such as in the case of a grocery
store, proprietorship may be more
suitable. For large manufacturing units,
however, when direct personal contact
with the customer is not required, the
company form of organisation may be
adopted. Similarly, in cases where services
of a professional nature are required,
partnership form is much more suitable.
It would not be out of place to
mention here that the factors stated
above are inter-related. Factors like
capital contribution and risk vary with
the size and nature of business, and
hence a form of business organisation
that is suitable from the point of view
of the risks for a given business when
run on a small scale might not be
appropriate when the same business
is carried on a large scale. It is,
therefore, suggested that all the relevant
factors
taken
consideration while making a decision
with respect to the form of organisation
that should be adopted.
2.8 A COMPARATIVE ASSESSMENT OF
DIFFERENT FORMS OF BUSINESS
ORGANISATIONS
By now it is clear to you as to what the
different forms of organisations are and
in what ways they help or hamper the
commencement and conduct of the
business. The discussion so far has
been on a piecemeal basis, examining
features of each form of business
organisations one by one. In Table 2.5,
we analysed characteristics of different
forms of organisations taken together
so as to enable you to understand on a
comparative basis as to where a form
of organisation stands in comparison
to others in respect of select features.
Key Terms
Sole proprietorship
Partnership
Karta
Mutual agency
Unlimited liability
Company
Perpetual succession
Artificial person
Common seal
Subsidiary
Holding company
Registration
Dayabhaga
Mitakashara
Co-parceners
Joint Hindu
family business
SUMMARY
Forms of business organisation refers to the types of organisations which
differ in terms of ownership and management. The major forms of
organisation include proprietorship, partnership, joint Hindu family
business, cooperative society and company.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Sole proprietorship refers to a form of organisation where business is owned,
managed and controlled by a single individual who bears all the risks and
is the only recipient of all the profits. Merits of this form of organisation
include quick decision making, direct incentive, personal satisfaction, and
ease of formation and closure. But this form of organisation suffers from
limitations of limited resources, unstable life span of business, unlimited
liability of sole proprietor and his/her limited managerial ability.
Partnership is defined as an association of two or more persons who agree
to carry on a business together and share the profits as well as bear risks
collectively. Major advantages of partnership are: ease of formation and
closure, benefits of specialisation, greater funds, and reduction of risk. Major
limitations of partnership are unlimited  liability, possibility of conflicts,
lack of continuity and lack of public confidence. As there are different types
of partners such as active, sleeping, secret and nominal partners; so is the
case with types of partnerships which can vary from general partnership,
limited partnership, partnership at will to particular partnership.
Joint Hindu family business is a business owned and carried on by the
members of a Hindu Undivided Family, which is governed by the Hindu
law. Karta — the oldest male member of the family — controls the business.
The strong points of joint Hindu family business include effective control,
stability in existence, limited liability and increased loyalty among family
members. But this form of organisation too suffers from certain limitations
such as limited resources, lack of incentives, dominance of the karta and
limited managerial ability.
A cooperative society is a voluntary association of persons who get together
to protect their economic interests. The major advantages of a cooperative
society are equality in voting, members’ limited liability, stable existence,
economy in operations, support from government, and ease of formation.
But this form of organisation suffers from weaknesses such as limited
resources, inefficiency in management, lack of secrecy, government control,
and differences among members in regard to the way society should be
managed and organised. Based on their purpose and nature of members,
various types of societies that can be formed include: consumers cooperative
society, producers cooperative society, marketing cooperative society, farmers
cooperative society, credit cooperative society, and cooperative housing
society.
A company, on the other hand, may be defined as an artificial person,
existing only in the eyes of the law with perpetual succession, having a
separate legal identity and a common seal. While major advantages of a
company form of organisation are members’ limited liability, transfer of
interest, stable existence, scope for expansion, and professional
management; its key limitations are: complexity in formation, lack of secrecy,
impersonal work environment, numerous regulations, delay in decision
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION
making, oligarchic management, and conflict of interests among different
shareholders.
Companies can be of two types — private and public. A private company is
one which restricts transfer of shares and does not invite the public to
subscribe to its shares. A public company, on the other hand, is allowed to
raise its funds by inviting the public to subscribe to its share capital.
Furthermore, there is a free transferability of shares in the case of a public
company.
Choice of form of organisation: Selection of an appropriate form of
organisation can be made after taking various factors into consideration.
Initial costs, liability, continuity, capital considerations, managerial ability,
degree of control and nature of business are the key factors that need to
taken into account while deciding about the suitable form of organisation
for one’s business.
EXERCISES
Multiple Choice Questions
Tick the appropriate answer
The structure in which there is separation of ownership and management
is called
Sole proprietorship
Partnership
Company
All business
organisations
The karta in Joint Hindu family business has
Limited liability
Unlimited  liability
No liability for debts
Joint liability
In a cooperative society the principle followed is
One share one vote
One man one vote
No vote
Multiple votes
The board of directors of a joint stock company is elected by
General public
Government bodies
Shareholders
Employees
The maximum number of partners allowed in the banking business are
Twenty
No limit
Profits do not have to be shared. This statement refers to
Partnership
Joint Hindu family business
Sole proprietorship
Company
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
The capital of a company is divided into number of parts each one of
which are called
Dividend
Profit
Interest
Share
The Head of the joint Hindu family business is called
Proprietor
Director
Karta
Manager
Provision of residential accommodation to the members at reasonable
rates is the objective of
Producer’s cooperative
Consumer’s cooperative
Housing cooperative
Credit cooperative
10. A partner whose association with the firm is unknown to the general
public is called
Active partner
Sleeping partner
Nominal partner
Secret partner
Short Answer Questions
For which of the following types of business do you think a sole
proprietorship form of organisation would be more suitable, and why?
Grocery store
Medical store
Legal consultancy
Craft centre
Internet café
Chartered accountancy
firm.
For which of the following types of business do you think a partnership
form of organisation would be more suitable, and why?
Grocery store
Medical clinic
Legal consultancy
Craft  centre
Internet café
Chartered accountancy
Explain the following terms in brief
Perpetual succession
Common seal
Karta
Artificial person
Compare the status of a minor in a Joint Hindu Family Business with
that in a partnership firm.
If registration is optional, why do partnership firms willingly go through
this legal formality and get themselves registered? Explain.
State the important privileges available to a private company.
How does a cooperative society exemplify democracy and secularism?
Explain.
What is meant by ‘partner by estoppel’? Explain.
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION
Long Answer Questions
What do you understand by a sole proprietorship firm? Explain its merits
and limitation?
Why is partnership considered by some to be a relatively unpopular
form of business ownership? Explain the merits and limitations of
partnership.
Why is it important to choose an appropriate form of organisation?
Discuss the factors that determine the choice of form of organisation.
Discuss the characteristics, merits and limitation of cooperative form
of organisation. Also describe briefly different types of cooperative
societies.
Distinguish between a Joint Hindu family business and partnership.
Despite limitations of size and resources, many people continue to prefer
sole proprietorship over other forms of organisation?  Why?
Application Questions
In which form of organisation is a trade agreement made by one owner
binding on the others? Give reasons to support your answer.
The business assets of an organisation amount to Rs. 50,000 but the
debts that remain unpaid are Rs.  80,000.  What course of action can
the creditors take if
The organisation is a sole proprietorship firm
The organisation is a partnership firm with Anthony and Akbar as
partners. Which of the two partners can the creditors approach
for repayment of debt? Explain giving reasons
Kiran is a sole proprietor. Over the past decade, her business has grown
from operating a neighbourhood corner shop selling accessories such
as artificial jewellery, bags, hair clips and nail art to a retail chain with
three branches in the city. Although she looks after the varied functions
in all the branches, she is wondering whether she should form a
company to better manage the business. She also has plans to open
branches countrywide.
Explain two benefits of remaining a sole proprietor
Explain two benefits of converting to a joint stock company
What role will her decision to go nationwide play in her choice of
form of the organisation?
What legal formalities will she have to undergo to operate business
as a company?
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Projects/Assignments
Divide students into teams to work on the following
To study the profiles of any five neighbourhood grocery/stationery
store
To conduct a study into the functioning of a Joint Hindu family
businesses
To enquire into the profile of five partnerships firms
To study the ideology and working of cooperative societies in the
To study the profiles of any five companies (inclusive of both private
and public companies)
Notes
Some of the following aspects can be assigned to the students for
undertaking above mentioned studies.
Nature of business, size of the business measured in terms of capital
employed, number of persons working, or sales turnover, problems faced,
Incentive, reason behind choice of a particular form, decision making
pattern, willingness to expand and relevant considerations, Usefulness
of a form, etc.
Students teams should be encouraged to submit their findings and
conclusions in the form of project reports and multi-media presentations.
© NCERT
not to be republished
CHAPTER 3
PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
explain the concept and characteristics of business;
explain the features of different forms of public enterprises viz.,
departmental, statutory corporations and government companies;
critically examine the changing role of the public sector;
explain the features of global enterprises; and
appreciate the benefits of joint ventures.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
3.1 INTRODUCTION
You must have come across all types
of business organisations in your daily
life. In your neighbourhood market,
there are shops owned by sole
proprietors or big retail organisations
run by a company. Then there are
people providing you services like legal
services, medical services, being owned
by more than one person i.e.,
partnership firms. These are all
privately owned organisations.
Similarly, there are other offices or
places of business which may be owned
by the government. For example,
Railways is an organisation wholly
owned
managed
government. The post office, in your
locality is owned by the Post and
Telegraph Department, Government of
India, though our dependence on their
postal services, particularly in cities
and towns has been greatly  reduced.
This is because of plenty of private
courier services firms operating in
bigger towns. Then there are businesses
which operate in more than one country
known as global enterprises. Therefore,
you may have observed that all types
of organisations are doing business in
the country whether they are public,
private or global. In this chapter we
shall be studying how the economy is
divided into two sectors, public and
private, the different types of public
enterprises, their role and that of the
global enterprises.
3.2 PRIVATE SECTOR AND PUBLIC
SECTOR
There are all kinds of business
organisations — small or large,
industrial or trading, privately owned
or government owned existing in our
Anita, a student of class XI, was going through some newspapers. The headlines
stared at her face, Government plans to disinvest its shares in a few companies.
The next day there was another news item on one public sector company incurring
heavy losses and the proposal for closing the same. In contrast to this, she read
another item on how some of the companies under the private sector were doing
so well. She was actually curious to know what these terms  like public sector,
disinvestment, privatisation meant. She realised that in certain areas there
was only the government which operates like the railways and in some areas
both the privately owned and government run business were operating. For
example, in the heavy industry sector SAIL, BHEL and TISCO, Reliance, Birlas
all were there and in the telecom sector, companies like Tata, Reliance, Airtel
operate and in airlines Sahara and Jet have recently gained entry. These
companies along with the Government-owned companies like MTNL, BSNL, Indian
Airlines, Air India. She then started wondering where from companies like Coca
cola, Pepsi, Hyundai came? Were they always here or did they operate somewhere
else, in some other country. She went to the library and was surprised to know
that there was so much information about all these in books, business magazines
and newspapers.
© NCERT
not to be republished
PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES
country. These organisations affect our
daily economic life and therefore
become part of the Indian economy.
Since the Indian economy consists of
both privately owned and government
owned business enterprises, it is
known as a mixed economy. The
Government of India has opted for a
mixed economy where both private and
government enterprises are allowed to
operate. The economy, therefore, may
be classified into two sectors viz.,
private sector and public sector.
The private sector consists of
business owned by individuals or a
group of individuals, as you have
learnt in the previous chapter. The
various forms of organisation are
sole proprietorship, partnership,
joint Hindu family, cooperative
and company.
The public sector consists of
various organisations owned and
managed by the government. These
organisations may either be partly or
wholly owned by the central or state
government. They may also be a part
of the ministry or come into existence
by a Special Act of the Parliament. The
government, through these enterprises
participates in the economic activities
of the country.
The government in its industrial
policy resolutions, from time-to-time,
defines the area of activities in which
the private sector and public sector are
allowed to operate. In the Industrial
Policy
Resolution
1948,
Government of India had specified the
approach towards development of the
industrial sector. The roles of the
private and public sector were clearly
defined and the government through
various Acts and Regulations was
overseeing the economic activities of
both the private and public sector. The
Industrial Policy Resolution, 1956 had
also laid down certain objectives for the
public sector to follow so as to
accelerate the rate of growth and
industrialisation. The public sector was
given a lot of importance but at the
same time mutual dependency of
public and private sectors was
emphasised. The 1991 industrial
policy was radically different from all
the earlier policies where the
government
deliberating
disinvestment of public sector and
allowing greater freedom to the private
sector. At the same time, foreign direct
investment was invited from business
houses
outside
India.
Thus,
multinational corporations or global
enterprises which operate in more than
one country gained entry into the
Indian economy. Thus, we have public
sector units, private sector enterprises
and global enterprises coexisting in the
Indian economy.
3.3 FORMS OF ORGANISING PUBLIC
SECTOR ENTERPRISES
Government’s participation in business
and economic sectors of the country
needs some kind of organisational
framework to function. You have
studied about the forms of business
organisation in the private sector viz.,
sole proprietorship, partnership, Hindu
undivided family, cooperative and
company.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
In the public sector, as it grows, an
important question arises in respect of
how it is to be organised or what form
of organisation it should take. The
government has a major role to play in
the formation of the public sector. But
the government acts through its people,
its offices, employees and they take
decisions on behalf of the government.
For this purpose, public enterprises
were formed by the government to
participate in the economic activities of
the country. They are expected to
contribute to the economic deve-
lopment of the country in today’s
liberalised, competitive world. These
public enterprises are owned by the
public and are accountable to the
public through the Parliament. They
are characterised by public ownership,
public funds being used for its activities
and public accountability.
A public enterprise may take any
particular form of organisation
depending upon the nature of its
operations and their relationship with
the government. The suitability of a
particular form of organisation would
depend upon its requirements. At the
same time, in accordance with general
principles, any organisation in the
public sector should ensure organisational
performance productivity and quality
standards.
The forms of organisation which a
public enterprise may take are as
follows:
Departmental undertaking
Statutory corporation
(iii)
Government company
3.3.1 Departmental Undertakings
This is the oldest and most traditional
form of organising public enterprises.
Indian Economy
Public Sector
Private Sector
Departmental
Undertakings
Statutory
Corporation
Government
Companies
Private
(Ltd.)
Properietorship
Partnership
Joint
Hindu
Family
Cooperative
Company
Public
(Ltd.)
Multinational
Corporations
© NCERT
not to be republished
PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES
These enterprises are established as
departments of the ministry and are
considered part or an extension of the
ministry itself. The Government
functions through these departments
and the activities performed by them
are an integral part of the functioning
of the government. They have not been
constituted as autonomous or
independent institutions and as such
are not independent legal entities. They
act through the officers of the
Government and its employees are
Government employees. These
undertakings may be under the central
or the state government and the rules
of central/state government are
applicable. Examples of these
undertakings are railways and post
and telegraph department.
Features
characteristics
Departmental undertakings are as
follows:
(i) The funding of these enterprises
come directly from the Govern-
ment Treasury and are an annual
appropriation from the budget of
the Government. The revenue
earned by these is also paid into
the treasury;
(ii) They are subject to accounting
and audit controls applicable to
other Government activities;
(iii) The employees of the enterprise are
Government servants and their
recruitment and conditions of
service are the same as that of
other employees directly under the
Government. They are headed by
Indian Administrative Service (IAS)
officers and civil servants who are
transferable from one ministry to
another;
(iv) It is generally considered to be
a major subdivision of the
Government department and is
subject to direct control of the
ministry;
(v) They are accountable to the
ministry since their management
is directly under the concerned
ministry.
Merits
Departmental undertakings have
certain advantages which are as follows:
(i) These undertakings facilitate the
Parliament to exercise effective
control over their operations;
(ii) These ensure a high degree of
public accountability;
(iii) The revenue earned by the
enterprise goes directly to the
treasury and hence is a source of
income for the Government;
(iv) Where national security is
concerned, this form is most
suitable since it is under the direct
control and supervision of the
concerned Ministry.
Limitations
This form of organisation suffers from
serious drawbacks, some of which are
as follows:
(i) Departmental undertakings fail to
provide flexibility, which is essential
for the smooth  operation of business;
(ii) The employees or heads of depart-
ments of such undertakings are
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
not allowed to take independent
decisions, without the approval of
the ministry concerned. This leads
to delays, in matters where
prompt decisions are required;
(iii) These enterprises are unable to
take advantage of business
opportunities. The bureaucrat’s
over-cautious and conservative
approval does not allow them to
take risky ventures;
(iv) There is red tapism in day-to-day
operations and no action can be
taken unless it goes through the
proper channels of authority;
(v) There is a lot of political inter-
ference through the ministry;
(vi) These organisations are usually
insensitive to consumer needs and
do not provide adequate services
to them.
3.3.2 Statutory Corporations
Statutory corporations are public
enterprises brought into existence by
a Special Act of the Parliament. The Act
defines its powers and functions, rules
and regulations governing its
employees and its relationship with
government departments.
This is a corporate body created by
the legislature with defined powers and
functions and is financially independent
with a clear control over a specified
area or a particular type of commercial
activity. It is a corporate person and
has the capacity of acting in its own
name. Statutory corporations therefore
have the power of the government and
considerable amount of operating
flexibility of private enterprises.
Features
Statutory corporations have certain
distinct features, which are discussed
as below:
(i) Statutory corporations are set up
under an Act of Parliament and
are governed by the provisions of
the Act. The Act defines the objects,
powers and privileges of a
statutory corporation;
(ii) This type of organisation is wholly
owned by the state. The
government has the ultimate
financial responsibility and has
the power to appropriate its
profits. At the same time, the state
also has to bear the losses, if any;
(iii) A statutory corporation is a body
corporate and can sue and be
sued, enter into contract and
acquire property in its own name;
(iv) This type of enterprise is usually
independently financed. It obtains
funds by borrowings from the
government or from the public
through revenues, derived from
sale of goods and services. It has
the authority to use its revenues;
(v) A statutory corporation is not
subject to the same accounting
and audit procedures applicable
to government departments. It is
also not concerned with the central
budget of the Government;
(vi) The employees of these enterprises
are not government or civil
servants and are not governed by
government rules and regulations.
The conditions of service of the
employees are governed by the
provisions of the Act itself. At
© NCERT
not to be republished
PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES
times, some officers are taken
from government departments,
on deputation, to head these
organisations.
Merits
This form of organisation enjoys certain
advantages in its working, which are
as follows:
(i) They enjoy independence in their
functioning and a high degree of
operational flexibility. They are free
from undesirable government
regulation and control;
(ii) Since the funds of these organi-
sations do not come from the
central budget, the government
generally does not interfere in their
financial matters, including their
income and receipts;
(iii) Since they are autonomous
organisations they frame their own
policies and procedures within the
powers assigned to them by the
Act. The Act may, however,
provide few issues/matters which
require prior approval of a
particular ministry;
(vi) A statutory corporation is a
valuable instrument for economic
development. It has the power of
the government, combined with
the initiative of private enterprises.
Limitations
This type of organisation suffers from
several limitations, which are as follows:
(i) In reality, a statutory corporation
does not enjoy as much operational
flexibility as stated above. All
actions are subject to many rules
and regulations;
(ii) Government and political inter-
ference has always been there in
major decisions or where huge
funds are involved;
(iii) Where there is dealing with public,
rampant corruption exists;
(iv) The government has a practice of
appointing advisors to the
Corporation Board. This curbs the
freedom of the corporation in
entering into contracts and
other decisions. If there is any
disagreement, the matter is
referred to the government for final
decisions. This further delays action.
3.3.3 Government Company
A Government company is established
under the Indian Companies Act, 1956
and is registered and governed by the
provisions of the Indian Companies Act.
These are established for purely
business purposes and in true spirit
compete with companies in the private
sector.
According to the Indian Companies
Act 1956, a government company
means any company in which not less
than 51 percent of the paid up capital
is held by the central government, or
by any state government or partly by
central government and partly by one
or more state governments.
From the above definition, it is clear
that the government exercises control
over the paid up share capital of the
company. The shares of the company
are purchased in the name of the
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
President of India. Since the
government is the major shareholder
and exercises control over the
management of these companies, they
are known as government companies.
Features
Government companies have certain
characteristics which makes them
distinct from other forms of
organisations. These are discussed as
follows:
(i) It is an organisation created by the
Indian Companies Act, 1956;
(ii) The company can file a suit in a
court of law against any third
party and be sued;
(iii) The company can enter into a
contract and can acquire property
in its own name;
(iv) The management of the company
is regulated by the provisions of
the Companies Act, like any other
public limited company;
(v) The employees of the company are
appointed according to their own
rules and regulations as contained
in the Memorandum and Articles
of Association of the company.
The Memorandum and Articles of
Association are the main
documents of the company,
containing the objects of the
company and its rules and
regulations;
(vi) These companies are exempted
from the accounting and audit
rules and procedures. An auditor
is appointed by the Central
Government and the Annual
Report is to be presented in the
parliament or the state legislature;
(vii) The government company obtains
its funds from government
shareholdings and other private
shareholders. It is also permitted
to raise funds from the capital
market.
Merits
Government companies enjoy several
advantages, which are as follows:
(i) A government company can be
established by fulfilling the
requirements of the Indian
Companies Act. A separate Act in
the Parliament is not required;
(ii) It has a separate legal entity, apart
from the Government;
(iii) It enjoys autonomy in all
management decisions and takes
actions according to business
prudence;
(iv) These companies by providing
goods and services at reasonable
prices are able to control the
market and curb unhealthy
business practices.
Limitations
Despite the autonomy given to these
companies, they have certain dis-
advantages:
(i) Since the Government is the only
shareholder in some of the
Companies, the provisions of the
Companies Act does not have
much relevance;
(ii) It evades constitutional res-
ponsibility, which a company
© NCERT
not to be republished
PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES
financed by the government
should  have. It is not answerable
directly to the Parliament;
(iii) The government being the sole
shareholder, the management and
administration rests in the hands
of the government. The main
purpose of a government com-
pany, registered like other
companies, is defeated.
The Indian economy is in a stage
of transition. The Five Year Plans in
the initial stages of development gave
lot of importance to the public sector.
In the post 90’s period, the new
economic policies, emphasised
liberalisation, privatisation and
globalisation. The role of public sector
was redefined. It was not supposed
to play a passive role but to actively
3.4 CHANGING ROLE OF PUBLIC SECTOR
At the time of Independence, it was
expected that the public sector
enterprises would play an important
role in achieving certain objectives of
the economy either by direct
participation in business or by acting
as a catalyst. The public sector would
build up infrastructure for other sectors
of the economy and invest in key areas.
The private sector was unwilling to
invest in projects which required heavy
investment and had long gestation
periods. The government then took it
upon itself to develop infrastructural
facilities and provide for goods and
services essential for the economy.
participate and compete in the market
with other private sector companies
in the same industry. They were also
held accountable for losses and
return on investment. If a public
sector
making
losses
continuously, it was referred to the
Board for Industrial and Financial
Reconstruction (BIFR) for complete
overhauling or shut down. Various
committees were set up to study the
working of inefficient public sector
units with reports on how to improve
their managerial efficiency and
profitability. The role of public sector
is definitely not what was envisaged
in the early 60’s or 70’s.
State Bank of India
Which bank has the most number of ATMs across India? Which bank has the
largest coverage network across India? State Bank of India is one such bank. Its
penetration, particularly in the rural sectors, and its sheer tonnage of customers
has been well documented in the past. SBI undertook an enormous image
overhauling effort in 2005. SBI has revamped its operations to make itself more
contemporary, tech-savy and customer friendly, shedding the slipshod style of
working that has been the bane of PSU banks growing at an annual rate of 16
percent, indicating that all is well for the time being. If SBI is able to sustain this
rate of growth, modernise its operations and increase its visibility among the
urban populace, the image of public sector banks will definitely improve.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(i) Development of infrastructure:
The development of infrastructure is a
prerequisite for industrialisation in any
country. In the pre-Independence
period, basic infrastructure was not
developed and therefore, industrialisation
progressed at a very slow pace. The
process of industrialisation cannot
be sustained without adequate
transportation and communication
facilities, fuel and energy, and basic and
heavy industries. The private sector did
not show any initiative to invest in heavy
industries or develop it in any manner.
They did not have trained personnel or
finances to immediately establish heavy
industries which was the requirement
of the economy.
It was only the government which
could mobilise huge capital, coordinate
industrial construction and train
technicians and workforce. Rail, road,
sea and air transport was the
responsibility of the government, and
their expansion has contributed to the
pace of industrialisation and ensured
future economic growth. The public
sector enterprises were to operate in
certain spheres. Investments were to be
made to:
(a) Give infrastructure to the core
sector, which requires huge capital
investment, complex and upgraded
technology, big and effective
organisation structures like steel
plants, power generation plants,
civil aviation, railways, petroleum,
state trading, coal, etc;
(b) Give a lead in investment to the core
sector where private sector
enterprises are not functioning in
the desired direction, like fertilizers,
pharmaceuticals, petro-chemicals,
newsprint, medium and heavy
engineering;
(c) Give direction to future investments
like hotels, project management,
consultancies, textiles, auto-
mobiles, etc.
(ii) Regional balance: The government
is responsible for developing all regions
and states in a balanced way and
removing regional disparties. Most of
the industrial progress was limited to
a few areas like the port towns in the
pre-Independence period. After 1951,
the government laid down in its Five
Year Plans, that particular attention
would be paid to those regions which
were lagging behind and public sector
industries were deliberately set up.
Four major steel plants were set up in
the backward areas to accelerate
economic development, provide
employment to the workforce and
develop ancilliary industries. This was
achieved to some extent but there is
scope for a lot more. Development of
backward regions so as to ensure a
regional balance in the country is one
of the major objectives of planned
development. Therefore, the govern-
ment had to locate new enterprises in
backward areas and at the same time
prevent the mushrooming growth of
private sector units in already
advanced areas.
(iii) Economies of scale: Where large
scale industries are required to be set
up with huge capital outlay, the public
© NCERT
not to be republished
PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES
sector had to step in to take advantage
of economies of scale. Electric power
plants, natural gas, petroleum and
telephone industries are some
examples of the public sector setting
up large scale units. These units
required a larger base to function
economically which was only possible
with government resources and mass
scale production.
(iv) Check over concentration of
economic power: The public sector
acts as a check over the private sector.
In the private sector there are very few
industrial houses which would be
willing to invest in heavy industries
with the result that wealth gets
concentrated in a few hands and
monopolostic practices are encouraged.
This gives rise to inequalities in income,
which is detrimental to society.
The public sector is able to set large
industries which requires heavy
investment and thus the income and
benefits that accrue are shared by a
large of number of employees and
workers. This prevents concentration
of wealth and economic power in the
private sector.
(v) Import substitution: During the
second and third Five Year Plan period,
India was aiming to be self-reliant in
many spheres. Obtaining foreign
exchange was also a problem and it
was difficult to import heavy machinery
required for a strong industrial base.
At that time, public sector companies
involved in heavy engineering which
would help in import substitution were
established. Simultaneously, several
public sector companies like STC and
MMTC have played an important role
in expanding exports of the country.
(vi) Government policy towards the
public sector since 1991: The
Government of India had introduced
four major reforms in the public sector
in its new industrial policy in 1991. The
main elements of the Government policy
are as follows:
• Restructure and revive potentially
viable PSUs
• Close down PSUs, which cannot
be revived
• Bring down governments equity in
all non-strategic PSUs to 26 per
cent or lower, if necessary; and
• Fully protect the interest of
workers.
(a) Reduction in the number of
industries reserved for the public
sector from 17 to 8 (and then to 3):
In the 1956 resolution on Industrial
policy, 17 industries were reserved
for the public sector. In 1991, only
8 industries were reserved for
the public sector, they were restricted
to atomic energy, arms and
communication, mining, and
railways. In 2001, only three
industries were reserved exclusively
for the public sector. These are
atomic energy, arms and rail
transport. This meant that the private
sector could enter all areas (except
the three) and the public sector
would have to compete with them.
The public sector has played a vital
role in the development of the
economy. However, the private sector
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
is also quite capable of contributing
substantially to the nation building
process. Therefore, both the public
sector and the private sector need to
be viewed as mutually complementary
parts of the national sector. Private
sector units also have to assume
greater public responsibilities.
Simultaneously, the public sector
needs to focus on achieving more in a
highly competitive market.
(b) Disinvestment of shares of
a select set of public sector
enterprises: Disinvestment involves
the sale of the equity shares to the
private sector and the public. The
objective was to raise resources and
encourage wider participation of the
general public and workers in the
ownership of these enterprises. The
government had taken a decision to
withdraw from the industrial sector
and reduce its equity in all
undertakings. It was expected that
this would lead to improving
managerial performance and
ensuring financial discipline. But
there remains a lot to be done in
this area.
The primary objectives of privatising
public sector enterprises are:
• Releasing the large amount of
public resources locked up in non-
strategic Public Sector Enterprises
(PSEs), so that they may be utilised
on other social priority areas such
as basic health, family welfare and
primary education.
• Reducing the huge amount of
public debt and interest burden;
• Transferring the commercial risk
to the private sector so that the
funds are invested in able projects;
• Freeing these enterprises from
government
control
introduction
corporate
governance; and
• In many areas where the public
Privatisation in India
The Lagan Jute Machinery Company Limited (LJMC) was the first case of
successful privatisation of a Central Public Sector Undertaking, carried out by
the Government. LJMC is a Calcutta-based company, and manufactures jute
machinery (mainly spinning and drawing frames). It employed around 400
employees prior to privatisation. It started incurring losses from 1996-97 onward
and the turnover was on a decline. LJMC’s net worth as on March 1998 was
around Rs. 5 crore and its annual turnover was also around Rs. 5 crore at
that time.
In the initial stages of disinvestment, LJMC was approved for privatisation
through sale of 74 per cent stake to a strategic partner. The disinvestment process
was handled by LJMC’s holding company, Bharat Bhari Udyog Nigam LImited
(BBUNL), under the administrative control and directions of the then Department
of Heavy Industries (DHI), Ministry of Industry, Government of India.
© NCERT
not to be republished
PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES
sector had a monopoly, for
example, telecom sector the
consumers have benefitted by more
choices, lower prices and better
quality of products and services.
(c) Policy regarding sick units to be
the same as that for the private
sector: All public sector units were
referred to the Board of Industrial
and Financial Reconstruction to
decide whether a sick unit was to
be restructured or closed down. The
Board has reconsidered revival and
rehabilitation schemes for some
cases and winding up for a number
of units. There is a lot of resentment
amongst workers of the units which
are to be closed down. A National
Renewal Fund was set up by the
government to retrain or redeploy
retrenched labour and to provide
compensation to public sector
employees seeking voluntary
retirement.
There are many enterprises
which are sick and not capable of
being revived as they have
accumulated huge losses. With
public finances under intense
pressure, both central and state
government are just not able to
sustain them much longer. The
only option available to the
government in such cases is to close
down these undertakings after
providing a safety net for the
employees and workers. Resources
under the National Renewal Fund
have not been sufficient to meet the cost
of Voluntary Separation Scheme or
Voluntary Retirement Scheme.
(d) Memorandum of Understanding:
Improvement of performance
through a MoU (Memorandum of
Understanding) system by which
managements are to be granted
greater autonomy but held
accountable for specified results.
Under this system, public sector
units were given clear targets and
operational autonomy for achieving
those targets. The MoU was between
the particular public sector unit and
their administrative ministries
defining their relationship and
autonomy.
3.5 GLOBAL ENTERPRISES
At some time you must have come
across products produced by Multi
National Corporations (MNCs). In the
last ten years MNCs have played an
important role in the Indian economy.
They have become a common feature
of most developing economies in the
world. MNCs as is evident from what
we see around us, are gigantic
corporations which have their
operations in a number of countries.
They are characterised by their huge
size, large number of products,
advanced technology, marketing
strategies and network of operations all
over the world. Global enterprises thus
are huge industrial organisations which
extend their industrial and marketing
operations through a network of their
branches in several countries. Their
branches are also called Majority
Owned Foreign Affiliates (MOFA). These
enterprises operate in several areas
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
producing multiple products with their
business strategy extending over a
number of countries. They do not aim
at maximising profits from one or two
products but instead spread their
branches all over. They have an impact
on the international economy also. This
is evident from the fact that the sales of
top 200 corporations were equivalent
to 28.3 percent of the world’s GDP in
1998. This shows that top 200 MNCs
control over a quarter of the world
economy. Therefore, MNCs are in a
position to exercise massive control on
the world economy because of their
capital resources, latest technology and
goodwill. By virtue of this, they are able
to sell any product in different
countries. Some of these corporations
may be slightly exploitative in nature
and concentrate more on selling
consumer goods and luxury items
which are not always desirable for
developing countries.
Features
These corporations have distinct
features which distinguish them from
other private sector companies, public
sector companies and public sector
enterprises. These are as follows:
(i) Huge capital resources: These
enterprises are characterised by
possessing huge financial resources
and the ability to raise funds from
different sources. They are able to tap
funds from various sources. They may
issue equity shares, debentures or
bonds to the public. They are also in a
position to borrow from financial
institutions and international banks.
They enjoy credibility in the capital
market. Even investors and banks of
the host country are willing to invest in
them. Because of their financial
strength they are able to survive under
all circumstances.
(ii) Foreign collaboration: Global
enterprises usually enter into
agreements with Indian companies
pertaining to the sale of technology,
production of goods, use of brand
names for the final products, etc. These
MNCs may collaborate with companies
in the public and private sector. There
are usually various restrictive clauses
in the agreement relating to transfer
of technology, pricing, dividend
payments, tight control by foreign
technicians, etc. Big industrial houses
wanting to diversify and expand have
gained by collaborating with MNCs in
terms of patents, resources, foreign
exchange etc. But at the same time
these foreign collaborations have given
rise to the growth of monopolies and
concentration of power in few hands.
(iii) Advanced technology: These
enterprises possess technological
superiorities in their methods of
production. They are able to conform
to international standards and quality
specifications. This leads to industrial
progress of the country in which such
corporations operate since they are
able to optimally exploit local resources
and raw materials. Computerisation
and other inventions have come due to
the technological advancements
provided by MNCs.
(iv) Product innovation: These
enterprises are characterised by having
© NCERT
not to be republished
PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES
highly sophisticated research and
development departments engaged in
the task of developing new products
and superior designs of existing
products. Qualitative research requires
huge investment which only global
enterprises can afford.
(v) Marketing strategies:  The
marketing strategies of global
companies are far more effective than
other companies. They use aggressive
marketing strategies in order to increase
their sales in a short period. They posses
a more reliable and up-to-date market
information system. Their advertising
and sales promotion techniques are
normally very effective. Since they
already have carved out a place for
themselves in the global market, and
their brands are well-known, selling
their products is not a problem.
(vi) Expansion of market territory:
Their operations and activities extend
beyond the physical boundaries of their
own countries. Their international
image also builds up and their market
territory expands enabling them to
become international brands. They
operate through a network of
subsidiaries, branches and affiliates in
host countries. Due to their giant size
they occupy a dominant position in the
market.
(vii) Centralised control: They have
their headquaters in their home
country and exercise control over all
branches and subsidiaries. However,
this control is limited to the broad
policy framework of the parent
company. There is no interference in
day-to-day operations.
3.6 JOINT VENTURES
Meaning
Business organisations as you have
studied earlier can be of various types
private or government owned or global
enterprises. Now, any business
organisation if it so desires can
join hands with another business
organisation for mutual benefit. These
two organisations may be private,
government-owned or a foreign
company. When two businesses agree
to join together for a common purpose
Joint Venture — Bharti and Airtel
Bharti and Airtel entered 2005 as the biggest players in the telecom sector.
Airtel, with 15 million customers, is only one of Bharti’s ventures. Beetel, the
telephone brand under Bharti Teletech, keeps them firmly grounded on the
landline front as well. Additionally, Bharti Telesoft, established in 1999 to provide
value added services and solutions to wireless and wireline carriers across the
globe, today finds presence in 25 countries, with over 100 networks and power
services to 50 million subscribers. They’re on the outsourcing bandwagon as
well as TeleTech Services India, a collaboration between Bharti and TeleTech
holding Inc, which provides standard customer solutions and back-office support.
Field Fresh Foods, is Bharti’s venture with ELRO holding to export farm fresh
agricultural products exclusively to markets in Europe and USA.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
and mutual benefit, it gives rise to a
joint venture. Businesses of any size
can use joint ventures to strengthen
long-term relationships or to
collaborate on short term projects. A
joint venture can be flexible depending
upon the party’s requirements. These
need to be clearly stated in a joint
venture agreement to avoid conflict at
a later stage.
A joint venture may also be the
result of an agreement between two
businesses in different countries. In this
case, there are certain provisions
provided by the governments of the two
countries, which will have to be
adhered to.
Thus, we see that joint ventures
may mean many things, depending
upon the context we are using it in. But
in a broader sense, a joint venture is
the pooling of resources and expertise
by two or more businesses, to achieve
a particular goal. The risks and
rewards of the business are also
shared. The reasons behind the joint
venture often include business
expansion, development of new
products or moving into new markets,
particularly in another country. It is
becoming increasingly common for
companies to create joint ventures with
other businesses/companies and form
strategic alliances with them. The
reasons for these alliances may be
complementary capabilities and
resources such as distribution
channels, technology or finance. In this
kind of a joint venture, two or more
(parent) companies agree to share
capital, technology, human resources,
risks and rewards in the formation of a
new entity, under shared control.
In India, joint venture companies
are the best way of doing business.
There are no separate laws for these
joint ventures. The companies
incorporated in India are treated the
same as domestic companies.
A joint venture company can be
formed in any of the following ways:
(i) Two parties (individuals or
companies),
incorporate
company in India. Business of one
party is transferred to a new
company. For consideration of
such transfer, shares are issued by
the new company and subscribed
by the above party. The other
subscribes for the shares in cash;
(ii) The above two parties subscribe
to the shares of the joint venture
company in agreed proportion, in
cash and start a new business;
(iii) Promoter shareholder of an
existing Indian company and
another party which may be either
an individual or a company may
collaborate to jointly carry on the
business of that company. The
other party may be non-resident
or resident and may take up
shares of the company through
payment in cash.All joint ventures
in India require government
approvals if a foreign partner or a
Non-Resident Indian (NRI) is
involved. The approval can be
obtained either from the Reserve
Bank of India or Foreign Investment
Promotion Board (FIPB), depending
upon particular circumstances.
© NCERT
not to be republished
PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES
(a) If the joint venture is covered under
automatic route, then the approval of
the Reserve Bank of India is required.
(b) In other special cases not covered
under the automatic route, a special
approval of FIPB is required.
A joint venture must be based on a
memorandum of understanding signed
by both the parties highlighting the
basis of a joint venture agreement. The
terms should be thoroughly discussed
and negotiated to avoid any legal
complications at a later stage.
Negotiations and terms must take into
account the cultural and legal
background of the parties. The joint
venture agreement must also state that
all necessary governmental approvals
and licenses will be obtained within a
specified period.
3.6.1 Benefits
Business can achieve unexpected gains
through joint ventures with a partner.
Joint ventures can prove to be
extremely beneficial for both parties
involved. One party may have strong
potential for growth and innovative
ideas, but is still likely to  benefit from
entering into a joint venture because it
enhances its capacity,  resources and
technical expertise. The major benefits
of joint ventures are as follows:
(i) Increased
resources
capacity: Joining hands with another
or teaming up adds to existing
resources and capacity enabling the
joint venture company to grow and
expand more quickly and efficiently.
The new business pools in financial
and human resources and is able to
face market challenges and take
advantage of new opportunities.
(ii) Access to new markets and
distribution networks: When a
business enters into a joint venture with
a partner from another country, it
opens up a vast growing market. For
example, when foreign companies form
joint venture companies in India they
gain access to the vast Indian market.
Their products which have reached
saturation point in their home markets
can be easily sold in new markets.
They can also take advantage of the
established distribution channels i.e.,
the retail outlets in different local
markets. Otherwise establishing their
own retail outlets may prove to be
very expensive.
(iii) Access
technology:
Technology is a major factor for most
businesses to enter into joint ventures.
Advanced techniques of production
leading to superior quality products
saves a lot of time, energy and
investment as they do not have to
develop their own technology.
Technology also adds to efficiency and
effectiveness, thus leading to reduction
in costs.
(iv) Innovation: The
markets
are increasingly becoming more
demanding in terms of new and
innovative products. Joint ventures
allow business to come up with
something new and creative for
the same market. Specially foreign
partners  can come up with innovative
products because of new ideas and
technology.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(v) Low cost of production: When
international corporations invest in
India, they benefit immensely due to the
lower cost of production. They are able
to get quality products for their global
requirements. India is becoming an
important global source and extremely
competitive in many products.
There are many reasons for this, low
cost of raw materials and labour,
technically qualified workforce;
management professionals, excellent
manpower in different cadres like
lawyers, chartered accountants,
engineers, scientists. The international
partner thus, gets the products of
required quality and specifications at a
much lower cost than what is prevailing
in the home country.
(vi) Established brand name: When
two businesses enter into a joint venture
one of the parties benefits from the
other’s goodwill which has already been
established in the market. If the joint
venture is in India and with an Indian
company, the Indian company does not
have to spend time or money in
developing a brand name for the
product or even a distribution system.
There is a ready market waiting for the
product to be launched. A lot of
investment is saved in the process.
Key Terms
Public sector
Departmental undertaking
Privatisation
Public enterprises
Government companies
Globalisation
Statutory corporation
Disinvestment
Global enterprises
Joint ventures
Public accountability
Public Sector
Undertakings
SUMMARY
Private sector and public sector: There are all kinds of business
organisations — small or large, industrial or trading, privately owned or
government owned existing in our country. These organisations affect our
daily economic life and therefore become part of the Indian economy. The
government of India has opted for a mixed economy where both private and
government enterprises are allowed to operate. The economy therefore may
be classified into two sectors viz., private sector and public sector. The
private sector consists of business owned by individuals or a group of
individuals. Various forms of organisation are sole proprietorship,
partnership, joint Hindu family, cooperative and company. The public sector
consists of various organisations owned and managed by the government.
These organisations may either be partly or wholly owned by the central or
state government.
© NCERT
not to be republished
PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES
Forms of organising public sector enterprises: Government’s participation
in business and economic sectors of the country needs some kind of
organisational framework to function. A public enterprise may take any
particular form of organisation depending upon the nature of it’s operations
and their relationship with the government. The suitability of a particular
form of organisation would depend upon its requirements. The forms of
organisation which a public enterprise may take are as follows:
Departmental undertaking
Statutory corporation
(iii)
Government company
Departmental undertakings: These enterprises are established as
departments of the ministry and are considered part or an extension of the
ministry itself. The Government functions through these departments and
the activities performed by them are an integral part of the functioning of
the government.
Statutory corporations: Statutory corporations are public enterprises
brought into existence by a Special Act of the Parliament. The Act defines
its powers and functions, rules and regulations governing its employees
and its relationship with Government departments. This is a corporate body
created by legislature with defined powers and functions and financially
independent with a clear control over a specified area or a particular type
of commercial activity.
Government company: These companies are established under the Indian
Companies Act, 1956. These are Government companies and like all other
companies in the private sector are registered and governed by the
provisions of the Indian companies Act. According to the Indian Companies
Act 1956, a government company means any company in which not less
than 51 percent of the paid up capital is held by the central government, or
by any state Governments or Government or partly by central Government
and partly by one or more state Governments.
Changing role of public sector: At the time of Independence, it was expected
that the public sector enterprises would play an important role in achieving
certain objectives of the economy either by direct participation in business
or by acting as a catalyst. The Indian economy is in a stage of transition.
In the post 90’s period, the new economic policies emphasised liberalisation,
privatisation and globalisation. The role of the public sector was redefined.
It was not supposed to play a passive role but to actively participate
and compete in the market with other private sector companies in the
same industry.
Development of infrastructure: The process of industrialisation cannot
be sustained without adequate transportation and communication facilities,
fuel and energy, and basic and heavy industries. It is only the government
which could mobilise huge capital, coordinate industrial construction and
train technicians and workforce.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Regional balance: The government is responsible for developing all regions
and states in a balanced way and removing regional disparties. Development
of backward regions so as to ensure a regional balance in the country is
one of the major objectives of planned development. Therefore, the
government had to locate new enterprises in backward areas and at the
same time prevent the mushrooming growth of private sector unit in already
advanced areas.
Economies of scale: Where large scale industries are required to be set up
with huge capital outlay, the public sector had to step in to take advantage
of economies of scale.
Check over concentration of economic power: The public sector acts as
a check over the private sector. In the private sector there are very few
industrial houses which would be willing to invest in heavy industries with
the result that wealth gets concentrated in a few hands and monopolostic
practices are encouraged.
Import substitution: During the second and third Five Year Plan period,
India was aiming to be self-reliant in many spheres. Public sector companies
involved in heavy engineering which would help in import substitution were
established.
Government policy towards public sector since 1991. Its
main elements are: Restructure and revive potentially viable PSUs, Close
down PSUs, which cannot be revived. Bring down governments equity in
all non-strategic PSUs to 26 per cent or lower if necessary; and fully protect
the interest of workers.
(a) Reduction in the number of industries reserved for the public sector from
17 to 8 (and then to 3): This meant that the private sector could enter all
areas (except 3) and the public sector would have to compete with them.
(b) Disinvestment of shares of a select set of public sector enterprises:
Disinvestment involves the sale of the equity shares to the private sector
and the public. The objective was to raise resources and encourage
wider participation of the general public and workers in the ownership
of these enterprises. The government had taken a decision to withdraw
from the industrial sector and reduce its equity in all undertakings.
(c) Policy regarding sick units to be the same as that for the private sector: All
public sector units were referred to the Board of Industrial and Financial
Reconstruction to decide whether a sick unit was to be restructured or
closed down.
Memorandum of Understanding: Improvement of performance through a
MoU (Memorandum of Understanding) system by which managements are
to be granted greater autonomy but held accountable for specified results.
Global enterprises: In the last ten years MNCs have played an important
role in the Indian economy. They are characterised by their huge size, large
© NCERT
not to be republished
PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES
number of products, advanced technology, marketing strategies and network
of operations all over the world. Global enterprises thus are huge industrial
organisations which extend their industrial and marketing operations
through a network of their branches in several countries.
Features: These corporations have distinct features which distinguishes
them from other private sector companies, public sector companies and public
sector enterprises i.e., (i) Huge capital resources, (ii) Foreign collaboration,
(iii) Advanced Technology, (iv) Product innovation, (v) Marketing strategies,
(vi) Expansion of market territory, (vii) Centralised control.
Joint ventures: Joint ventures may mean many things, depending upon
the context we are using it in. But in a broader sense, a joint venture is the
pooling of resources and expertise by two or more businesses, to achieve a
particular goal. The risks and rewards of the business are also shared. The
reasons behind the joint venture often include business expansion,
development of new products or moving into new markets, particularly in
another country.
Benefits: Business can achieve unexpected gains through joint ventures
with a partner. The major benefits of joint venture are as follows:
(i) Increased resources and capacity (ii) Access to new markets and
distribution networks (iii) Access to technology (iv) Innovation (v) Low cost
of production (vi) Established brand name.
EXERCISES
Multiple Type Questions
A government company is any company in which the paid up capital
held by the government is not less than
49 per cent
51 per cent
50 per cent
25 per cent
Centralised control in MNC’s implies control exercised by
Branches
Subsidiaries
Headquarters
Parliament
PSE’s are organisations owned by
Joint Hindu family
Government
Foreign Companies
Private entrepreneurs
Reconstruction of sick public sector units is taken up by
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Disinvestments of PSE’s implies
Sale of equity shares to
Closing down
private sector/public
operations
Investing in new areas
Buying shares PSE’s
Short Answer Questions
Explain the concept of public sector and private sector.
State the various types of organisations in the private sector.
What are the different kinds of organisations that come under the public
sector?
List the names of some enterprises under the public sector and classify
them.
Why is the government company form of organisation preferred to other
types in the public sector?
How does the government maintain a regional balance in the country?
Long Answer Questions
Describe the Industrial Policy 1991, towards the public sector.
What was the role of the public sector before 1991?
Can the public sector companies compete with the private sector in
terms of profits and efficiency? Give reasons for your answer.
Why are global enterprises considered superior to other business
organisations?
What are the benefits of entering into joint ventures?
Projects/Assignments
Collect information on companies in the public sector which have been
selected for disinvestment in the last 2-3 years. Also examine the
controversies surrounding these decisions. Prepare a project report.
Make a list of Indian companies entering into joint ventures with foreign
companies. Find out the apparent benefits derived out of such ventures.
© NCERT
not to be republished
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS SERVICES
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
state the characteristics of services;
distinguish services from goods;
classify different types of business services;
explain the concept of e-banking;
identify and classify different types of insurance policies; and
describe different types of warehouses.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
INTRODUCTION
You must all have, at some time or the
other experienced the effect of business
activities on your lives. Let us examine
few examples of business activity i.e.,
purchasing ice cream from a store and
eating ice cream in a restaurant,
watching a movie in a cinema hall or
purchasing a video cassette/CD,
purchasing a school bus and leasing it
from a transporter. If you analyse all
these activities, you will observe that
there is a difference between purchasing
and eating, purchasing and watching
and purchasing and leasing. What is
common in all of them is that one is
purchasing an item and the other is
experiencing a service. But there is
definitely a difference between the item
or good and the service performed.
For a layperson, services are
essentially intangibles. Their purchase
does not result in the ownership of
anything physical. For example, you can
only seek advice from the doctor, you
cannot purchase him. Services are all
those economic activities that are
intangible and imply an interaction to
be realised between the service provider
and the consumer.
Services are those separately
identifiable, essentially intangible
activities that provides satisfaction of
wants, and are not necessarily linked to
the sale of a product or another service.
All of us have seen a petrol pump. Have your ever thought how a petrol pump
owner does his business in a village? How he gets the petrol and diesel to the
villages in the interior? How he gets the money to purchase large quantities of
petrol and diesel? How he communicates to petrol depots for requirement and
also to customers? How he safeguards himself from various risks associated
with this business? The answer to all the above questions lies in the
understanding of business services. The transportation of petrol and diesel
from oil refineries to petrol pumps is carried out by train and tankers (transport
services).  They are then stored at various depots of oil companies situated in
all major towns across India (warehousing services). Petrol pump owners use
postal, mail and telephone facilities to be in touch with customers, banks and
the depots for the availability of their requirements on regular basis
(communication services). As oil companies always sell the petrol and diesel
on advance payment, the owners have to take loans and advances from banks
to fund their purchases (banking services). Petrol and diesel being highly risky
products, the owners have to safeguard themselves from various risks by getting
the business, the products, the life of people working there, etc., insure
(insurance services). Thus, we see that a single business of providing petrol
and diesel at a petrol pump is actually a collective outcome of various business
services. These services are being utilised in the entire process of shipment of
petrol and diesel from oil refineries to the point of sale at petrol pumps, spread
across the length and breath of India.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS SERVICES
A good is a physical product
capable of being delivered to a
purchaser and involves the transfer of
ownership from seller to customer.
Goods are also generally used to refer
to commodities or items of all types,
except services, involved in trade or
commerce.
NATURE OF SERVICES
There are five basic features of services.
These features also distinguish them
from goods and are known as the five Is
of services. These are discussed as
below:
(i) Intangibility: Services are
intangible, i.e., they cannot be touched.
They are experiential in nature. One
cannot taste a doctor’s treatment, or
touch entertainment. One can only
experience it. An important implication
of this is that quality of the offer can
often not be determined before
consumption and, therefore, purchase.
It is, therefore, important for the service
providers that they consciously work
on creating a desired service so that the
customer undergoes a favourable
experience. For example, treatment by a
doctor should be a favourable experience.
(ii) Inconsistency: The second
important characteristic of services is
inconsistency. Since there is no
standard tangible product, services
have to be performed exclusively each
time. Different customers have different
demands and expectations. Service
providers need to have an opportunity
to alter their offer to closely meet the
requirements of the customers. This is
happening, for example, in the case of
mobile services.
(iii) Inseparability:
Another
important characteristic of services is
the simultaneous activity of production
and consumption being performed.
This makes the production and
consumption of services seem to be
inseparable. While we can manufacture
a car today and sell it after, say, a
month; this is often not possible with
services that have to be consumed as
and when they are produced. Service
providers may design a substitute for
the person by using appropriate
technology but the interaction with the
customer remains a key feature of
services. Automated Teller Machines
(ATMs) may replace the banking clerk
for the front office activities like cash
withdrawal and cheque deposit. But,
at the same time, the presence of the
customer, is required and his/her
interaction with the process has to be
managed.
(iv) Inventory (Less): Services have
little or no tangible components and,
therefore, cannot be stored for a future
use. That is, services are perishable
and providers can, at best, store some
associated goods but not the service
itself. This means that the demand and
supply needs to be managed as the
service has to be performed as and
when the customer asks for it. They
cannot be performed earlier to be
consumed at a later date. For example,
a railway ticket can be stored but the
railway journey will be experienced
only when the railways provides it.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(v) Involvement: One of the most
important characteristics of services is
the participation of the customer in the
service delivery process. A customer
has the opportunity to get the services
modified according to specific
requirements.
4.2.1 Difference between Services
and Goods
From the above, it is clear that the two
main differentiating characteristics of
services and goods are non-
transferability of ownership and
presence of both provider as well as
consumer. While goods are produced,
services are performed. A service is an
act which cannot be taken home. What
we can take home is the effect of the
services. And as the services are sold
at the consumption point, there are no
inventories. On the basis of above
features, we can have following
points of distinction between goods
and services.
4.3 TYPES OF SERVICES
When speaking of the service sector,
services can be classified into three
broad categories, viz., business
services, social services and personal
services. These have been explained in
the following pages.
(i) Business Services: Business
services are those services which are
used by business enterprises for the
conduct of their activities. For
example, banking, insurance,
transportation, warehousing  and
communication services.
llifl
Difference between Services and Goods
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS SERVICES
An Introduction to the GATS
The agreement on trade in services reached in the Uruguay Round is perhaps
the most important single development in the multilateral trading system. The
new General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) for the first time framed
internationally agreed rules and commitments, broadly comparable with those
of the General Agreement on Tarrif and Trade (GATT). The most important element
of GATS is the classification of services used in making commitments. The GATS
schedule largely follows a classification, which identifies 11 basic service sectors
(plus a twelfth category for miscellaneous services). These sectors are subdivided
into some 160 subsectors or separate service activities. As an example, the
tourism category breaks down into subsectors for hotel and restaurants.
The twelve sectors are:
Business services (including professional and computer)
Communication services
Construction and related engineering services
Distribution services
Educational services
Environmental services
Financial services (Insurance and Banking)
Health related and social services
Tourism and travel related services
10. Recreational, cultural and sporting services
11. Transport services and
12. Other services not included elsewhere
(ii) Social Services: Social services
are those services that are generally
provided voluntarily in pursuit of
certain social goals. These social goals
may be to improve the standard of
living for weaker sections of society, to
provide educational services to their
children, or to provide health care and
hygienic conditions in slum areas.
These services are usually provided
voluntarily but for some consideration
to cover their costs. For example,
health care and education services
provided by certain Non-government
organisations (NGOs) and government
agencies.
(iii) Personal Services: Personal
services are those services which are
experienced differently by different
customers. These services cannot be
consistent in nature. They will differ
depending upon the service provider.
They will also depend upon
customer’s preferences and demands.
For example, tourism, recreational
services, restaurants.
context
better
understanding of the business
world, we will be limiting our
further discussions to the first
category of the service sector i.e.,
business services.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
4.3.1 Business Services
Today’s world is of tough competition,
where the survival of the fittest is the
rule. There is no room for non-
performance, and hence companies
tend to stick to what they can do best.
In order to be competitive, business
enterprises, are becoming more and
more dependant on specialised
business services. Business enterprises
look towards banks for availability of
funds; insurance companies for getting
their plant, machinery, goods, etc.,
insured; transport companies for
transporting raw material; and finished
goods, and telecom and postal services
for being in touch with their vendors,
suppliers and customers. Today’s
globalised world has ushered in a rapid
change in the service industry in India.
India has been gaining a highly
competitive edge over other countries
when it comes to providing services to
the developed economies of the world.
Many foreign companies are looking to
India for performing a host of business
services. They are even transferring a
part of their business operations to be
performed in India. We will discuss
these in detail in the next chapter.
Role of Services in an Economy
The services sector — including power, telecom and transport account for
60-65 per cent of the economy in most OECD (Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development) countries. While that may be surprising, even
developing countries have significant proportion of their GDP coming from
the services sector.
Sustained, high and broad-based growth is essential for economic development
and poverty alleviation. What is needed for such growth is an increase in
investment in the economy. There are encouraging signs on both the growth
and investment fronts in recent years. India is the second largest country in
the world, measured by a population of purchasing power parity. It ranks
among the top 5 economies of the world and expects to become the third largest
economy in the world by 2025.
As with any growing economy the sectoral composition of GDP has been
changing with the services showing an increased share of above 50 per cent
and that of agriculture declining to 25 per cent. The services sector continued
to be the mainstay of the expansion during 2003-04, contributing 57.6 per
cent to real GDP growth. Leading the upsurge was ‘trade, hotels, transport
and communication’. This was in consonance with the improved performance
of the commodity producing sectors. The strong expansion in cargo handled
at major ports as well as the rise in freight and passenger traffic of the railways
boosted the performance of the transport sector.
According to the latest estimates, services account for about 63 per cent of
the world economy. Industry accounts for 32 per cent and agriculture just 5
per cent. Nearly 70 per cent of the labour force in developed economies is
employed in the services sector.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS SERVICES
BANKING
Commercial banks are an important
institution of the economy for providing
institutional credit to its customers. A
banking company in India is the one
which transacts the business of
banking which means accepting, for the
purpose of lending and investment of
deposits of money from the public,
repayable on demand or otherwise and
withdrawable by cheques, draft, order
or otherwise. In simple terms, a bank
accepts money on deposits, repayable
on demand and also earns a margin of
profit by lending money. A bank
stimulates economic activity in the
market by dealing in money. It mobilises
the savings of people and makes funds
available to business financing their
capital and revenue expenditure. It
also deals in financial instruments and
provides financial services for a price
i.e., interest, discount, commission, etc.
Banks can be classified into the
following:
1. Commercial banks
2. Cooperative banks
3. Specialised banks
4. Central bank
(i) Commercial Banks: Commercial
banks are institutions dealing in
money. These are governed by Indian
Banking Regulation Act 1949 and
according to it banking means
accepting deposits of money from the
public for the purpose of lending or
investment. There are two types of
commercial banks, public sector and
private sector banks.
Public sectors banks are those in
which the government has a major
stake and they usually need to
emphasise on social objectives than on
profitability. Private sector banks are
owned, managed and controlled by
private promoters and they are free
4.4.1 Type of Banks
The focus of banking is varied, the
needs diverse and methods different.
Thus, we need distinctive kinds of
banks to cater to the above-mentioned
complexities.
to operate as per market forces. There
are 20 nationalised public sector banks
like SBI, PNB, IOB etc., and other
private sector banks represented by
HDFC Bank, ICICI Bank, Kotak
Mahindra Bank and Jammu and
Kashmir Bank.
Banking and Social Objectives
In the recent past there has been a concerted effort by the policy makers in
reorienting banking towards achieving social objectives. There has been a major
shift in the banking policy of the country:
Urban orientation
Rural orientation
Class banking
Mass banking
(iii)
Traditional
Innovative practices
Short term objectives
Development objectives
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(ii) Cooperative Banks: Cooperative
Banks are governed by the provisions
of State Cooperative Societies Act and
meant essentially for providing cheap
credit to their members. It is an
important source of rural credit i.e.,
agricultural financing in India.
(iii) Specialised Banks: Specialised
banks are foreign exchange banks,
industrial banks, development banks,
export-import banks catering to
specific needs of these unique activities.
These banks provide financial aid to
industries, heavy  turnkey projects and
foreign trade.
(iv) Central Bank: The Central bank
of any country supervises, controls and
regulates the activities of all the
commercial banks of that country. It
also acts as a government  banker. It
controls and coordinates currency and
credit policies of any country. The
Reserve Bank of India is the central
bank of our country.
4.4.2 Functions of Commercial
Banks
Banks perform a variety of functions.
Some of them are the basic or primary
functions of a bank while others are
agency or general utility services in
nature. The important functions are
briefly discussed below:
(i) Acceptance of deposits: Deposits
are the basis of the loan operations
since banks are both borrowers and
lenders of money. As borrowers they
pay interest and as lenders they grant
loans and get interest. These deposits
are generally taken through current
account, savings account and fixed
deposits. Current account deposits can
be withdrawn to the extent of the
balance at any time without any prior
notice.
Savings
accounts
encouraging savings by individuals.
Banks pay rate of interest as decided
by RBI on these deposits. Withdrawal
from these accounts has some
restrictions in relation to the amount
as well as number of times in a given
period. Fixed accounts are time
deposits with higher rate of interest as
compared to the savings accounts. A
premature withdrawal is permissible
with a percentage of interest being
forfeited.
(ii) Lending of funds: Second major
activity of commercial banks is to
provide loans and advances out of the
money received through deposits.
These advances can be made in the form
of overdrafts, cash credits, discounting
trade bills, term loans, consumer
credits and other miscellaneous
advances. The funds lent out by banks
contribute a great deal to trade,
industry, transport and other business
activities.
(iii) Cheque facility: Banks render a
very important service to their
customers by collecting their cheques
drawn on other banks. The cheque is
the most developed credit instrument,
a unique feature and function of banks
for the withdrawal of deposits. It is the
most convenient and an inexpensive
medium of exchange. There are two
types of cheques mainly (a) bearer
cheques, which are encashable
immediately at bank counters and
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS SERVICES
(b) crossed cheques which are to be
deposited only in the payees account.
(iv) Remittance of funds: Another
salient function of commercial banks
is of providing the facility of fund
transfer from one place to another, on
account of the interconnectivity of
branches. The transfer of funds is
administered by using bank drafts, pay
orders or mail transfers, on nominal
commission charges. The bank issues
a draft for the amount on its own
branches at other places or other banks
at those places. The payee can present
the draft on the drawee bank at his
place and collect the amount.
(v) Allied services: In addition to
above functions, banks also provide
allied services such as bill payments,
locker facilities, underwriting services.
They also perform other services like buying
and selling of shares and debentures
on instructions and other personal
services like payment of insurance
premium, collection of dividend etc.
4.4.3 e-Banking
The growth of Internet and e-commerce
is dramatically changing everyday
life, with the world wide web and
e-commerce transforming the world
into a digital global village. The latest
wave in information technology is
internet banking. It is a part of virtual
banking and another delivery channel
for customers.
In simple terms, internet banking
means any user with a PC and a
browser can get connected to the banks
website to perform any of the virtual
banking functions and avail of any of
the bank’s services. There is no human
operator to respond to the needs of the
customer. The bank has a centralised
data base that is web-enabled. All the
services that the bank has permitted
on the internet are displayed on a
menu. Any service can be selected and
further interaction is dictated by the
nature of service.
In this new digital market place
banks and financial institutions have
started providing services over the
internet. These type of services provided
by the banks on the internet, called
e-banking, lowers the transaction cost,
adds value to the banking relationship
and empowers customers. e-banking
is electronic banking or banking using
electronic media. Thus, e-banking is a
service provided by many banks, that
allows, a customer to conduct banking
transactions, such as managing
savings, checking accounts, applying
for loans or paying bills over the
internet using a personal computer,
mobile telephone or handheld
computer (personal digital assistant)
The range of services offered by
e-banking are: Electronic Funds
Transfer (EFT), Automated Teller
Machines (ATM) and Point of Sales
(PoS), Electronic Data Interchange
(EDI) and Credit Cards Electronic or
Digital cash.
Benefits
There are various benefits of e-banking
provided to customers which are:
(i) e-banking provides 24 hours,
365 days a year services to the
customers of the bank;
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(ii) Customers can make some of the
permitted transactions from office
or house or while travelling  via
mobile telephone;
(iii) It inculcates a sense of financial
discipline by recording each and
every transaction;
(iv) Greater customer satisfaction by
offering unlimited access to the
bank, not limited by the walls of the
branch and less risk and greater
security to the customer as they
can avoid travelling with cash.
The banks also stand to gain by
e-banking. The benefits are:
(i) e-banking provides competitive
advantage to the bank;
(ii) e-banking provides unlimited
network to the bank and is not
limited to the number of branches,
Any PC connected to a modem and
a telephone having an internet
connection can provide cash
withdrawl needs of the customer;
(iii) Load on branches can be
considerably
reduced
establishing centralised data base
and by taking over some of the
accounting functions.
INSURANCE
Life is full of uncertainties. The chances
of occurrence of an event causing losses
are quite uncertain. There are risks of
Indian Insurance Sector
It is a well-known fact that the Indian economy has been amongst the fastest
growing economies of the world. It is triggered by better performances of all the
three sectors i.e., agriculture, industry and services. With an increase in
manufacturing and service sector activities, a directly proportional higher
insurance penetration is the need of the hour.
With the initiation of financial sector reforms, the Indian insurance sector which
was till now under the government control has to set open for competition to
meet the global challenge. The first step taken by the government was to establish
IRDA Act with the objective of streamlining the development process. The Indian
insurance market is a mega market with a huge potential. Since the opening of
the insurance sector in December 1999 the insurance industry is changing
rapidly. Today 13 companies operate in the life and 13 in non-life segment. LIC
of India has dominated the life segment for over four decades although only
25 per cent of the insurable population was insured.
From the year 2000 onwards IRDA started granting licenses to private players.
Thus general insurance sector has seen considerable expansion over the past
few years. The premium income has recorded a growth rate of 20 per cent. A
department wise split shows that in the year 2002-03, 21 per cent of business is
derived from fire, 9 per cent from marine insurance, 39 per cent from motor
insurance, 8 per cent from health schemes, 5 per cent from re-engineering and
remaining 18 per cent from other miscellaneous insurances. Amongst the fastest
growing companies are the National Insurance, Bajaj Allianz, Tata-AIG and ICICI
Lombard. Currently, over 70 per cent of the business underwritten (fire, marine,
motor and engineering) is subject to tariff controls.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS SERVICES
death and disability for human life; fire
and burglary risk for property; perils of
the sea for shipment of goods and, so
on. If any of these takes place, the
individuals and/or, organisations may
suffer a great loss, sometimes beyond
their capacities to bear the same. It
is to minimise the impact of such
uncertainties that there is a need for
insurance. Investment in factory
buildings or heavy equipments or other
assets is not possible unless there is
arrangement for covering the risks, with
the help of insurance. Keeping this in
mind, people facing common risks come
together and make small contributions
to a common fund, which helps to
spread the loss caused to an individual
by a particular risk over a number of
persons who are exposed to it.
Insurance is thus a device by which
the loss likely to be caused by an
uncertain event is spread over a
number of persons who are exposed to
it and who prepare to insure themselves
against such an event. It is a contract
or agreement under which one party
agrees in return for a consideration to
pay an agreed amount of money to
another party to make a loss, damage
or injury to something of value in
which the insured has a pecuniary
interest as a result of some uncertain
event. The agreement/contract is put
in writing and is known as ‘policy’. The
person whose risk is insured is called
‘insured’ and the firm which insures the
risk of loss is known as insurer/
assurance underwriter.
4.5.1 Fundamental principle of
Insurance
The basic principle of insurance is that
an individual or a business concern
chooses to spend a definitely known
sum in place of a possible huge amount
involved in an indefinite future loss.
Thus insurance is the substitution of
a small periodic payment (premium) for
a risk of large possible loss. The loss of
risk still remains but the loss is spread
over a large number of policyholders
exposed to the same risk. The premium
paid by them are pooled out of which
the loss sustained by any policy holder
is compensated. Thus, risks are shared
with others. From the analysis of past
events the insurer (an insurance
company or an underwriter) knows the
probable losses caused by each type
of risk covered by insurance.
Insurance, therefore, is a form of risk
management primarily used to safe
guard against the risk of potential
financial loss. Ideally, insurance is
defined as the equitable transfer of the risk
of a potential loss, from one entity to
another, in exchange for a reasonable
fee. Insurance company, therefore, is
an association, corporation or an
organisation engaged in the business
of paying all legitimate claims that may
arise, in exchange for a fee (known as
premium).
Insurance is a social device in which
a group of individuals (insured)
transfers risk to another party (insurer)
in order to combine loss experience, which
provides for payment of losses from
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
funds contributed (premium) by all
members. Insurance is meant to protect
the insured, against uncertain events,
which may cause disadvantage to him.
4.5.2 Functions of Insurance
The various functions of insurance are
as follows:
(i) Providing certainty: Insurance
provides certainity of payment for the
risk of loss. There are uncertainties of
happenings of time and amount of loss.
Insurance removes these uncertainties
and the assured receives payment of
loss. The insurer charges premium for
providing the certainity.
(ii) Protection: The second main
function of insurance is to provide
protection from probable chances of
loss. Insurance cannot stop the
happening of a risk or event but can
compensate for losses arising out of it.
(iii) Risk sharing: On the happening
of a risk event, the loss is shared by all
the persons exposed to it. The share is
obtained from every insured member
by way of premiums.
(iv) Assist in capital formation: The
accumulated funds of the insurer
received by way of premium payments
made by the insured are invested in
various income generating schemes.
4.5.3 Principles of Insurance
The principles of insurance are the
rules of action or conduct adopted by
the stakeholders involved in the
insurance business. The specific
principles of utmost significance to a
valid insurance contract consists of the
following:
(i) Utmost good faith: A contract of
insurance is a contract of uberrimae
fidei i.e., a contract found on utmost
good faith. Both the insurer and the
insured should display good faith
towards each other in regard to the
contract. It is the duty of the insured
to voluntarily make full, accurate
disclosure of all facts, material to the
risk being proposed and the insurer to
make clear all the terms and conditions
in the insurance contract. Thus, it is
binding on the proposer to disclose all
material facts about the subject matter
of the proposed insurance. Any fact,
which is likely to affect the mind of  a
prudent insurer in deciding to accept
the proposal of insurance or in fixing
the rate of premium is material for this
purpose. Failure to make disclosure of
material facts by the insured makes the
contract of insurance voidable at the
discretion of the insurer.
Examples of facts to be disclosed
Fire insurance: Construction of building, fire detection and fire fighting
equipment; nature of its use.
Motor insurance: Type of vehicle; driver details.
Personal Accident insurance: Age, height, weight, occupation, previous medical
history.
Life insurance: Age, previous medical history, smoking/drinking habits.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS SERVICES
(ii) Insurable Interest: The insured
must have an insurable interest in the
subject matter of insurance. One
fundamental fact of this principle is
that ‘it is not the house, ship,
machinery, potential liability of life that
is insured, but it is the pecuniary
interest of the insured in them, which
is insured.’ Insurable interest means
some pecuniary interest in the subject
matter of the insurance contract. The
insured must have an interest in the
preservation of the thing or life insured,
so that he/she will suffer financially on
the happening of the event against
which he/she is insured. In case of
insurance of property, insurable
interest of the insured in the subject
matter of the insurance must exist at
the time of happening of the event. In
order to name insurable interest
however, it is not necessary that one
should be the owner of the property.
For example, a trustee holding
property on behalf of others has an
insurable interest in the property.
(iii) Indemnity: All insurance
contracts of fire or marine insurance
are contracts of indemnity. According
to it, the insurer undertakes to put the
insured, in the event of loss, in the same
position that he occupied immediately
before the happening of the event
insured against. In other words the
insurer undertakes to compensate the
insured for the loss caused to him/her
due to damage or destruction of
property insured. The compensation
payable and the loss suffered are to be
measured in terms of money. The
principle of indemnity is not applicable
to life insurance.
(iv) Proximate Cause: According to
this principle, an insurance policy is
designed to provide compensation only
for such losses as are caused by the
perils which are stated in the policy.
When the loss is the result of two or
more causes, the proximate cause
means the direct, the most dominant
and most effective cause of which the
loss is the natural consequence. In case
of loss arising out of any mishap, the
most proximate cause of the mishap
should be taken into consideration.
(v) Subrogation: It refers to the right
of the insurer to stand in the place of
the insured, after settlement of a claim,
as far as the right of insured in respect
of recovery from an alternative source
is involved. After the insured is
compensated for the loss or damage to
the property insured by him/her the
right of ownership of such property
passes on to the insurer. This is
because the insured should not be
allowed to make any profit, by selling
the damaged property or in the case of
lost property being recovered.
(vi) Contribution: As per this principle
it is the right of an insurer who has paid
claim under an insurance, to call upon
other liable insurers to contribute for
the loss of payment. It implies, that in
case of double insurance, the insurers
are to share the losses in proportion to
the amount assured by each of them.
In case there is a loss, when there is
more than one policy on the same
property, the insured will have no right
to recover more than the full amount
of his actual loss. If the full amount is
recovered from one insurer the right to
obtain further payment from the other
insurer will cease.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(vii) Mitigation: This principle states
that it is the duty of the insured to take
reasonable steps to minimise the loss
or damage to the insured property.
Suppose goods kept in a store house
catch fire then the owner of the goods
should try to recover the goods and
save them from fire to minimise the
loss or damage. The insured must
behave  with great prudence and not
be careless just because there is an
insurance cover. If reasonable care is
not taken like any prudent person
then the claim from the insurance
company may be lost.
4.5.4 Types of Insurance
Various types of insurance exist by
virtue of practice of insurance
companies and the influence of legal
enactments controlling the insurance
business. Broadly speaking, insurance
may be classified as follows:
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS SERVICES
LIFE INSURANCE
Since life itself is uncertain, all
individuals try to assure themselves of
a certain sum of money in the future to
take care of unforeseen events or
happenings. Individuals in the course
of their life are always exposed to some
kind of risks.
The risk may be of an event which
is certain that is death. In that case,
what will happen to the other members
of the family who are dependent on a
particular individuals income. The
other risk may be living too long in
which an individual may become too
old to earn i.e., retirement. In this case
also, the earnings will decline or end.
Under such circumstances, individuals
seek protection against these risks
and life insurance companies offer
protection against such risks.
A life insurance policy was
introduced as a protection against the
uncertainity of life. But gradually its
scope has widened and there are
various types of insurance policies
available to suit the requirements of an
individual. For example, disability
insurance, health/medical insurance,
annuity insurance and life insurance
proper.
Life insurance may be defined as a
contract in which the insurer in
consideration of a certain premium,
either in a lump sum or by other
periodical payments, agrees to pay to
the assured, or to the person for whose
benefit the policy is taken, the assured
sum of money, on the happening of a
specified event contingent on the
human life or at the expiry of certain
period. Thus, the insurance company
undertakes to insure the life of a person
in exchange for a sum of money called
premium. This premium may be paid
in one lump sum, or periodically i.e.,
monthly, quarterly, half yearly or
yearly. At the same time, the company
promises to pay a certain sum of money
either on the death of the person or on
his attaining a certain age (i.e., the
expiry of certain period). Thus, the
person is sure that a specified amount
will be given to him when he attains a
certain age or that his dependents will
get that sum in the event of his death.
This agreement or contract which
contains all the terms and conditions
is put in writing and such document is
called the policy. The person whose life
is insured is called the assured. The
insurance company is the insurer and
the consideration paid by the assured
is the premium. The premium can be
paid periodically in instalments.
This insurance provides protection
to the family at the premature death or
gives adequate amount at old age when
earning capacities are reduced. The
insurance is not only a protection but
is a sort of investment because a certain
sum is returnable to the insured at
the time of death or at the expiry of a
certain period.
Life insurance also encourages
savings as the amount of premium has
to be paid regularly. It thus, provides
a sense of security to the insured and
his dependents.
The general principles of insurance
discussed in the previous section apply
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
to life insurance also with a few
exceptions. The main elements of a life
insurance contract are:
(i) The life insurance contract must
have all the essentials of a valid
contract. Certain elements like offer
and acceptance, free  consent,
capacity to enter into a contract,
lawful consideration and lawful
object must be present for the
contract to be valid;
(ii) The contract of life insurance is a
contract of utmost good faith. The
assured should be honest and
truthful in giving information to the
insurance company. He must
disclose all material facts about his
health to the insurer. It is his duty
to disclose accurately all material
facts known to him even if the
insurer does not ask him;
(iii) In life insurance, the insured must
have insurable interest in the life
assured. Without insurable interest
the contract of insurance is void. In
case of life insurance, insurable
interest must be present at the time
when the insurance is affected. It is
not necessary that the assured
should have insurable interest at
the time of maturity also. For
example, a person is presumed to
have an interest in his own life and
every part of it, a creditor has an
insurable interest in the life of his
debtor,  and a proprietor of a drama
company has an insurable interest
in the lives of the actors;
(iv) Life insurance contract is not a
contract of indemnity. The life
of a human being cannot be
compensated and only a specified
sum of money is paid. That is why
the amount payable in life
insurance on the happening of the
event is fixed in advance. The sum
of money payable is fixed, at the
time of entering into the contract. A
contract of life insurance, therefore,
is not a contract of indemnity.
Types of life insurance policies
The document containing the written
contract between the insurer and the
insured alongwith the terms and
conditions of insurance is called the
Policy. After the proposal form is filled
by the insured (or the proposer) and
the insurer (insurance company)
accepts the form and the premium, a
policy is issued to the insurer.
People have different requirements
and therefore they would like a policy
to fulfill all their needs. The needs of
people for life insurance can be family
needs, children’s needs, old age and
special needs. To meet the needs of
people the insurers have developed
different types of products such as
Whole Life Assurance, Endowment type
plans, combination of Whole Life and
Endowment type plans, Children’s
Assurance plans and Annuity plans.
Some of these are explained below:
(i) Whole Life Policy: In this kind of
policy, the amount payable to the
insured will not be paid before the
death of the assured. The sum then
becomes payable only to the
beneficiaries or heir of the deceased.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS SERVICES
The premium will be payable for a
fixed period (20 or 30 years) or for the
whole life of the assured. If the premium
is payable for a fixed period, the policy will
continue till the death of the assured.
(ii) Endowment Life Assurance
Policy: The insurer (Insurance
Company) undertakes to pay a specified
sum when the insured attains a
particular age or on his death which
ever is earlier. The sum is payable to his
legal heir/s or nominee named therein
in case of death of the assured.
Otherwise, the sum will be paid to the
assured after a fixed period i.e., till he/
she attains a particular age. Thus, the
endowment policy matures after a
limted number of years.
(iii) Joint Life Policy: This policy is
taken up by two or more persons. The
premium is paid jointly or by either of
them in instalments or lump sum. The
assured sum or policy money is payable
upon the death of any one person to the
other survivor or survivors. Usually this
policy is taken up by husband and wife
jointly or by two partners in a
partnership firm where the amount is
payable to the survivor on the death of
either of the two.
(iv) Annuity Policy: Under this policy,
the assured sum or policy money is
payable after the assured attains a
certain age in monthly, quarterly, half
yearly or annual instalments. The
premium is paid in instalments over a
certain period or single premium may
be paid by the assured. This is useful
to those who prefer a regular income
after a certain age.
(v) Children’s Endowment Policy:
This policy is taken by a person for his/
her children to meet the expenses of
their education or marriage. The
agreement states that a certain sum will
be paid by the insurer when the
children attain a particular age. The
premium is paid by the person entering
into the contract. However, no premium
wil be paid, if he dies before the maturity
of the policy.
FIRE INSURANCE
Fire insurance is a contract whereby
the insurer, in consideration of the
premium paid, undertakes to make
good any loss or damage caused by fire
during a specified period upto the
amount specified in the policy.
Normally, the fire insurance policy is
for a period of one year after which it is
to be renewed from time to time. The
premium may be paid either in lump
sum or instalments. A claim for loss
by fire must satisfy the two following
conditions:
(i) There must be actual loss; and
(ii) Fire must be accidental and non-
intentional.
The risk covered by a fire insurance
contract is the loss resulting from fire
or some other cause, and which is the
proximate cause of the loss. If
overheating without ignition causes
damage, it will not be regarded as a fire
loss within the meaning of fire
insurance and the loss will not be
recoverable from the insurer.
A fire insurance contract is based
on certain fundamental principles
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Difference between Life, Fire and Marine Insurance
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS SERVICES
which have been discussed in general
principles. The main elements of a fire
insurance contract are:
(i) In fire insurance, the insured must
have insurable interest in the subject
matter of the insurance. Without
insurable interest the contract of
insurance is void. In case of fire
insurance, unlike life insurance
insurable interest must be present
both at the time of insurance and at
the time of loss. For example, a
person has insurable interest in the
property he owns, a businessman
has insurable interest in his stock,
plant, machinery and building,  an
agent has an insurable interest in
the property of his principal, a
partner has insurable interest in the
property of a partnership firm, and
a mortgagee has insurable interest
in the property, which is mortgaged.
(ii) Similar to the life insurance
contract, the contract of fire
insurance is a contract of utmost
good faith i.e., uberrimae fidei. The
insured should be truthful and
honest in giving information to the
insurance company regarding the
subject matter of the insurance. He
duty-bound
disclose
accurately all facts regarding the
nature of property and risks
attached to it. The insurance
company should also disclose the
facts of the policy to the proposer.
(iii) The contract of fire insurance is a
contract of strict indemnity. The
insured can, in the event of loss,
recover the actual amount of loss
from the insurer. This is subject to
the maximum amount for which the
subject matter is insured. For
example, if a person has insured his
house for Rs. 4,00,000 the insurer
is not necessarily liable to pay that
amount, although the house may
have been totally destroyed by fire;
but he will pay the actual loss after
deducting depreciation within the
maximum limit of Rs. 4,00,000. The
purpose being that a person should
not be allowed to gain by insurance.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(iv) The insurer is liable to compensate
only when fire is the proximate
cause of damage or loss.
MARINE INSURANCE
A marine insurance contract is an
agreement whereby the insurer
undertakes to indemnify the insured
in the manner and to the extent thereby
agreed against marine losses. Marine
insurance provides protection against
loss by marine perils or perils of the sea.
Marine perils are collision of ship with
the rock, or ship attacked by the
enemies, fire and captured by pirates
and actions of the captains and crew of
the ship. These perils cause damage,
destruction or disappearance of the
ship and cargo and non-payment of
freight. So, marine insurance insures
ship hull, cargo and freight. Thus, it is
a device wherein the insurer undertakes
to compensate the owner of a ship or
cargo for complete or partial loss at sea.
The insurer gurantees to make good the
losses due to damage to the ship or cargo
arising out of the risks incidental to sea
voyages. The insurer in this case is known
as the underwriter and a certain sum of
money  is paid by the insured in
consideration for the guarantee/
protection he gets. Marine insurance is
slightly different from other types. There
are three things involved i.e., ship or hull,
cargo or goods, and freight.
(a) Ship or hull insurance: Since the
ship is exposed to many dangers at
sea, the insurance policy is for
indemnifying the insured for losses
caused by damage to the ship.
(b) Cargo insurance: The cargo while
being transported by ship is subject
to many risks. These may be at port
i.e., risk of theft, lost goods or on
voyage etc. Thus, an insurance
policy can be issued to cover against
such risks to cargo.
(c) Freight insurance: If the cargo does
not reach the destination due to
damage or loss in transit, the
shipping company is not paid freight
charges. Freight insurance is for
reimbursing the loss of freight to the
shipping company i.e., the insured.
The fundamental principles of
marine insurance are the same as the
general principles. The main elements
of a marine insurance contract are:
(i) Unlike life insurance, the contract
of marine insurance is a contract of
indemnity. The insured can, in the
event of loss recover the actual
amount of loss from the insurer.
Under no circumstances, the
insured is allowed to make profit
out of the marine insurance
contract. But cargo policies provide
commercial indemnity rather than
strict indemnity. The insurers
promise to indemnify the insured
“in the manner and to the extent
agreed.” In case of ‘Hull Policy’, the
amount insured is fixed at a level
above the current market value;
(ii) Similar to life and fire insurance, the
contract of marine insurance is a
contract of utmost good faith. Both
the insured and insurer must
disclose everything, which is in their
knowledge and can affect the
insurance contract. The insured is
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS SERVICES
duty-bound to accurately disclose
all facts which include the nature
of shipment and the risk of damage
it is exposed to;
(iii) Insurable interest must exist at the
time of loss but not necessary at the
time when the policy was taken;
(iv) The principle of causa proxima will
apply to it. The insurance company
will be liable to pay only if that
particular or nearest cause is
covered by the policy. For example,
if a loss is caused by several
reasons then nearest cause of loss
will be considered.
4.6 COMMUNICATION SERVICES
Communication services are helpful to
the business for establishing links with
the outside world viz., suppliers,
customers, competitors etc. Business
does not exist in isolation, it has to
communicate with others for
transmission of ideas and information.
Communication services need to be
very efficient, accurate and fast for them
to be effective. In this fast moving and
competitive world it is essential to have
advanced technology for quick
exchange of information. The electronic
media is mainly responsible for this
transformation. The main services
which help business can be classified
into postal and telecom.
Postal Services
Indian post and telegraph department
provides various postal services across
India. For providing these services the
whole country has been divided into 22
postal circles. These circles manage the
day-to-day functioning of the various
head post offices, sub-post offices and
branch post offices. Through their
regional
divisional
level
arrangements the various facilities
provided by postal department are
broadly categorised into:
(i) Financial facilities: These facilities
are provided through the post office’s
savings schemes like Public Provident
Fund (PPF), Kisan Vikas Patra, and
National Saving Certificates in addition
to normal retail banking functions of
monthly income schemes, recurring
deposits, savings account, time
deposits and money order facility.
Indian Postal Network Realities
1,54,149 post offices
5,64,701 letter boxes
1,575 crore mails every year
5,01,716 villages with public telephones (84 per cent of total villages)
26,000 post offices already connected through network
Post Office Savings Bank is the largest retail bank of 1,50,000 plus branches
Total collections at Rs. 200,000 crores
Dedicated VSAT network via satellite of over 1200 post offices
Speed Post facility for over 1000 destinations in India
Links 97 major countries around the globe
Source: www.indiapost.gov.in
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(ii) Mail facilities: Mail services consist
of parcel facilities that is trans-mission
of articles from one place to another;
registration facility to provide security
of the transmitted articles and
insurance facility to provide insurance
cover for all risks in the course of
transmission by post.
Postal department also offers allied
facilities of the following types:
1. Greeting post — A range of
delightful greeting cards for
every occasion.
2. Media post — An innovative
and effective vehicle for
Indian corporates to advertise
their brand through postcards,
envelopes, aerograms, tele-
grams, and also through
letterboxes.
General Insurance
1. Health Insurance
Health Insurance is a safeguard against rising medical costs. A health insurance
policy is a contract between an insurer and an individual or group, in which the
insurer agrees to provide specified health insurance at an agreed-upon price
(the premium). Depending upon the policy, premium may be payable either in a
lump sum or in instalments. Health insurance usually provides either direct
payment or reimbursement for expenses associated with illness and injuries.
The cost and range of protection provided by health insurance depends on the
provider and the policy purchased. In India, presently the health insurance
exists primarily in the form of Mediclaim policy offered to an individual or to any
group, association or corporate bodies.
2. Motor Vehicle Insurance
Motor Vehicle Insurance falls under the classification of General Insurance.
This insurance is becoming very popular and its importance increasing day-by-
day. In motor insurance the owner’s liability to compensate people who were
killed or insured through negligence of the motorists or drivers is passed on to
the insurance company. The rate of premium under motor insurance is
standardised.
3. Burglary Insurance
Burglary insurance falls under the classification of insurance of property. In
case of burglary policy, the loss of damages of household goods and properties
and personal effects due to theft, larceny, burglary, house-breaking and acts of
such nature are covered. The actual loss is compensated.
Insurable interest must exist at the time of loss but not necessarily at the
time when the policy was taken.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS SERVICES
The principle of causa proxima will apply to it. The insurance company will
be liable to pay only that particular or nearest cause that is covered by the
policy. For example, if a loss is caused by several reasons then the nearest
cause of loss will be considered.
4. Cattle Insurance
A contract of cattle insurance is a contract whereby a sum of money is secured to
the assured in the event of death of animals like bulls, buffaloes, cows and heifers.
It is a contract against death resulting from accident, disease, or pregnant
condition as the case may be. The insurer usually undertakes to pay the excess
in the event of loss.
5. Crop Insurance
A contract of crop insurance is a contract to provide a measure of financial
support to farmers in the event of a crop failure due to drought or flood. This
insurance covers against all risks of loss or damages relating to production of
rice, wheat, millets, oil seeds and pulses etc.
6. Sports Insurance
This policy assures a comprehensive cover available to amateur sportsmen
covering their sporting equipment, personal effects, legal liability and personal
accident risks. If desired the cover can also be made available in respect of the
named member of insured’s family residing with him. This cover is not available
to professional sportsmen. The cover is available in respect of any one or more of
the following sports: angling, badminton, cricket, golf, lawn tennis, squash, use of
sporting guns.
7. Amartya Sen Siksha Yojana
This policy offered by the General Insurance Company secures the education of
dependent children. If the insured parent/legal guardian sustains any bodily
injury resulting solely and directly from an accident, caused by external, violent
and visible means and if such injury shall within twelve calendar months of its
occurrence be the sole and direct cause of his/her death or permanent total
disablement, the insurer shall indemnify the insured student, in respect of all
covered expenses to be incurred from the date of occurrence of such accident till
the expiry date of policy or completion of the duration of covered course whichever
occurs first and such indemnity shall not exceed the sum insured as stated in the
policy schedule.
8. Rajeswari Mahila Kalyan Bima Yojana
This policy has been designed to provide relief to the family members of insured
women in case of their death or disablement arising due to all kinds of accidents
and/or death and/or disablement arising out of problems incidental to women only.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
3. Direct post is for direct advertising.
It can be both addressed as well
as unaddressed.
4. International Money Transfer
through collaboration with
Western Union financial services,
USA, which enables remittance of
money from 185 countries to India.
5. Passport facilities — A unique
partnership with the ministry of
external affairs for facilitating
passport application.
6. Speed Post: It has over 1000
destinations in India and links with
97 major countries across the globe.
7. e-bill post is the latest offering of
the department to collect bill
payment across the counter for
BSNL and Bharti Airtel.
Telecom Services
World class telecommunications
infrastructure is the key to rapid
economic and social development of the
country. It is in fact the backbone of
every business activity. In today’s world
the dream of doing business across
continents will remain a dream in the
absence of telecom infrastructure.
There have been far reaching
developments in the convergence of
telecom, IT, consumer electronics and
media
industries
worldwide.
Recognising the potential in enhancing
quality of life and to facilitate India’s
vision of becoming IT super power by
the year 2025, new Telecom Policy
Framework 1999 and Broadband
Policy 2004 were developed by the
Government of India. Through this
framework the government intends to
provide both universal services to
all uncovered areas and high-level
services for meeting the needs of the
country’s economy.
The various types of telecom
services are:
(i) Cellular mobile services: These are
all types of mobile telecom services
including voice and non-voice
messages, data services and PCO
services utilising any type of network
equipment within their service area.
They can also provide direct inter
connectivity with any other type of
telecom service provider.
(ii) Radio paging services: Radio
Paging Service is an affordable means
of transmitting information to persons
even when they are mobile. It is a one-
way information broadcasting solution,
and has spread its reach far and wide.
Radio paging services are available
including tone only, numeric only and
alpha/numeric paging.
(iii) Fixed line services: These are all
types of fixed services including voice
and non-voice messages and data
services to establish linkages for long
distance traffic. These utilise any type
of network equipment primarily
connected through fiber optic cables
laid across  the length and breadth of
the country. The also provide inter
connectivity with other types of telecom
services.
(iv) Cable services: These are linkages
and switched services within a licensed
area of operation to operate media
services, which are essentially one way
entertainment related services. The two
way communication including voice,
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS SERVICES
data and information services through
cable network would emerge significantly
in the future. Offering services through
the cable network would be similar to
providing fixed services.
(v) VSAT services: VSAT (Very Small
Aperture Terminal) is a satellite-based
communications service. It offers
businesses and government agencies
a highly flexible and reliable
communication solution in both
urban and rural areas. Compared to
land-based services, VSAT offers
the assurance of reliable and
uninterrupted service that is equal to
or better than land-based services. It
can be used to provide innovative
applications such as tele-medicine,
newspapers-on-line, market rates and
tele-education even in the most remote
areas of our country.
(vi) DTH services: DTH (Direct to
Home) is again a satellite based media
services provided by cellular
companies. One can receive media
services directly through a satellite with
the help of a small dish antenna and a
set top box. The service provider of DTH
services provides a bouquet of multiple
channels. It can be viewed on our
television without being dependent on
the services provided by the cable
network services provider.
TRANSPORTATION
Transportation comprises freight
services together with supporting and
auxiliary services by all modes of
transportation i.e., rail, road, air and
sea for the movement of goods and
international carriage of passengers.
You have already studied the
comparative
advantages
disadvantages of different modes of
transportation in earlier classes. Their
services are considered to be important
for business since speed is of essence
in any business transaction. Also
transportation removes the hindrance
of place, i.e., it makes goods available
to the consumer from the place of
production. We need to develop our
transportation system to keep pace
Infrastructure in Transportation
In the first, 50 years of independence, India saw the construction of around
13, 000 kilometers of national highways. The ambitious NHAI, Government of
India’s project consisting of Golden Quadrilateral connecting Delhi-Kolkata-
Chennai-Mumbai and the North-South, East-West corridors linking Srinagar to
Kanyakumari and Silchar to Porbandar will see the construction of 13,151 kms
of National Highways within a span of eight years. This project will not only
change the face of road transport in India, but it will also have a lasting impact
on our economy. The Ministry of Railways have also done massive innovations
in their movement and monitoring of goods trains to facilitate the needs of the
business community.
The Government of India is also serious in ensuring better and more facilities at
the seaports and airports to provide an impetus to business activities. The
government plans not only to enhance capacities of existing ports but also to
develop modern and new ports at strategic locations.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
with the requirements of our economy.
We need better infrastructure of roads
with sufficient width and high quality.
We have few ports and they too are
congested. Both government and
industry needs to be proactive and view
the effective functioning of this service
as a necessity for providing a lifeline to
a business services. In sectors like
agriculture and food, there are massive
losses of product in the process of
transportation and storage.
Warehousing
Storage has always been an important
aspect of economic development. The
warehouse was initially viewed as a
static unit for keeping and storing
goods in a scientific and systematic
manner so as to maintain their original
quality, value and usefulness.
The typical warehouse received
merchandise by rail, truck or bullock
cart. The items were moved manually
to a storage within the warehouse and
hand piled in stacks on the floor. They
are used by manufacturers, importers,
exporters, wholesalers, transport
business, customs etc., in India.
Today’s warehouses have ceased to
be a mere storage service providers and
have really become logistical service
providers in a cost efficient manner.
That is making available the right
quantity, at the right place, in the right
time, in the right physical form at the
right cost. Modern warehouses are
automated with automatic conveyors,
computer operated cranes and forklifts
for moving goods and also usage of
logistics automation software’s for
warehouse management.
Types of Warehouses
(i) Private warehouses: Private
warehouses are operated, owned or
leased by a company handling their
own goods, such as retail chain
stores or multi-brand multi-product
companies. As a general rule an efficient
warehouse is planned around a
material handling system in order to
encourage maximum efficiency of
product movement. The benefit of
private warehousing includes control,
flexibility, and other benefits like
improved dealer relations.
(ii) Public warehouses: Public
warehouses can be used for storage of
goods by traders, manufacturers or
any member of the public after the
payment of a storage fee or charges.
The government regulates the operation
of these warehouses by issuing licences
for them to private parties.
The owner of the warehouse stands
as an agent of the owner of the goods
and is expected to take appropriate care
of the goods.
These warehouses provide other
facilities also like transportation by rail
and road. They are responsible for the
full safety of the goods. Small
manufacturers find it very convenient
as they cannot afford to construct their
own warehouses.
The other benefits include flexibility
in the number of locations, no fixed cost
and capability of offering value added
services like packaging and labelling.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS SERVICES
(iii) Bonded warehouses: Bonded
warehouses are licensed by the
government to accept imported goods
prior to payment of tax and customs
duty. These are goods which are
imported from other countries.
Importers are not permitted to remove
goods from the docks or the airport till
customs duty is paid.
At times, importers are not in a
position to pay the duty in full or does
not require all the goods immediately.
The goods are kept in bonded
warehouses by the customs authorities
till the customs duty is paid. These
goods are said to be in bond.
These warehouses have facilities for
branding, packaging, grading and
blending. Importers may bring their
buyers for inspection of goods and
repackage them according to their
requirements. Thus, it facilitates
marketing of goods.
Goods can be removed in part as
and when required by the importers
and buyers, and import duty can be
paid in instalments.
The importer need not block funds
for payment of import duties before the
goods are sold or used. Even if he wishes
to export the goods kept in the bonded
warehouse he may do so without
payment of customs duty. Thus, bonded
warehouses facilitate entrepot trade.
(iv) Government warehouses: These
warehouses are fully owned and
managed by the government. The
government manages them through
organisations set up in the public
sector. For example, Food Corporation
of India, State Trading Corporation,
and Central Warehousing Corporation.
(v) Cooperative warehouses: Some
marketing cooperative societies or
agricultural cooperative socities have
set up their own warehouses for
members of their cooperative society.
Functions of warehousing
The functions of warehousing are
discussed as follows:
(a) Consolidation: In this function
the warehouse receives and
consolidates, materials/goods from
different production plants and
dispatches the same to a particular
customer on a single transportation
shipment.
(b) Break the bulk: The warehouse
performs the function of dividing
the  bulk quantity of goods received
from the production plants into
smaller quantities. These smaller
quantities are then transported
according to the requirements of
clients to their places of business.
Plant B
Plant A
Consolidation
Warehouses
A / B / C
Plant C
PLANT A
Break-Bulk
Warehouse
Customer B
Customer C
Customer A
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(c) Stock piling:  The next function of
warehousing is the seasonal storage
of goods to select businesses. Goods
or raw materials which are not
required immediately for sale or
manufacturing are stored in
warehouses. They are made available
to business depending on customers
demand. Agricultural products
which are harvested at specific times
with subsequent consumption
through out the year also need to be
stored and released in lots.
(d) Value added services: Certain
value added services are also
provided by the warehouses, such
as in transit mixing, packaging and
labelling. Goods sometimes need to
Central Warehousing Corporation
At present a central government undertaking CWC i.e., Central Warehousing
Corporation provides these services for businessmen across the country. Private
warehousing companies like TCI, Shanker International, Blue Dart, DHL etc.,
are providing cargo facilities of both transportation and warehousing.
be opened and repackaged and
labelled again at the time of
inspection by prospective buyers.
Grading according to quantity and
dividing goods in smaller lots is
another function.
(e) Price stablisation: By adjusting
the supply of goods with the
demand situation, warehousing
performs the function of stabilising
prices. Thus, prices are controlled
when supply is increasing and
demand is slack and vice versa.
(f) Financing: Warehouse owners
advance money to the owners on
security of goods and further
supply goods on credit terms to
customers.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS SERVICES
Key Terms
Business services
Insurance
Subrogation
Fire insurance
Banking
Insurable interest
Contribution
Marine insurance
e-Banking
Indemnity
Mitigation
Telecom services
Commercial banks
Proximate cause
Life insurance
Warehousing
SUMMARY
Nature of services: Services are those separately identifiable, essentially
intangible activities that provide satisfaction of wants, and are not
necessarily linked to the sale of a product or another service. There are five
basic features of services. These features also distinguish them from goods
and are known as the five Is of services i.e., Intangibility, Inconsistency,
Inseparability, Inventory (less), Involvement.
Difference between services and goods: While goods are produced,
services are performed. A service is an act which cannot be taken home.
What we can take home is the effect of the services. And as the services are
sold at the consumption point, there are no inventories.
Types of services: Business Services, Social Services, Personal Services.
Business services: In order to be competitive, business enterprises are
becoming more and more dependent on specialised business services.
Business enterprises look towards banks for availability of funds; insurance
companies for getting their plant, machinery, goods, etc., insured; transport
companies for transporting raw material and finished goods; and telecom
and postal services for being in touch with their vendors, suppliers and
customers.
Banking: A banking company in India is one which transacts the business
of  banking which means accepting, for the purpose of lending and investment
of deposits of money from the public, repayable on demand or otherwise and
withdrawable by cheques, draft, order or otherwise.
Type of banks: Banks can be classified into the following i.e., commercial
banks, cooperative banks, specialised banks, central bank.
Functions of commercial bank: Some of them are the basic or primary
functions of a bank while others are agency services or general utility services
in nature. Acceptance of deposits, lending of funds, cheque facility, remittance
of funds, allied services.
e-Banking: The latest wave in information technology is internet banking. It
is a part of virtual banking and another delivery channel for customers.
e-banking is electronic banking or banking using the electronic media. Thus,
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
e-banking is a service provided by many banks, that allows a customer to
conduct banking transactions, such as managing savings, checking
accounts, applying for loans or paying bills over the internet using a personal
computer, mobile telephone or handheld computer (personal digital assistant)
Insurance: Insurance is thus a device by which the loss likely to be caused
by an uncertain event is spread over a number of persons who are exposed
to it and who are prepared to insure themselves against such an event. It is
a contract or agreement under which one party agrees in return for a
consideration to pay an agreed amount of money to another party to make
good a loss, damage or injury to something of value in which the insured has
a pecuniary interest as a result of some uncertain event.
Fundamental principle of insurance: The basic principle of insurance is
that an individual or a business concern chooses to spend a definitely known
sum in place of a possible huge amount involved in an indefinite future loss.
Insurance, therefore, is a form of risk management primarily used to safe
guard against the risk of potential financial loss.
Functions of insurance: Providing certainty, Protection, Risk sharing, Assist
in capital formation.
Principles of Insurance
Utmost good faith: A contract of insurance is a contract of uberrimae fidei
i.e. a contract found on utmost good faith. Both the insurer and the insured
display good faith towards each other in regard to the contract.
Insurable interest: The insured must have an insurable interest in the
subject matter of insurance.
Insurable interest means some pecuniary interest in the subject matter of
the insurance contract.
Indemnity: According to it, the insurer undertakes to put the insured, in
the event of loss, in the same position that he occupied immediately before
the happening of the event insured against.
Proximate cause: When the loss is the result of two or more causes, the
proximate cause means the direct, the most dominant and most effective
cause of which the loss is a natural consequence.
Subrogation: It refers to the right of the insurer to stand in the place of the
insured, after settlement of a claim, as far as the right of the insured in
respect of recovery from an alternative source is involved.
Contribution: As per this principle it is the right of an insurer who has paid
claim under an insurance, to call upon other liable insurers to contribute
for the loss payment.
Mitigation: This principles states that it is the duty of the insured to take
reasonable steps to minimise the loss or damage to the insured property.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS SERVICES
Types of Insurance
Life insurance: Life insurance may be defined as a contract in which the
insurer, in consideration of a certain premium, either in a lump sum or by
other periodical payments, agrees to pay to the assured, or to the person
for whose benefit the policy is taken, the assured sum of money, on the
happening of a specified event contingent on the human life or at the expiry
of a certain period.
This insurance provides protection to the family at premature death of an
individual or gives adequate amount at an old age when earning capacities
are reduced. The insurance is not only a protection but is a sort of investment
because a certain sum is returnable to the insured at the time of death or at
the expiry of a certain period.
The main elements of a life insurance contract are:
The life insurance contract must have all the essentials of a valid
contract.
The contract of life insurance is a contract of utmost good faith.
(iii)
In life insurance, the insured must have insurable interest in the life
assured.
Life insurance contract is not a contract of indemnity.
Types of life insurance policies: People have different requirements and
therefore they would like a policy to fulfill all their needs. The needs of people
for life insurance can be family needs, children’s needs, old age and  special
needs. To meet the needs of people the insurer’s have developed different
types of products such as Whole Life Assurance, Endowment type plans,
combination of Whole Life and Endowment type plans, Children’s Assurance
plans and Annuity plans.
Fire insurance: Fire insurance is a contract whereby the insurer, in
consideration of the premium paid, undertakes to make good any loss or
damage caused by a fire during a specified period upto the amount specified
in the policy.
The main elements of a fire insurance contract are:
In fire insurance, the insured must have insurable interest in the
subject matter of the insurance.
Similar to the life insurance contract, the contract of fire insurance is a
contract of utmost good faith i.e uberrimae fidei.
(iii)
The contract of fire insurance is a contract of strict indemnity.
The insurer is liable to compensate only when fire is the proximate
cause of damage or loss.
Marine insurance: A marine insurance contract is an agreement whereby
the insurer undertakes to indemnify the insured in the manner and to the
extent thereby agreed against marine losses. Marine insurance provides
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
protection against loss by marine perils or perils of the sea. Marine insurance
is slightly different from other types. There are three things involved i.e. ship
or hull, cargo or goods and freight.
The main elements of a marine insurance contract are:
Unlike life insurance, the contract of marine insurance is a contract
of indemnity.
Similar to life and fire insurance, the contract of marine insurance is
a contract of utmost good faith.
(iii)
Insurable interest must exist at the time of loss.
The principle of causa proxima will apply to it.
Communication services: Communication services are helpful to business
for establishing links with the outside world viz., suppliers, customers,
competitors etc. The main services which help business can be classified
into postal and telecom.
Postal services: Various facilities provided by postal department are broadly
categorised into financial facilities, mail facilities.
Telecom services: The various types of telecom services are of the following
types: Cellular Mobile Services, Radio Paging Services, Fixed line services,
Cable Services, VSAT Services, DTH services.
Transportation: Transportation comprises freight services together with
supporting and auxiliary services by all modes of transportation i.e. rail,
road, air and sea for the movement of goods and international carriage of
passengers.
Warehousing: The warehouse was initially viewed as a static unit for keeping
and storing goods in a scientific and systematic manner so as to maintain
their original quality, value and usefulness.
Today’s warehouses have ceased to be mere storage service providers and
have really become logistical service providers in a cost efficient manner.
Types of warehouses: private warehouses, public warehouses,bonded
warehouses, government warehouses, cooperative warehouses.
Functions of warehousing: The functions of warehousing are normally
discussed as follows : consolidation, break the bulk, stock piling, value added
services, price stablisation, financing.
EXERCISES
Multiple Choice Questions
DTH services are provided by________.
Transport companies.
Banks
Cellular companies
None of the above
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS SERVICES
The benefits of public warehousing includes_______.
Control
Flexibility
Dealer relationship
None of the above
Which of the following is not a function of insurance?
Risk sharing
Assist in capital
formation
Lending of funds
None of the above
Which of the following is not applicable in life insurance contract?
Conditional contract
Unilateral contract
Indemnity contract
None of the above
CWC stands for_______.
Central Water Commission
Central Warehousing
Commission
Central Warehousing Corporation d.
Central Water
Corporation
Short Answer Questions
Define services and goods.
What is e-banking. What are the advantages of e-banking?
Write a note on various telecom services available for enhancing
business.
Explain briefly the principles of insurance with suitable examples.
Explain warehousing and its functions.
Long Answer Questions
What are services? Explain their distinct characteristics?
Explain the functions of commercial banks with an example of each.
Write a detailed note on various facilities offered by Indian Postal
Department.
Describe various types of insurance and examine the nature of risks
protected by each type of insurance.
Explain in detail the warehousing services.
Projects/Assignments
Identify a list of various services you use on a regular basis and identify
their distinct characteristics.
Do a project on banking services. Approach a nearby bank and collect
information about various facilities offered by them and also collect
leaflets about salient features of different schemes. Compile and suggest
what extra services you feel the bank should be providing.
© NCERT
not to be republished
CHAPTER 5
EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
state the meaning of e-business;
explain the process of online buying and selling as a part of
e-business;
distinguish e-business from traditional business;
state benefits of switching over to electronic mode;
explain requirements for a firm’s initiation into e-business;
identify major security concerns of electronic mode of doing
business;
discuss the need for business process outsourcing; and
appreciate the scope of business process outsourcing.
© NCERT
not to be republished
EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS
5.1 INTRODUCTION
The way business is done has
undergone fundamental changes
during the last decade or so. The
manner of conducting business is
referred to as the ‘mode of business,’
and, the prefix ‘emerging’ underlines
the fact, that these changes are
happening here and now, and, that
these trends are likely to continue.
In fact, if one were to list the
three strongest trends that are
shaping  business, these would be:
(i) digitisation — the conversion of text,
sound, images, video, and other
content into a series of ones and zeroes
that can be transmitted electronically,
(ii) outsour cing, and, (iii) inter -
nationalisation and globalisation. You
will read about international business
in Chapter 11. In this chapter, we will
be familiarising you with the first two
developments, i.e., digitisation (a term
from electronics) of business — also
referred to as electronic business
(e-business), and Business Process
Outsourcing (BPO).  Before we do so, a
brief discussion about the factors
responsible for these two new modes
of business would be in order.
The newer modes of business are
not new business. These are rather
simply the new ways of doing business
attributable to a number of factors.
You are aware that business as an
activity is aimed at creating utilities or
value in the form of goods and services
which the household and industrial
buyers purchase for meeting their
needs and wants. In an effort to
improve the business processes — be
purchase
production,
marketing, finance or human resources
business managers and business
thinkers keep evolving newer and better
ways of doing things. Business firms
have to strengthen their capabilities of
creating utilities and delivering value
to successfully meet the competitive
pressures and ever-growing demands
of consumers for better quality, lower
prices, speedier deliveries and better
customer care.  Besides, the quest for
benefitting from emerging technologies
means that business as an activity
keeps evolving.
“Let us do some shopping,” Rita woke up Rekha, her friend from the home-
village who had come to Delhi during the vacations. “At this hour well past
midnight,” said Rekha rubbing her eyes, “Who would be sitting with his shop
open for you?” “Oh! Perhaps I could not convey it properly. We are not going
anywhere! I am talking about online shopping over the internet!” told Rita.
“Oh yes! I have heard of online shopping, but have never done any,” Rekha
said, “What would they be selling over the internet, how will they deliver,
What about payment… and why is it that internet has not yet become as
popular in the villages? As Rekha was grappling with these questions, Rita
had already logged on to one of India’s largest online shopping mall.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
5.2 e-BUSINESS
If the term business is taken to mean
a wide range of activities comprising
industry, trade and commerce;
e-business may be defined as the
conduct of industry, trade and
commerce using the computer
networks. The network you are most
familiar with as a student or consumer
is the internet. Whereas internet is a
public thorough way, firms use more
private, and, hence more secure
networks for more effective and efficient
management of their internal functions.
e-business versus e-commerce:
Though, many a times, the terms
e-business and e-commerce are used
interchangeably, yet more precise
definitions would distinguish between
the two. Just as the term ‘business’ is
a broader term than ‘commerce’,
e-business is a more elaborate term
and comprises various business
transactions and functions conducted
electronically, including the more
popular gamut of transactions called
‘e-commerce.’ e-commerce covers a
firm’s interactions with its customers
and suppliers over the internet.
e-business includes not only
e-commerce,
other
electronically conducted business
functions such as production,
inventory management, product
development, accounting and finance
and human resource  management.
e-business is, therefore, clearly much
more than buying and selling over the
internet, i.e., e-commerce.
5.2.1 Scope of e-Business
We have mentioned above that the
scope of e-business is quite vast.
Almost all types of business functions
such as production, finance, marketing
and personnel administration as well
Figure 5.1    Firm as a link between Network of Suppliers and Customers
transactions
Transactions
Suppliers
Customers
R & D
Production
Purchase
Finance
Marketing
Intra-firm
B transactions
© NCERT
not to be republished
EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS
as managerial activities like planning,
organising and controlling can be
carried out over computer networks.
The other way of looking at the scope
of e-business is to examine it in terms
of people or parties involved in
electronic transactions. Viewed from
this perspective, a firm’s electronic
transactions and networks can be
visualised as extending into three
directions viz., (i) B2B which is a firm’s
interactions with other businesses,
(ii) B2C i.e., a firm’s interactions with
its customers and (iii) intra-B or a firm’s
internal processes.
Figure 5.1 summarises the network
of parties and interactions that
comprises e-business.
A brief discussion of various
constituents of e-business and inter-
and intra-transactions among them is
given as below:
(i) B2B Commerce: Here, both the
parties involved in e-commerce
transactions are business firms, and,
hence the name B2B, i.e., business-to-
business. Creation of utilities or
delivering value requires a business to
interact with a number of other business
firms which may be suppliers or vendors
of diverse inputs; or else they may be
a part of the channel through which
a firm distributes its products to
the consumers. For example, the
manufacture of an automobile requires
assembly of a large number of
components which in turn are being
manufactured elsewhere — within the
vicinity of the automobile factory or even
overseas. To reduce dependence on a
single supplier, the automobile factory
has to cultivate more than one vendor
for each of the components. A network
of computers is used for placing orders,
monitoring production and delivery of
components, and making payments.
Likewise, a firm may strengthen and
improve its distribution system by
exercising a real time (as it happens)
control over its stock-in-transit as well
as that with different middlemen in
different locations. For example, each
consignment of goods from a warehouse
and the stock-at-hand can be monitored
and replenishments and reinforcements
can be set in motion as and
when needed. Or else, a customer’s
specifications may be routed through
the dealers to the factory and fed
into the manufacturing system for
customised production. Use of
e-commerce expedites the movement of
the information and documents; and of
late, money transfers as well.
Historically, the term e-commerce
originally meant facilitation of B2B
transactions using Electronic Data
Interchange (EDI) technology to send
and receive commercial documents like
purchase orders or invoices.
(ii) B2C Commerce: As the name
implies, B2C (business-to-customers)
transactions have business firms at
one end and its customers on the other
end. Although, what comes to one’s
mind instantaneously is online
shopping, it must be appreciated that
‘selling’ is the outcome of the marketing
process. And, marketing begins well
before a product is offered for sale and
continues even after the product has
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
History of e-commerce
e-commerce began before personal computers were prevalent and has grown
into a multi-billion dollar industry, but where did it come from? By looking at the
evolution of e-commerce, it will be easier to judge its trends for the future.
Event
EDI, or electronic data interchange, was standardised through
ASC X12.* This guaranteed that companies would be able to
complete transactions with one another reliably.
‘Compuserve’ offers online retail products to its customers. This
gives people the first chance to buy things off their computer.
Netscape arrived. Providing users a simple browser** to surf the
internet and a safe online transaction technology called Secure
Sockets Layer.***
Two of the biggest names in e-commerce are launched:
Amazon.com and e-Bay dot. com
DSL, or Digital Subscriber Line, provides fast, always-on Internet
service to subscribers across California. This prompts people to
spend more time, and money, online.
Retail spending over the Internet reaches $20 billion, according
to Business.com.
The U.S government extended the moratorium on internet taxes
until at least 2005.
Source: Glossary of e-commerce Terms,
http://www.uta.edu/infosys/e_comm/terms/term_a.htm
American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII): A widely used and
internationally recognised coding system to represent characters in a standard way.
ASCII is commonly used for storage within computer systems, and for exchange between
them.
Browser: The generic term for software programs that retrieve, display, and print
information on World Wide Web.  The most popular browsers are Microsoft Internet Explorer,
Netscape Navigator and Mosaic.  Mosaic was the first browser to introduce graphics.
Previously, users were only allowed to view the text of web pages.
Secure Socket Layer (SSL): SSL was designed by Netscape for use in electronic commerce
for transactions involving confidential information such as credit card numbers. Secure
Socket Layer uses a system of public and private key authentication combined with other
schemes to verify electronic signatures. The ability to conduct secure and confidential
transactions over the internet is critical to the success of electronic commerce. Public key is
the password that the sender uses to encrypt the data and the private key is used by the
receiver of a message to decrypt the data.
© NCERT
not to be republished
EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS
been sold. B2C commerce, therefore,
entails a wide gamut of marketing
activities such as identifying activities,
promotion and sometimes even delivery
of products (e.g., music or films) that
are carried out online. e-commerce
permits conduct of these activities at a
much lower cost but high speed. For
example, ATM speeds up withdrawal
of money.
freedom of shopping-at-will. Customers
can also make use of call centres set
up by companies to make toll free calls
to make queries and lodge complaints
round the clock at no extra cost to
them. The beauty of the process is that
one need not set up these call centres
or help lines; they may be outsourced.
We shall discuss this aspect later in the
section devoted to Business Process
Outsourcing (BPO).
ATM speeds up withdrawal of Money
e-commerce greatly facilitates and speeds up the entire B2C process.  Withdrawal
of one’s own money from banks was, for example, a tedious process in the past.
One had to go through a series of procedural formalities before he or she was
able to get the payment. After the introduction of ATMs, all that is fast becoming
history now. The first thing that occurs is that the customer is able to withdraw
his money, and the rest of the back-end processes take place later.
Customers these days are becoming
very choosy and desire individual
attention to be given to them. Not only
do they require the product features be
tailor-made to suit their requirements,
but also the convenience of delivery and
payment at their pleasure. With the
onset of e-commerce, all this has
become a reality.
Further, B2C variant of e-commerce
enables a business to be in touch with
its customers on round-the-clock
basis. Companies can conduct online
surveys to ascertain as to who is
buying what and what the customer
satisfaction level is.
By now, you might have formed the
opinion that B2C is a one-way traffic,
i.e., from business-to-customers. But
do remember that its corollary, C2B
commerce is very much a reality which
provides the consumers with the
(iii) Intra-B Commerce: Here, parties
involved in the electronic transactions
are from within a given business firm,
hence, the name intra-B commerce. As
noted earlier too, one critical difference
between e-commerce and e-business
is that, e-commerce comprises a
business firm’s interaction with its
suppliers, and distributors/other
business firms (hence, the name B2B)
and customers (B2C) over the internet.
While e-business is a much wider term
and also includes the use of intranet
for managing interactions and
dealings among various departments
and persons within a firm. It is largely
due to use of intra-B commerce that
today it has become possible for
the firms to go in for flexible
manufacturing. Use of computer
networks makes it possible for the
marketing department to interact
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
constantly with the production
department and get the customised
products
requirements of the individual
customer. In a similar vein, closer
computer-based interactions among
the other departments makes it
possible for the firm to reap
advantages of efficient inventory
and cash management, greater
utilisation of plant and machinery,
effective handling of customers’
orders, and effective human resource
management.
Just as intercom facilitated voice
communication within the office,
intranet facilitates multimedia and even
3-D graphic communication among
organisational units for well-
informed decisions, permitting better
coordination, faster decisions and
speedier workflows. Take for example,
a firm’s interactions with its employees,
sometimes referred to as B2E
commerce.  Companies are resorting to
personnel recruitment, interviewing
and selection, training, development
and education via e-commerce
(captured in a catch-all phrase
‘e-learning’). Employees can use
electronic catalogues and ordering
forms and access inventory information
for better interaction with the
customers. They can send field reports
via e-mail and the management can
have them on real time basis. In fact,
Virtual Private Network (VPN)
technology would mean that employees
do not have to come to office. Instead,
in a way the office goes to them and
they can work from wherever they are,
and at their own speed and time
convenience. Meetings can be held
online via tele/ video conferencing.
(iv) C2C Commerce: Here, the
business originates from the consumer
and the ultimate destination is also
consumers, thus the name C2C
commerce. This type of commerce is
best suited for dealing in goods for
which there is no established market
mechanism, for example, selling used
books or clothes either on cash or
barter basis. The vast space of
the internet allows persons to globally
search
potential
buyers.
Additionally, e-commerce technology
provides market system security to
such transactions which otherwise
would have been missing if
the buyers and sellers were to
interact in anonymity of one-to-one
transactions? An excellent example of
this is found at eBay where consumers
sell their goods and services to other
consumers. To make this activity
more secure and robust, several
technologies have emerged. Firstly,
eBay allows all the sellers and buyers
to rate one another. In this manner,
future prospective purchasers may see
that a particular seller has sold to more
than 2,000 customers — all of whom
rate the seller as excellent. In another
example, a prospective purchaser may
see a seller who has previously sold
only four times and all four rate the
seller poorly. This type of information
is helpful. Another technology that has
emerged to support C2C activities is
that of the payment intermediary.
PayPal is a good example of this kind.
© NCERT
not to be republished
EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS
e-commerce makes flexible Manufacturing and
Mass Customisation possible
Customised products have traditionally been made to order by craftsmen and
have, therefore, been expensive and delivery times have been long. Industrial
revolution meant that organisations could engage in mass production and could
sell homogeneous products rolled out of the factory at a lower cost due to the
economies of scale. Thanks to e-commerce, now organisations can offer
customised products/ services at lower costs, that previously were only associated
with mass produced commodity items. Here are a few examples:
401(k) Forum (US)
Customises educational content and investment advice based
on individual interviews.
Acumin Corp. (US) Customises vitamin pills specified by using the Internet.
Customers fill in lifestyle and health questionnaire.
Dell (US)
Build your own PC.
Green Mountain
Electricity supplier (but not generator). Customers could select
Energy Resources
sources for their electricity, e.g., hydro, solar, etc.
Levi Jeans
Tailored jeans service. Web service suspended after complaints
(Original Spin)
by retailers but service now offered through retailers. Offers
49,500 different sizes and 30 styles for a total of nearly 1.5
million options for a cost of just $55. Orders are sent by net
and jeans are produced and shipped in 2-3 weeks.
N.V. Nutsbedrijf
Westland supplies natural gas to many tulip growers in the
Westland
Netherlands. Computers in the greenhouse help greenhouse
(Newzealand)
owners maintain temperature, CO2 output, humidity, light and
other factors in the most cost-efficient manner.
National Bicycle
Custom built bicycles within 2/3 days of taking the order.
(Japan)
Simon and
Teachers can order customised books specifically matched to
Schuster (US)
individual course and student needs. Xerox DocuTech printers
are generating in excess of 125,000 customised books a month.
Skyway (US)
Skyway is a logistics company offering whole order delivery.
Shipments from multiple origins with different modes of
transport can be merged in transit and delivered as a single
order with one set of paperwork to the store or consumer.
SmithKline
Creates customised stop smoking programme for customers.
Beecham (US)
Uses call centre questionnaire to generate a series of
personalised communications.
Source: Adapted from http://www.managingchange.com
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Facilitating C2C Commerce — The Way
Does it
eBay’s Trust and Safety team is responsible for keeping the marketplace a safe,
well-lit place for people around the world to trade with one other.
Actively working to enable members to trade safely, eBay fosters trust between
members through the development and enforcement of rules and policies, the
creation of reputation-building programs, and the prevention of fraud.
eBay also works behind-the-scenes to prevent fraud and, in the event a problem
occurs, eBay proactively works with law enforcement and government agencies
throughout the world to enforce its policies. Rooted in the values of the marketplace,
eBay’s policies are aimed at offering a level playing field, encouraging open, honest,
and accountable transactions, and creating economic opportunities for everyone.
To help the community trade safely and build trust with one another, eBay offers
the following tools, programs, and resources:
eBay Feedback
eBay feedback is each user’s reputation on eBay. Through positive, negative, and
neutral ratings and comments, each eBay member has a Feedback score. All
sellers display this score in the Seller Information box of the item listing page.
eBay Feedback fosters trust between people by acting as both an incentive to do
the right thing and as a mark of distinction for those who conduct transactions
with respect, honesty, and fairness.
Buyer Protection
Users who see the PayPal Buyer Protection shield buy with confidence knowing
that their purchase is covered up to $500 at no additional cost. For users who are
not using PayPal as their payment system, there is also the eBay Standard
Purchase Protection Program which provides up to $200 coverage (minus a $25
processing cost) for either items that are not received or items that are not as
described in the listing.
Spoof (Fraudulent) Web Site Protection
The eBay Toolbar with Account Guard enables eBay members to protect their
accounts by indicating when they are on an eBay or PayPal site and warning
them when they are on a potentially fraudulent, or spoof, Web site. In addition,
eBay helps users prevent and combat fraud by conducting online tutorials on
spoof email and educating members on how to report issues to spoof@ebay.com.
eBay Security Center
The eBay Security Center provides guidance on buying safely, selling safely, and
paying safely, as well as valuable third-party, government and law-enforcement
resources. The Security Center is a valuable resource for all users, from first-time
buyers who want information on safeguarding online transactions to high-volume
sellers who want to protect their copyrights.
Source: ww w.ebay.com
© NCERT
not to be republished
EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS
Instead of purchasing items directly
from an unknown, untrusted seller; the
buyer can instead send the money to
Pay Pal. From there, PayPal notifies the
seller that they will hold the money for
them until the goods have been shipped
and accepted by the buyer.
An important C2C area of
interactive commerce can be the
formation of consumers’ forum and
pressure groups. You might have heard
of Yahoo groups. Like a vehicle owner
in a traffic jam can alert others via
message on radio (you must have
heard traffic alerts on FM) about the
traffic situation of the area he is stuck
in; an aggrieved customer can share his
experience with a product/service/
vendor and warn others by writing just
a message and making it known to the
entire group. And, it is quite possible
that the group pressure might result
in a solution of this problem.
From the foregoing discussion
concerning scope of e-business, it is
clear that e-business applications are
varied and many.
e-Business versus Traditional
Business
By now, you must have formed an idea
as to how e-enabling has radically
transformed the mode of doing
business. Table 5.1 provides a feature
on comparison between traditional
business and e-business.
A comparative assessment of the
features of traditional and e-business
as listed in Table 5.1 points towards
the distinct benefits and limitations of
e-business that we shall discuss in the
following paragraphs.
5.3 BENEFITS OF e-BUSINESS
(i) Ease of formation and lower
investment requirements: Unlike a
host of procedural requirements for
setting up an industry, e-business is
relatively easy to start. The benefits of
internet technology accrue to big or
small business alike. In fact, internet
is responsible for the popularity of the
phrase: ‘networked individuals and
firms are more efficient than
networthed individuals.’ This means
that even if you do not have much of
the investment (networth) but have
contacts (network), you can do
fabulous business.
Imagine a restaurant that does not
have any requirement of a physical
space. Yes, you may have an online
‘menu’ representing the best of cuisines
from the best of restaurants the world-
over that you have networked with. The
customer visits your website, decides
the menu, places the order that in turn
is routed to the restaurant located
closest to his location. The food is
delivered and the payment collected by
the restaurant staff and the amount due
to you as a client solicitor is credited to
your account through an electronic
clearing system.
(ii) Convenience: Internet offers the
convenience of ‘24 hours × 7 days a
week × 365 days’ a year business that
allowed Rita and Rekha to go for
shopping well after midnight. Such
flexibility is available even to the
organisational personnel whereby they
can do work from wherever they are,
and whenever they may want to do it.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Yes, e-business is truly a business
as enabled and enhanced by
electronics and offers the advantage
of accessing anything, anywhere,
anytime.
(iii) Speed: As already noted, much of
the buying or selling involves exchange
of information that internet allows at
the click of a mouse. This benefit
becomes all the more attractive in the
case of information-intensive products
such as softwares, movies, music,
e-books and journals that can even be
delivered online.  Cycle time, i.e., the
time taken to complete a cycle from the
origin of demand to its fulfilment,
is substantially reduced due to
transformation of the business
processes from being sequential to
becoming parallel or simultaneous.
You know that in the digital era, money
is defined as electronic pulses at
the speed of light, thanks to the
electronic funds transfer technology of
e-commerce.
(iv) Global reach/access: Internet is
truly without boundaries. On the one
hand, it allows the seller an access to
the global market; on the other hand,
it affords to the buyer a freedom to
choose products from almost any part
of the world. It would not be an
exaggeration to say that in the absence
of internet, globalisation would have
been considerably restricted in scope
and speed.
Box A
Some e-Business Applications
e-Procurement: It involves internet-based sales transactions between business
firms, including both, “reverse auctions” that facilitate online trade between a
single business purchaser and many sellers, and, digital marketplaces that
facilitate online trading between multiple buyers and sellers.
e-Bidding/e-Auction: Most shopping sites have ‘Quote your price’ whereby you
can bid for the goods and services (such as airline tickets!). It also includes
e-tendering whereby one may submit tender quotations online.
e-Communication/e-Promotion: Right from e-mail, it includes publication of
online catalogues displaying images of goods, advertisement through banners,
pop-ups, opinion poles and customer surveys, etc. Meetings and conferences
may be held by the means of video conferencing.
e-Delivery: It includes electronic delivery of computer software, photographs,
videos, books (e-books) and journals (e-journals) and other multimedia content
to the user’s computer. It also includes rendering of legal, accounting, medical,
and other consulting services electronically. In fact, internet provides the firms
with the opportunities for outsourcing of a host of Information Technology Enabled
Services (ITES) that we will be discussing under business process outsourcing.
Now, you can even print the airlines and railway tickets at home!
e-Trading: It involves securities trading, that is online buying and selling of
shares and other financial instruments. For example, sharekhan.com is India’s
largest online trading firm.
© NCERT
not to be republished
EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS
itili
itili
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(v) Movement towards a paperless
society: Use of internet has
considerably reduced dependence on
paperwork and the attendant ‘red tape.’
You know that Maruti Udyog does bulk
of its sourcing of supplies of materials
and components in a paper less fashion.
Even the government departments and
regulatory authorities are increasingly
moving in this direction whereby they
allow electronic filing of returns and
reports. In fact, e-commerce tools are
effecting the administrative reforms
aimed at speeding up the process of
granting permissions, approvals and
licences. In this respect, the provisions
of Information Technology Act 2000
are quite noteworthy.
5.4 LIMITATIONS OF e-BUSINESS
e-business is not all that rosy. Doing
business in the electronic mode suffers
from certain limitations. It is advisable
to be aware of these limitations as well.
(i) Low personal touch: High-tech it
may be, e-business, however, lacks
warmth of interpersonal interactions. To
this extent, it is relatively less suitable
mode of business in respect of product
categories requiring high personal
touch such as garments, toiletries, etc.
(ii) Incongruence between order
taking/giving and order fulfilment
speed: Information can flow at the click
of a mouse, but the physical delivery of
the product takes time. This
incongruence may play on the patience
of the customers. At times, due to
technical reasons, web sites take
unusually long time to open. This may
further frustrate the user.
(iii) Need for technology capability
and competence of parties to
e-business: Apart from the traditional
(R eading,
WRiting,
ARithmetic), e-business requires a
fairly high degree of familiarity of the
parties with the world of computers.
And, this requirement is responsible for
what is known as digital divide, that is
the division of society on the basis of
familiarity and non-familiarity with
digital technology.
(iv) Increased risk due to anonymity
and non-traceability of parties:
Internet transactions occur between
cyber personalities. As such, it becomes
difficult to establish the identity of the
parties. Moreover, one does not know
© NCERT
not to be republished
EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS
even the location from where the parties
may be operating. It is riskier, therefore,
transacting
through
internet.
e-business is riskier also in the sense
that there are additional hazards of
impersonation (someone else may
transact in your name) and leakage of
confidential information such as credit
card details.  Then, there also are
problems of ‘virus,’ and ‘hacking,’ that
you must have heard of. If not, we will
be dealing with security and safety
concerns of online business.
(v) People resistance: The process of
adjustment to new technology and new
way of doing things causes stress and
Information Technology Act 2000 paves way for Paperless Society
Below are given some of the provisions of Information Technology Act 2000 that
have made it possible to have paper less dealings in the business world as well
as in the government domain.
Legal recognition of electronic records (Section 4): Where any law provides
that information or any other matter shall be in writing or in the typewritten or
printed form, then, notwithstanding anything contained in such law, such
requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such information or matter
is rendered or made available in an electronic form; and accessible so as to be
usable for a subsequent reference.
Legal recognition of digital signatures (Section 5): Where any law provides
that information or any other matter shall be authenticated by affixing the
signature or any document shall be signed or bear the signature of any person,
hence notwithstanding anything contained in such law, such requirement shall
be deemed to have been satisfied, if such information or matter is authenticated
by means of digital signature affixed in such a manner as may be prescribed by
the Central Government.
Use of electronic records and digital signatures in Government and its
agencies (Section 6-1): Where any law provides for the filing of any form,
application or any other document with any office, authority, body or agency
owned or controlled by the appropriate Government in a particular manner; the
issue or grant of any licence, permit, sanction or approval by whatever name
called in a particular manner; the receipt or payment of money in a particular
manner, then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force, such requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied if
such filing, issue, grant, receipt or payment, as the case may be, is effected by
means of such electronic form as may be prescribed by the appropriate
Government.
Retention of electronic records (Section 7-1): Where any law provides that
documents, records or information shall be retained for any specific period, then,
that requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such documents,
records or information are retained in the electronic form.
Source: Information Technology Act, 2000
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
a sense of insecurity. As a result, people
may resist an organisation’s plans of
entry into e-business.
(vi) Ethical fallouts: “So, you are
planning to quit, you may as well quit
right now”, said the HR manager
showing her a copy of the e-mail that
she had written to her friend. Sabeena
was both shocked and stunned as to
how her boss got through to her e-mail
account. Nowadays, companies use an
‘electronic eye’ to keep track of the
computer files you use, your e-mail
account, the websites you visit etc. Is it
ethical?
Despite limitations, e-commerce
is the way
It may be pointed out that most of the
limitations of e-business discussed
above are in the process of being
overcome. Websites are becoming more
and more interactive to overcome the
problem of ‘low touch.’ Communication
technology is continually evolving to
increase the speed and quality of
communication through internet.
Efforts are on to overcome the digital
divide, for example, by resorting to such
strategies as setting up of community
telecentres in villages and rural areas
in India with the involvement of
government agencies, NGOs and
international institutions. In order to
diffuse e-commerce in all nooks and
corners, India has undertaken about
150 such projects.
In view of the above discussion, it
is clear that e-business is here to stay
and is poised to reshape the businesses,
governance and the economies. It is,
therefore, appropriate that we
familiarise ourselves with how
e-business is conducted.
Digital Divide: The Facts
First the figures. The statistics on the basic building block of connectivity —
that is the phone lines — are stark.
According to the latest UN Human Development Report, industrialised countries,
with only 15 per cent of the world’s population, are home to 88 per cent of all
Internet users. Less than 1 per cent of people in South Asia are online even
though it is home to one-fifth of the world’s population.
The situation is even worse in Africa. With 739 million people, there are only 14
million phone lines. That’s fewer than in Manhattan or Tokyo. Eighty percent of
those lines are in only six countries. There are only 1 million Internet users on
the entire continent compared with 10.5 million in the UK.
Even if telecommunication systems were in place, most of the world’s poor would
still be excluded from the information revolution because of illiteracy and a lack
of basic computer skills. In Benin, for example, more than 60 per cent of
the population is illiterate. The other 40 per cent are similarly out of luck.
Four-fifths of the Websites are in English, a language understood by only one in
10 people on the planet.
Source: http://www.news.bbc.co.uk/.../special_report/1999/10/
© NCERT
not to be republished
EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS
5.5 ONLINE TRANSACTIONS
Operationally, one may visualise three
stages involved in online transactions.
Firstly, the pre-purchase/sale stage
including advertising and information-
seeking; secondly, the purchase/sale
stage comprised of steps such as price
negotiation, closing of purchase/sales
deal and payment; and thirdly, the
delivery stage (see Figure 5.2).  It may
be observed from Figure 5.2 that, except
the stage relating to delivery, all other
stages involve flow of information. The
information is exchanged in the
traditional business mode too, but at
severe time and cost constraints. In face-
to-face interaction in traditional
business mode, for example, one needs
to travel to be able to talk to the other
party, requiring travel effort, greater time
and costs. Exchange of information
through the telephone is also
cumbersome. It requires simultaneous
presence of both the parties for verbal
exchange of information. Information
can be transmitted by post too, but this
again is quite a time consuming and
expensive process. Internet comes in as
the fourth channel which is free from
most of the problems referred to above.
In the case of information-intensive
products and services such as software
and music, even delivery can take place
online.
What is described here is the
process of online trading from a
customer’s standpoint. We will be
discussing the seller’s perspective in the
paragraphs on resource-requirements
for e-business. So, are you ready with
the shopping list or would you like to
rely on your instincts as you take
a tour of the shopping mall? Let
us follow Rita and Rekha browsing
indiatimes.com (Exhibit 5.1).
(i) Registration: Before online
shopping, one has to register with the
online vendor by filling-up a
registration form. Registration means
that you have an ‘account’ with the
online vendor.  Among various details
that need to be filled in is a ‘password’
as the sections relating to your
‘account’, and ‘shopping cart’ are
password protected. Otherwise, anyone
can login using your name and shop in
your name. This can put you in trouble.
(ii) Placing an order: You can pick
and drop the items in the shopping cart.
Shopping cart is an online record of
what you have picked up while
browsing the online store. Just as in a
physical store you can put in and take
items out of your cart, likewise, you can
do so even while shopping online. After
being sure of what you want to buy,
you can ‘checkout’ and choose your
payment options.
(iii) Payment mechanism: It is clear
from Exhibit 5.1 that payment for the
purchases through online shopping
may be done in a number of ways:
• Cash-on Delivery (CoD): As is
clear from the name, payment for
the goods ordered online may be
made in cash at the time of
physical delivery of goods.
• Cheque: Alternatively, the online
vendor may arrange for the pickup
of the cheque from the customer’s
end. Upon realisation, the delivery
of goods may be made.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
• Net-banking Transfer: Modern
banks provide to their customers the
facility of electronic transfer of funds
over the net. In this case, therefore,
the buyer may transfer the amount
for the agreed price of the transaction
to the account of the online vendor
who may, then, proceed to arrange
for the delivery of goods.
• Credit or Debit Cards: Popularly
referred to as ‘plastic money,’ these
cards are the most widely used
medium for online transactions. In
fact, about 95 per cent of online
consumer transactions are
executed with a credit card. Credit
card allows its holder to make
purchase on credit. The amount
due from the card holder to the
online seller is assumed by the card
issuing bank, who later transfers
the amount involved in the
transaction to the credit of the seller.
Buyer’s account is debited, who
often enjoys the freedom to deposit
the amount in instalments and at
his convenience.  Debit card allows
its holder to make purchases
through it to the extent of the
amount lying in the corresponding
account. The moment any
transaction is made, the amount
due as payment is deducted
electronically from the card.
To accept credit card as an
online payment type, the seller first
needs a secure means of collecting
credit card information from its
customer. Payments through credit
cards can be processed either
manually, or through an online
authorisation system, such as SSL
Certificate (see box on, History of
e-commerce).
Table 5.2    Telecenters Project in India
Number
Agency
Activity
of kiosks
Bhoomi
Government of Karnataka
Land title
e-chaupal
Procurement
Warna
National Informatics Centre (NIC)
Cane Factory
Akshaya
Kerala
e-literacy
Tara Haat
Development  Alternatives
e-training, market
information
Drishtee
Digital Partners
Mandi prices, land
titles
Milk Coops
National Dairy
Development Board
Milk Collection
CIC (NE)
Internet Access
Source: IIM, Workshop on Scaling up ICT for Poverty Alleviation in India, Ahmedabad,
February 26-27, 2004.
© NCERT
not to be republished
EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS
5.6 S ECURITY
AND SAFETY
e-TRANSACTIONS: e-BUSINESS
RISKS
Online transactions, unlike arm’s
length transactions in physical
exchange, are prone to a number of
risks. Risk refers to the probability of
any mishappening that can result
into financial, reputational or
psychological losses to the parties
involved in a transaction. Because of
greater probability of such risks in
the case of online transactions,
security and safety issues becomes
the most crucial concern in
e-business. One may broadly discuss
these issues under three headings:
transaction risks, data storage
and transmission risks, and
threat to intellectual property and
privacy risks.
• Digital Cash:  This is a form of
electronic currency that exists only
in cyberspace. This type of
currency has no real physical
properties, but offers the ability to
use real currency in an electronic
format. First you need to pay to a
bank (vide cheque, draft, etc.) an
amount equivalent to the digital
cash that you want to get issued
in your favour. Then the bank
dealing in e-cash will send you a
special software (you can
download on your hard disk) that
will allow you to draw digital cash
from your account with the bank.
You may then use the digital funds
to make purchases over the web.
This type of payment system hopes
to resolve the security problems
related to the use of credit card
numbers on the internet.
Figure 5.2    Buying / Selling Process
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Notes: 1. Typing of URL address in the address window of the browser leads one to the addressee’s
home page, in this case indiatimes.com. From there one can move on to ‘Shopping.’ Home page
means the introductory or menu page of a website.  A home page usually contains the site’s name
and a directory of its contents.  All other pages on a server are usually accessible by following links
from the home page.  2. URL, i.e., ‘Uniform Resource Locator’ refers to a world wide web address
that specifies a specific site, page, graphic, or document on the internet. It is www.indiatimes.com
in the present case.
Exhibit 5.1    An Adaptation of ‘Shopping’ Page of
indiatimes.com — India’s  Biggest Shopping Mall
Source: adapted from indiatimes.com
© NCERT
not to be republished
EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS
(i) Transaction risks: Online
transactions are vulnerable to the
following types of transaction risks:
• Seller denies that the customer
ever placed the order or the
customer denies that he ever
placed the order. This may be
referred to as ‘default on order
taking/giving.’
• The intended delivery does not
take place, goods are delivered at
wrong address, or goods other
than ordered may be delivered.
This may be regarded as ‘default
on delivery’.
• Seller does not get the payment for
the goods supplied whereas the
customer claims that the payment
was made. This may be referred
to as ‘default on payment’.
Thus, in e-business  risk may arise
for the seller or the buyer on account
of default on order taking/giving,
delivery as well as payment. Such
situations can be averted by providing
for identity and location/address
verification at the time of registration,
and obtaining authorisation as to the
order confirmation and payment
realisation. For example, in order to
confirm that the customer has correctly
entered his details in the registration
form, the seller may verify the same
from the ‘cookies’. Cookies are very
similar to the caller ID in telephones
that provide telemarketers with such
relevant information as: the consumer’s
name, address and previous purchase
payment record. As for customer’s
protection from anonymous sellers, it
is always advisable to shop from well-
established shopping sites. While
allowing advertisers to sell their
products online, these sites assure
customers of the sellers’ identities,
locations and service records. Sites
such as eBay even provide for rating of
the sellers. These sites provide
protection to the customers against
default on delivery and reimburse the
payments made up to some extent.
As for the payments, we have
already seen that in almost 95 per cent
of the cases people use credit cards for
their online purchases. At the time of
confirming the order, the buyer is
required to furnish the details such as
the card number, card issuer and card
validity online. These details may be
processed offline; and only after
satisfying himself or herself about the
availability of the credit limits, etc., the
seller may go ahead with the delivery
of goods. Alternatively, e-commerce
technology today permits even online
processing of the credit card
information.  For protecting the credit
card details from being misused,
shopping malls these days use the
encryption technology such as
Netscape’s Secure Sockets Layer (SSL).
You can gain some information about
SSL from box on history of e-commerce.
In the succeeding section, we will
familiarise you with the encryption or
cryptography — an important tool
used for safeguarding against data
transmission
risks
online
transactions.
(ii) Data storage and transmission
risks: Information is power indeed. But
think for a moment if the power goes
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
into the wrong hands. Data stored in
the systems and en-route is exposed
to a number of risks. Vital information
may be stolen or modified to pursue
some selfish motives or simply for fun/
adventure. You must have heard of
‘virus’ and ‘hacking’. Do you know the
full form of the acronym ‘VIRUS?’ It
means Vital Information Under Siege.
Actually, virus is a program (a series of
commands) which replicates itself on the
other computer systems.  The effect of
computer viruses can range from mere
annoyance in terms of some on-screen
display (Level-1 virus), disruption of
functioning (Level-2 virus) damage to
target data files (Level-3 virus), to
complete destruction of the system
(Level-4 virus). Installing and timely
updating anti-virus programmes and
scanning the files and disks with them
provides protection to your data files,
folders and systems from virus attacks.
Data may be intercepted in the
course of transmission. For this, one
may use cryptography. It refers to the
art of protecting information by
transforming it (encrypting it) into an
unreadable format called ‘cyphertext’.
Only those who possess a secret key
can decipher (or decrypt) the message
into ‘plaintext’. This is similar to using
‘code words’ with some one so that
others do not understand your
conversation.
(iii) Risks of threat to intellectual
property and privacy: Internet is an
open space. Once the information is
available over the internet, it moves out
of the private domain. It then becomes
difficult to protect it from being copied.
Data furnished in the course of online
transactions may be supplied to others
who may start dumping a host of
advertising and promotional literature
into your e-mail box. You are then at
the receiving end, with little respite from
receiving junk mails.
5.7 RESOURCES REQUIRED FOR
SUCCESSFUL e-BUSINESS
IMPLEMENTATION
Setting up of any business requires
money, men and machines (hardware).
For e-business, you require additional
resources for developing, operating,
maintaining and enhancing a website
where ‘site’ means location and ‘web’
means world wide web (www). Simply
speaking, a website is a firm’s location
on the world wide web. Obviously,
website is not a physical location.
Rather, it is an online embodiment of
all the content that a firm may like to
provide to others.
5.8 OUTSOURCING: CONCEPT
Outsourcing is yet another trend that
is radically reshaping business. It
refers to a long-term contracting out
generally the non-core and of late even
some of the core activities to captive
or third party specialists with a
view to benefitting from their
experience, expertise, efficiency and,
even investment.
This simple definition leads one to
the salient features of the concept that
are not peculiar to an industry/
business or country, but have become
a global phenomenon.
© NCERT
not to be republished
EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS
Figure 5.3    Types of Outsourcing Service Providers
(i) Outsourcing involves contracting
out: Literally, outsourcing means to
source from outside what you have
hitherto been doing in-house. For
example, most companies have so far
appointed their own sanitation staff for
maintaining neatness, cleanliness and
overall housekeeping of their premises.
That is, sanitation and housekeeping
functions were being performed in-
house. But of late, many companies
have started outsourcing these
activities, i.e., they have entrusted
outside agencies to perform these
activities for their organisations on a
contractual basis.
(ii) Generally non-core business
activities are outsourced: Sanitation
and housekeeping functions are non-
core for most organisations. Of course,
for municipalities and sanitations
services providers, these activities
comprise the core of their business
activity. Housekeeping is a core activity
for a hotel. In other words, depending
upon what business a company is in,
there will be some activities that are
central and critical to its basic business
purpose. Other activities may be
regarded as secondary or incidental to
fulfilling that basic purpose. The
purpose of a school, for example, is to
develop a child by means of curricular
and co-curricular activities. Clearly,
these activities comprise the ‘core’
activities. Running a cafeteria/canteen
or a book store is non-core activity for
a school.
As the organisations venture to
experiment with outsourcing, they may
initially outsource only the non-
core activities. But later on, as they
become comfortable with managing
interdependencies, they may start
getting even the core activities
performed by the outsiders. For
example, a school may tie-up with some
computer training institute to impart
computer education to its students.
(iii) Processes may be outsourced to
a captive unit or a third party: Think
of a large multinational corporation
that deals in diverse products and
markets them to a large number of
countries. A number of processes such
as recruitment, selection, training,
record and payroll (Human Resources),
management of accounts receivable
and accounts payable (accounting and
finance), customer support/grievance
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
handling /troubleshooting (marketing)
are common to all its subsidiaries
operating in different countries. If these
processes could be centralised and
parcelled out to a business unit created
especially for this purpose, this would
result in avoidance of duplication of
resources, realisation of efficiency and
economy’s performance of same activity
on a large scale at one or a few select
locations, thereby resulting in
substantial reduction in costs. Clearly,
therefore, if the task of performing some
activity internally is sufficiently large,
it may be beneficial for the firm to have
a captive service provider, i.e., a service
provider set up for providing services
of a given kind to only one firm. General
Electric (GE) is, for instance, the largest
captive BPO unit in India for providing
certain kinds of services to the parent
company in the United States as well
as to its subsidiaries in other countries.
Or else, these processes may be
parcelled out to third party service
providers who operate independently
in the market and provide services to
other firms too.
Figure 5.3 provides a synoptical
view of how a firm can outsource some
of its activities to the captive and third
party service providers. The hired party
service providers are the persons/firms
which specialise in some processes
such as Human Resource Management
(HRM) and provide their services to a
wide base of clients, cutting across
industries. Such service providers are
called ‘horizontals’ in the outsourcing
terminology. Else, they may specialise
in one or two industries and scale up
to doing a number of processes from
non-core to core. These are called
‘verticals.’  As the service providers
mature, they move simultaneously
horizontal and vertical.
The most important reason
underlying the use of outsourcing is
to benefit from the expertise and
experience of others. Institutions like
schools, companies and hospitals can
outsource the cafeteria activity to the
catering and nutrition firms for whom
these activities comprise the core or
heart of their operations. The idea of
outsourcing is valuable as you tend to
gain not only in terms of their expertise
and experience and the resultant
efficiency, but it also allows you to limit
your investment and focus attention to
what your core processes are.
Little wonder that outsourcing is
fast becoming an emerging mode of
business. Firms have started
increasingly outsourcing one or more
of their processes which can be more
efficiently and effectively carried out by
others. What qualifies outsourcing
as an emerging mode of business
is its increasing acceptance as a
fundamental business policy and
philosophy, as opposed to the earlier
philosophy of ‘doing it all by yourself ’.
5.8.1 Scope of Outsourcing
Outsourcing comprises four key
segments: contract manufacturing,
contract research, contract sales and
informatics (see Figure 5.4).
The term outsourcing has more
popularly come to be associated with
IT-enabled services or Business
Process Outsourcing (BPO). In fact,
© NCERT
not to be republished
EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS
even more popular term is ‘call centres’
providing customer -oriented voice
based services. About 70 per cent of
the BPO industry’s revenue comes
from call-centers, 20 per cent from
high-volume, low-value data work and
the remaining 10 per cent from higher-
value information work. ‘Customer Care’
accounts for the bulk of the call center
activities with 24 hrs × 7 days handling
of in-bound (customer queries and
grievances) and out-bound (customer
surveys, payment follow-up and
telemarketing) traffic. Figure 5.5 outlines
various types of outsourcing activities.
5.8.2 Need for Outsourcing
Necessity, they say, is the mother of all
inventions. This can be said to be true
even in case of the idea of outsourcing.
As discussed in the introduction to the
chapter, global competitive pressures
for higher quality products at lower
costs, ever demanding customers, and
emerging technologies are the three
major drivers causing a rethink or
re-look at business processes. These
may be regarded as factors responsible
for the continuing emergence of
outsourcing as a mode of business. In
fact, today outsourcing is being
resorted to not out of compulsion,
but also out of choice. Some of the
major reasons (and also benefits) of
outsourcing are discussed below.
(i) Focusing of attention: You may be
good at doing so many things in
academics and extra-curricular
activities, yet you would be better off by
focusing your limited time and money
on just a few things for better efficiency
and effectiveness. Likewise, business
firms are realising the usefulness of
focusing on just a few areas where they
Figure 5.4    Scope of Outsourcing
Source: www.cygnusindia.com
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
have distinct capability or core
competence, and contracting out the
rest of the activities to their outsourcing
partners. You are aware, that, in order
to create utilities or value, a business
engages in a number of processes, viz.,
purchase and production, marketing
and sales, R&D, accounting and
finance, HR and administration etc.
Firms need to define or redefine
themselves. They, for example, need to
consider as to whether they would like
to be called a manufacturing or
marketing organisation. Such a way of
delimiting the scope of business
enables them to focus their attention
and resources on select activities for
better efficiency and effectiveness.
(ii) Quest for excellence: You are
aware of the benefits of division of labour
Figure 5.5    Anatomy of Outsourcing
© NCERT
not to be republished
EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS
and specialisation. Outsourcing
enables the firms to pursue excellence
in two ways. One, they excel themselves
in the activities that they can do the
best by virtue of limited focus. And,
they excel by extending their
capabilities through contracting out
the remaining activities to those who
excel in performing them.   In the quest
for excellence, it is necessary not only
to know what you would like to focus
on, but also what you would like
others to do for you.
(iii) Cost
reduction:
Global
competitiveness necessitates not only
global quality, but also global
competitive pricing. As the prices turn
southwards due to competitive
pressures, the only way to survival and
profitability is cost reduction. Division
of labour and specialisation, besides
improving quality, reduces cost too.
This happens due to the economies of
large scale accruing to the outsourcing
partners as they deliver the same
service to a number of organisations.
Differences in prices of factors of
production across the countries
are also a factor contributing to
cost reduction. For example, India
is a preferred destination for
global outsourcing of Research and
Development, manufacturing, software
development and IT enabled services
(ITES) because of large scale availability
of required manpower at lower costs.
(iv) Growth through alliance: To the
extent you can avail of the services of
others, your investment requirements
are reduced, others have invested in
those activities for you. Even if you may
like to have a stake in the business of
your outsourcing partners, you profit
from not only the low-cost and better
quality services provided by them to
you but also by virtue of a share in the
profit from the overall business they do.
Therefore, you can expand rapidly as
the same amount of investible funds
result in creation of a large number of
businesses. Apart from financial
returns, outsourcing facilitates inter-
organisational knowledge sharing and
collaborative learning. This may also
explain the reasons why the firms today
are outsourcing not only their routine,
non-core processes, but also seeking
to benefit from outsourcing such
strategic and core processes as
Research and Development.
(v) Fillip to economic development:
Outsourcing, more so offshore out-
sourcing, stimulates entrepreneurship,
employment and exports in the host
countries (i.e., the countries from where
outsourcing is done). In India in the IT
sector alone, for example, there has
been such a tremendous growth of
entrepreneurship, employment and
exports that today we are the
undisputed leaders as far as global
outsourcing in software development
and IT-enabled services are concerned.
Presently, we have 60 per cent of the
$150 billion (1 billion = Rs. 100 crores)
global outsourcing share in the
informatics sector.
5.8.3 Concerns over Outsourcing
It will not be out of place to be aware of
some of the concerns that outsourcing
is besieged with.
(i) Confidentiality: Outsourcing
depends on sharing a lot of vital
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
information and knowledge. If the
outsourcing partner does not preserve
the confidentiality, and, say, for
example, passes it on to competitors, it
can harm the interest of the party that
outsources its processes. If outsourcing
involves complete processes/products,
there is a further risk of the outsourcing
partner starting up a competitive
business.
(ii) Sweat-shopping: As the firms that
outsource seek to lower their costs,
they try to get maximum benefit from
the low-cost manpower of the host
countries.  Moreover, it is observed that
whether in the manufacturing sector or
the IT-sector, what is outsourced is the
kind of components or work that does
not much build the competency and
capability of the outsourcing partner
beyond the skills needed to comply
with a rigidly prescribed procedure/
method. So, what the firm that go in
for outsourcing look for is the ‘doing’
skills rather than development of the
‘thinking’ skills.
(iii) Ethical concerns: Think of a shoe
company that, in order to cut costs,
outsources manufacturing to a
developing country where they use
child labour/women in the factories.
Back home, the company cannot do so
due to stringent laws forbidding use of
child labour. Is cost cutting by using
child labour in countries where it is not
outlawed or where the laws are ‘weak’,
ethical? Similarly, is it ethical to
outsource the work to countries where
there exists wage-discrimination on the
basis of sex of the worker?
(iv) Resentment in the home
countries: In the course of contracting
out manufacturing, marketing,
Research and Development or
IT-based services, what is ultimately
contracted out is ‘employment’ or jobs.
This may cause resentment back in the
home country (i.e., the country from
which the job is being sourced out)
particularly if the home country is
suffering from the problem of
unemployment.
The aforementioned concerns,
however, do not seem to matter much
as the global outsourcing continues to
flourish.  As India emerges as a global
outsourcing hub, the industry is
forecast to explode at exponential
rates — from 23,000 people and $ 10
million per annum in 1998 to over a
million people and revenues in excess
of $ 20 billion by 2008.
Key Terms
e-Business
e-Commerce
Browser
Virus
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL)
Online trading
e-Trading
e-Procurement
e-Bidding
e-Cash
Business Process Outsourcing
Call Centres
Verticals
Horizontals
Captive BPO units
Sweat-shopping
© NCERT
not to be republished
EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS
SUMMARY
The world of business is changing. e-business and outsourcing are the two
most obvious expressions of this change. The trigger for the change owes
its origin to both internal and external forces. Internally, it is the business
firm’s own quest for improvement and efficiency that has propelled it into
e-business and outsourcing. Externally, the ever mounting competitive
pressures and ever demanding customers have been the force behind the
change.
Electronic mode of doing business, or e-business as it is referred to, presents
the firm with promising opportunities for anything, anywhere and anytime
to its customers, thereby, dismantling the time and space/locational
constraints on its performance. Though e-business is high-tech, it suffers
from the limitation of being low in personal touch. The customers as a
result do not get attended to on an interpersonal basis. Besides, there are
concerns over security of e-transactions and privacy of those who transact
business over the internet. The benefits of e-commerce also seem to have
accrued unevenly across countries and across regions within a country.
Apart from becoming digital, the firms are also resorting to a departure
from the erstwhile ‘do it all by yourself’ mindset. They are increasingly
contracting out manufacturing, R and D as well as of business processes
irrespective of whether these are IT enabled or not. India is riding high on
the global outsourcing business and has gained considerably in terms
of employment generation, capability building and contribution to exports
and GDP.
Together, the two trends of e-business and outsourcing are reshaping the
way business is and will be conducted. Interestingly, both e-business and
outsourcing are continuing to evolve, and that is why these are referred to
as the emerging modes of business.
EXERCISES
Multiple Choice Questions
Tick mark (9) the most appropriate answer to the following questions
e-commerce does not include
A business’s interactions with its suppliers
A business’s interactions with its customers
Interactions among the various departments within the
business
Interactions among the geographically dispersed units of the
business
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Outsourcing
Restricts only to the contracting out of Information Technology
Enabled Services (ITES)
Restricts only to the contracting out of non-core business
processes
Includes contracting out of manufacturing and R&D as well as
service processes — both core and non-core — but restricts only
to domestic territory
Includes off-shoring
The payment mechanism typical to e-business
Cash on Delivery (CoD)
Cheques
Credit and Debit Cards
e-Cash
A Call Centre handles
Only in-bound voice based business
Only out-bound voice based business
Both voice based and non-voice based business
Both customer facing and back-end business
It is not an application of e-business
Online bidding
Online procurement
Online trading
Contract R&D
Short Answer Questions (50 Words)
State any three differences between e-business and traditional
business.
How does outsourcing represent a new mode of business?
Describe briefly any two applications of e-business.
What are the ethical concerns involved in outsourcing?
Describe briefly the data storage and transmission risks in e-business.
Long Answer Questions
Why are e-business and outsourcing referred to as the emerging modes
of business? Discuss the factors responsible for the growing importance
of these trends.
Elaborate the steps involved in on-line trading.
Evaluate the need for outsourcing and discuss its limitations.
© NCERT
not to be republished
EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS
Discuss the salient aspects of B2C commerce.
Discuss the limitations of electronic mode of doing business. Are these
limitations severe enough to restrict its scope? Give reasons for your
answer.
Projects/Assignments
Compare and contrast the products and their prices available on the
internet and in retail shops. Is the quality, customer satisfaction and
other factors the same?
Study any business unit/company which is using e-commerce,
e-business as a way of doing business. Interview some people working
there and find out the advantages in practical business in terms of its
costs also.
© NCERT
not to be republished
CHAPTER 6
SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS AND
BUSINESS ETHICS
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
explain the concept of social responsibility;
discuss the need for social responsibility;
identify the social responsibility towards different interest groups;
analyse the relationship between business and environmental
protection; and
define the concept of business ethics and state the elements of
business ethics.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS AND BUSINESS ETHICS
6.1 INTRODUCTION
A business enterprise should do
business and earn money in ways that
fulfill the expectations of the society.
Every individual living in society has
certain obligations towards society. He
has to respect social values and norms
of behaviour. A business enterprise is
permitted by society to carry on
industrial or commercial activities and
thereby earn profits. But it is obligatory
on part of the business enterprise not
to do anything, that is undesirable from
society’s point of view. Manufacture
and sale of adulterated goods, making
deceptive advertisements, not paying
taxes which are due, polluting the
environment and exploiting workers
are some examples of socially
undesirable practices which may
increase the profit of enterprises but
which have adverse effect on society at
large. On the other hand, supplying
good quality goods, creating healthy
working conditions, honestly paying
taxes prevention/installing pollution
devices in the factory, and sincerely
attending to customer complaints are
examples of socially desirable practices
which improve the image of enterprises
and also make them profitable. In fact,
it is through socially responsible and
ethically upright behaviour that
business enterprises can get durable
success.
6.2 CONCEPT OF SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
Social responsibility of business refers
to its obligation to take those decisions
and perform those actions which are
desirable in terms of the objectives and
values of our society. The assumption
of social responsibilities by business
enterprises implies that they respect
the aspirations of society and would try
their best to contribute to the
achievement of these aspirations along
with their profit interests. This idea is
in contrast to the common notion that
business exists only for maximising
profits for its owners and it is irrelevant
to talk of public good. It follows that a
Mani is a young newspaper reporter and has been writing for almost six months
on malpractices by business enterprises including such issues as misleading
advertisements, supply of adulterated products, poor working conditions,
environmental pollution, bribing government officials, and so on. He has started
believing that business people tend to do anything to mint money. He happens
to take an interview of Mr. Raman Jhunjhunwala, chairman of a leading truck
manufacturing company which is known for its fair dealing with customers,
employees, investors as well as other social groups. Through this interview,
Mani develops the understanding that it is possible for a business enterprise
to be socially responsible and ethically upright and, at the same time, be highly
profitable. He then gets busy with studying more about the social responsibility
of business and business ethics.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
responsible business, and indeed any
responsible member of society, must
act with due concern for the effects on
the lives of other people.
In this sense, social responsibility
is broader than legal responsibility of
business. Legal responsibility may be
fulfilled by mere compliance with the
law. Social responsibility is more than
that. It is a firm’s recognition of social
obligations even though not covered by
law, along with the obligations laid
down by law. In other words, social
responsibility involves an element of
voluntary action on the part of business
people for the benefit of society.
6.3 NEED FOR SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
What is the right thing to do when it
comes to social responsibility? Should
a business enterprise be run for the
benefit of its owners who may desire to
get as much profit as is possible or else,
it needs to be responsible for serving
the interest of other sections of society
such as customers, employees,
suppliers, government and community?
The very concept of social responsibility
implies that it is essentially an ethical
issue, since it involves the question of
what is morally right or wrong in
relation to the firm’s responsibilities.
Social responsibility also has an
element of voluntary action on the part
of the business person who may feel
free to perform or not to perform such
responsibilities. They may also exercise
their freedom for deciding the extent to
which they would like to serve various
sections of society. In fact, all business
people do not feel equally responsible
towards society. There has been a
debate, for some time now whether
business should assume social
responsibilities or not. Some people
strongly believe that a firm’s only social
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)
Whereas it is the responsibility of every form of business enterprise — be it sole
proprietorship, partnership, joint Hindu family, cooperative, or a joint stock
company to act in a socially desirable manner, the concept of CSR, used
particularly with reference to a company, has recently gained popularity.
Corporate social responsibility can be defined as achieving commercial success
in ways that honour ethical values and respect people, communities and the
natural environment. CSR means addressing the legal, ethical, commercial and
other expectations that society has from corporates who should take decisions
and actions that fairly balance the claims of all the stakeholders (i.e., the people
who have interest in the life of a corporate including shareholders, creditors,
consumers, competitors, workers, government and society at large)
CSR is viewed as a comprehensive set of policies, practices and programmes
that are integrated into business operations, supply claims and decision making
process throughout the company — wherever the company does business — and
includes responsibility for current and past actions as well as future impact.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS AND BUSINESS ETHICS
responsibility is towards its owners.
Some others, however, hold an opposite
view and argue that the firm has a social
responsibility to serve all sections of
society who are affected by its decisions
and actions. It would be useful to
understand the arguments offered
both in favour of and against the
assumption of social responsibilities
by business.
6.3.1
Arguments for Social
Responsibility
(i) Justification for existence and
growth: Business exists for providing
goods and services to satisfy human
needs. Though, profit motive is an
important justification for undertaking
business activity, it should be looked
upon as an outcome of service to the
people. In fact, the prosperity and
growth of business is possible only
through continuous service to society.
Thus,
assumption
social
responsibility by business provides
justifications for its existence and
growth.
(ii) Long-term interest of the firm:
A firm and its image stands to gain
maximum profits in the long run when
it has its highest goal as ‘service to
society’. When increasing number of
members of society — including
workers, consumers, shareholders,
government officials, feel that business
enterprise is not serving its best
interest, they will tend to withdraw their
cooperation to the enterprise
concerned. Therefore, it is in its own
interest if a firm fulfills it’s social
responsibility. The public image of any
firm would also be improved when it
supports social goals.
(iii) Avoidance of government
regulation: From the point of view of a
business, government regulations are
undesirable because they limit
freedom. Therefore, it is believed that
businessmen can avoid the problem of
government regulations by voluntarily
assuming social responsibilities, which
helps to reduce the need for new laws.
(iv) Maintenance of society: The
argument here is that laws cannot be
passed for all possible circumstances.
People who feel that they are not getting
their due from the business may resort
to anti-social activities, not necessarily
governed by law. This may harm the
interest of business itself. Therefore, it
is desirable that business enterprises
should assume social responsibilities.
(v) Availability of resources with
business: This argument holds that
business institutions have valuable
financial and human resources which
can be effectively used for solving
problems. For example, business has
a pool of managerial talent and capital
resources, supported by years of
experience in organising business
activities. It can help society to tackle
its problems better, given the huge
financial and human resources at its
disposal.
(vi) Converting problems into
opportunities: Related with the
preceding argument is the argument
that business with its glorious history
of converting risky situations into
profitable deals, can not only solve
social problems but it can also make
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
them effectively useful by accepting the
challenge.
(vii) Better environment for doing
business: If business is to operate in a
society which is full of diverse and
complicated problems, it may have little
chance of success. Therefore, it is
argued that the business system
should do something to meet needs
before it is confronted with a situation
when its own survival is endangered
due to enormous social illnesses. A
society with fewer problems provides
better environment for a firm to
conduct its business.
(viii) Holding business responsible
for social problems: It is argued that
some of the social problems have either
been created or perpetuated by
business enterprises themselves.
Environmental pollution, unsafe
workplaces, corruption in public
institutions, and discriminatory
practices in employment are some of
these problems. Therefore, it is the
moral obligation of business to get
involved in solving these problems,
instead of merely expecting that other
social agencies will deal with them on
their own.
6.3.2 Arguments against Social
Responsibility
Major arguments against social
responsibility are:
(i) Violation of profit maximisation
objective: According to this argument,
business exists only for profit
maximisation. Therefore, any talk of
social responsibility is against this
objective. In fact, business can best
fulfill its social responsibility if it
maximises profits through increased
efficiency and reduced costs.
(ii) Burden on consumers: It is argued
that social responsibilities like pollution
control and environmental protection
are very costly and often require huge
financial investments. In such
circumstances, businessmen are likely
to simply shift this burden of social
responsibility by charging higher prices
from the consumers instead of bearing
it themselves. Therefore, it is unfair to
tax the consumers in the name of social
responsibility.
(iii) Lack of social skills: All social
problems cannot be solved the way
business problems are solved. In fact,
businessmen do not have the necessary
understanding and training to solve
social problems. Therefore, according
to this argument, social problems
should be solved by other specialised
agencies.
(iv) Lack of broad public support:
Here the argument is that the public in
general does not like business
involvement or interference in social
programmes. Therefore, business
cannot operate successfully because of
lack of public confidence and
cooperation in solving social problems.
6.3.3 Reality of Social Responsibility
On the basis of the above arguments
for and against social responsibility,
one may wonder what the businessmen
do in reality. Do they concentrate on
profit maximisation? Or, do they
support social goals? The fact is that
one of the most important recent
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS AND BUSINESS ETHICS
changes in the attitude of business
people has been the realisation that
they have social obligations to fulfill
besides ensuring their own existence
through profitable activity. Of course,
part of this realisation is not genuine
and takes the form of lip service, which
is thought necessary to ensure the
survival of private enterprise. But at the
same time it cannot be denied that
private business does partly realise and
recognise the hard reality that a
privately owned firm has to meet the
challenge of a democratic society,
where all people have certain human
rights and therefore, can demand
responsible conduct from business.
Unless the business sets its house in
order, changes its outlook and is
prepared to play its legitimate role as
an organ of society, it has little chance
of success. It will be useful here to go
into some of the reasons and factors,
which have forced and persuaded
businessmen to consider their
responsibilities and the conditions
which were favourable to the
development of business concern with
social responsibility. Some of the more
important among them are:
(i) Threat of public regulation:
Democratically elected governments of
today are expected to act as welfare
states whereby they have to take care
of all sections of society. Thus, where
business institutions operate in a
socially irresponsible manner, action is
taken to regulate them for safeguarding
people’s interest. This threat of public
regulation is one important reason due
to which business enterprise feels
concerned with social responsibility.
(ii) Pressure of labour movement:
Over the last century or so, labour has
become far more educated and
organised. Accordingly, labour
movement for extracting gains for the
working class throughout the world
has become very powerful. This has
forced business enterprises to pay due
regard to the welfare of workers instead
of following a policy of ‘hire and fire’
under which they could deal with
workers at their will.
(iii) Impact of consumer conscious-
ness: Development of education and
media
increasing
competition in the market have made
the consumer conscious of his right
and power in determining market
forces. The principle of caveat emptor
(or let the buyer beware) has been
substituted by the principle of
‘customer is king’. Business enterprises
have started following customer -
oriented policies.
(iv) Development of social standard
for business: Businesses are no longer
considered merely money crazy entities
which can be allowed to mint money at
any cost and get away with any kind
of business practices. New social
standards consider economic activity
of business enterprises as legitimate
but with the condition that they must
also serve social needs. No business
can be done in isolation from society.
It is the society that permits business
to exist and grow and it is on the basis
of social standards that business
functioning is to be ultimately judged.
(v) Developme nt of business
education: Development of business
education with its rich content of social
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
responsibility has made more and
more people aware of the social
purpose of business. Educated
persons as consumers, investors,
employees, or owners have become
more sensitive towards social issues
than was the case earlier, when such
education was not available.
(vi) Relationship between social
interest and business interest:
Business enterprises have started
realising the fact that social interest and
business interest are not contradictory.
Instead, these are complementary to
each other. The feeling that business
can grow only through exploitation of
society has given way to the belief that
long-term benefit of business lies in
serving the society well. So also, a
useful institution like business is
recognised as an essential element of a
modern civilised society.
(vii) Development of professional,
managerial class: Professional
management education in universities
and specialised management institutes
have created a separate class of
professional managers who have got an
altogether different attitude towards
social responsibility as compared to the
earlier class of owner manager.
Professional managers are more
interested in satisfying a multiplicity of
interest groups in society for running
their enterprises successfully than
merely following profit goals.
These and a number of other social
and economic forces have combined
together to make business a socio-
economic activity. Business is no longer
a mere occupation; it is an economic
institution that has to reconcile its
short-term and long range economic
interests with the demands of the
society in which it functions.
Essentially, it is this which gives rise to
the general and specific social
responsibilities of business. While there
is no denial of the fact that business is
essentially an economic enterprise and
that it must ultimately justify itself on
economic performance, it is also true
that business is an organ of society and
as such it must justify its continuance
by fulfilling its roles and responsibilities
of society.
6.4 KINDS OF SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
Social responsibility of business can
broadly be divided into four categories,
which are as follows:
Economic responsibility: A
business enterprise is basically an
economic entity and, therefore, its
primary social responsibility is
economic i.e., produce goods and
services that society wants and sell
them at a profit. There is little
discretion in performing this
responsibility.
Legal responsibility: Every
business has a responsibility to
operate within the laws of the land.
Since these laws are meant for the
good of the society, a law abiding
enterprise is a socially responsible
enterprise as well.
Ethical responsibility: This
includes the behaviour of the firm
that is expected by society but not
codified in law. For example,
respecting the religious sentiments
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS AND BUSINESS ETHICS
and dignity of people while
advertising for a product. There is
an element of voluntary action in
performing this responsibility.
(d) Discretionary responsibility.
This refers to purely voluntary
obligation that an enterprise
assumes, for instance, providing
charitable contributions to
educational institutions or
helping the affected people during
floods or earthquakes. It is the
responsibility of the company
management
safeguard
the capital investment by
avoiding speculative activity and
undertaking only healthy business
ventures which give good returns
on investment.
6.5 SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY TOWARDS
DIFFERENT INTEREST GROUPS
Once the social objective of business is
recognised, it is important to know to
whom and for what the business and
its management are responsible.
Obviously, a business unit has to
decide in which areas it should carry
out social goals. Some of the specific
responsibilities and enterprise may be
outlined as under:
(i) Responsibility towards the
shareholders or owners: A business
enterprise has the responsibility to
provide a fair return to the shareholders
or owners on their capital investment
and to ensure the safety of such
investment. The corporate enterprise on
a company form of organisation must
also provide the shareholders with
regular, accurate and full information
about its working as well as schemes
of future growth.
(ii) Responsibility towards the
workers: Management of an enterprise
is also responsible for providing
opportunities to the workers for
meaningful work. It should try to create
the right kind of working conditions so
that it can win the cooperation of
workers. The enterprise must respect
the democratic rights of the workers to
form unions. The worker must also be
ensured of a fair wage and a fair deal
from the management.
(iii) Responsibility towards the
consumers: Supply of right quality
and quantity of goods and services to
consumers at reasonable prices
constitutes the responsibility of an
enterprise toward its customers. The
enterprise must take proper precaution
against adulteration, poor quality, lack
of desired service and courtesy to
customers, misleading and dishonest
advertising, and so on. They must also
have the right of information about the
product, the company and other
matters having a bearing on their
purchasing decision.
(iv) Responsibility towards the
government and community: An
enterprise must respect the laws of the
country and pay taxes regularly and
honestly. It must behave as a good
citizen and act according to the well
accepted values of the society. It must
protect the natural environment and
should avoid bad, effluent, smoky
chimneys, ugly buildings dirty working
conditions. It must also develop a
proper image in society through
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
continuous interaction with various
groups of people.
6.6 BUSINESS AND ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
Protection of the environment is a
serious issue that confronts business
managers and decision makers. The
environment is defined as the totality
of man’s surroundings — both natural
and man-made. These surroundings
are also in the nature of resources, that
are useful for human life. The resources
may also be called natural resources
like land, water, air, fauna and flora and
raw materials; or man-made resources
such as cultural heritage, socio-
economic institutions and the people.
It is widely recognised that the quality
of the environment is fast deteriorating
particularly due to industrial activity.
This is a common sight around major
cities like Kanpur, Jaipur, Delhi,
Panipat, Kolkata, and others, in
various states of our country. Their
emissions are seriously affecting the
health of the people. Pollution — the
injection of harmful substances into
the environment is, in fact, largely the
result of industrial production. Since
some waste is inevitable in the use
of materials and energy, the
manufacturers face a great challenge
in minimising the adverse impact
of this waste by using proper
technologies. Protection of the
environment is good for all of us.
Pollution changes the physical,
chemical and biological characteristics
of air, land and water. Pollution harms
human life and the life of other species.
It also degrades living conditions while
wasting or depleting raw material
resources. The country’s cultural
heritage is also affected and it is
becoming increasingly difficult to
protect all historical monuments.
Pollution
exists
because
environment can absorb only a limited
amount of pollutants and wastes.
Some hazardous wastes or toxic
by-products and chemicals are termed
as hazardous pollutants because they
have toxic characteristics that the
environment can not assimilate.
Pollution thus causes risks to
environmental quality, human health
and damage to natural and man-made
resources.
Protection
environment is directly related to the
control of pollution.
6.6.1 Causes of Pollution
It must be recognised that all sectors
of our society viz., industry,
government, agriculture, mining,
energy, transportation, construction,
and consumers generate waste. Wastes
contain pollutants which are the
materials of chemicals that have been
discarded during the process of
production or consumption. Pollution
is caused by these pollutants which are
released into the environment beyond
its assimilation capacity. Among the
various sources of pollution, industry
is a major generator of waste in terms
of both its quantity and toxicity.
Business activities such as production,
distribution, transport, storage,
consumption of goods and services are
known to be the most critical sources
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS AND BUSINESS ETHICS
of environmental pollution problems.
Many business enterprises have been
responsible for causing (i) air, (ii) water
(iii) land, and (iv) noise pollution.
These types of pollution are
discussed as follows:
(i) Air pollution: Air pollution is the
result of a combination of factors which
lowers the air quality. It is mainly due
to carbon monoxide emitted by
automobiles which contributes to air
pollution. Similarly, smoke and other
chemicals from manufacturing plants
pollute the air. Resultant air pollution
has created a hole in the ozone layer
leading to dangerous warming of
the earth.
(ii) Water pollution: Water becomes
polluted primarily from chemical and
waste dumping. For years, business
enterprises have been dumping waste
into rivers, streams and lakes with little
regard for the consequences. Water
pollution has led to the death of several
animals and posed a serious threat to
human life.
(iii) Land pollution: Dumping of toxic
wastes on land causes land pollution.
This damages the quality of land
making it unfit for agriculture or
plantation. Restoring the quality of the
land that has already been damaged is
a big problem.
(iv) Noise pollution: Noise caused by
the running of factories and vehicles
is not merely a source of annoyance
but is also a serious health hazard.
Noise pollution can be responsible
for many diseases like loss of hearing,
malfunctioning of the heart and
mental disorder.
6.6.2
Need for Pollution Control
Pollution prevention or control is
needed
preserve
precious
environmental resources and to
improve the environmental quality so
that the preserved resources can be
utilised for the benefit of mankind and
the improvement of health and well-
being of the people. The amount of
damage to a particular medium (air,
water, land) varies according to the type
of pollutant, the amount of pollutant
disposed of, and the distance from the
source of pollution. But all pollutants
alter the quality of the environment and
render it, to some degree, unfit to
preserve normal life. People are now
raising their voice loudly against
pollution generating activities.
Business enterprises cannot remain
unaffected
environmental
destruction. They need to take suitable
measures for pollution control not
Environmental Problems
The united nations has identified eight problems that cause damage to the natural
environment. These are:
(i) Ozone depletion
Fresh water quality and quantity
(ii) Global warming
Deforestation
(iii) Solid and hazardous wastes
(vii) Land degradation
(iv) Water pollution
(viii) Danger to biological diversity
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
merely to avoid criticisms against them
but also to enjoy other benefits of such
measures. Some of the important
reasons which make a case for pollution
control are as follows:
(i) Reduction of health hazards:
There is increasing evidence that many
diseases like cancer, heart attacks and
lung complications are caused by
pollutants in the environment.
Pollution control measures can not
only check the seriousness of such
diseases but can also be supportive of
a healthy life on earth.
(ii) Reduced risk of liability: It is
possible that an enterprise is held liable
to pay compensation to people affected
by the toxicity of gaseous, liquid and
solid wastes it has released into the
environment. Therefore, it is sound
business policy to install pollution
control devices in its premises to reduce
the risk of liability.
(iii) Cost savings: An effective pollution
control programme is also needed to
save costs of operating business. Cost
savings are particularly noticeable
when improper production technology
results in greater wastes which leads
to higher cost of waste disposal and
cost of cleaning the plants.
(iv) Improved public image: As
society becomes increasingly conscious
of environmental quality, a firm’s
policies and practices for controlling
wastes will increasingly influence
people’s attitude towards its working.
A firm that promotes the cause for
environment will be able to enjoy a good
reputation and will be perceived as a
socially responsible enterprise.
(v) Other social benefits: Pollution
control results in many other benefits
like clearer visibility, cleaner buildings,
better quality of life, and the availability
of natural products in a purer form.
6.6.3 Role
Business
Environmental Protection
Since the quality of the environment is
important for all of us, we have a
collective responsibility to protect it
from being spoiled. Whether it is
government, business enterprises,
consumers, workers, or other members
of society, each one can do something
to stop polluting the environment.
Government can enact laws to ban
hazardous products. Consumers,
workers and the members of society
can avoid using certain products
and doing things that are not
environment friendly.
The business enterprises should,
however, take the lead in providing their
own solutions to environmental
problems. It is the social responsibility
of every business to take steps not only
to check all sorts of pollution but also
to protect environmental resources.
Business enterprises are leading
creators of wealth, employment, trade
and technology. They also command
huge financial, physical and human
resources. They also have the know-
how to solve environmental pollution
problems with a preventive approach
by controlling pollutants at the source.
In most cases, a modification or change
in the process of production, redesign
of equipment, substituting poor quality
materials with better ones or other
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS AND BUSINESS ETHICS
innovative approaches could greatly
reduce or even eliminate pollution
entirely. Some of the specific steps which
can be taken by business enterprises
for environmental protection are as
stated below:
(i) A definite commitment by top
management of the enterprise
to create, maintain and develop
work culture for environmental
protection
pollution
prevention.
(ii) Ensuring that commitment to
environmental protection is shared
throughout the enterprise by all
divisions and employees.
(iii) Developing clear-cut policies and
programmes for purchasing good
quality raw materials, employing
superior technology, using
scientific techniques of disposal
and treatment of wastes and
developing employee skills for the
purpose of pollution control.
(iv) Complying with the laws and
regulations enacted by the
Government for prevention of
pollution.
(v) Participation
govern-
ment programmes relating to
management of hazardous
substances, clearing up of polluted
rivers, plantation of trees, and
checking deforestation.
(vi) Periodical assessment of pollution
control programmes in terms of
costs and benefits so as to increase
the progress with respect to
environmental protection.
(vii) Arranging educational workshops
and training materials to share
technical
information
experience with suppliers, dealers
and customers to get them actively
involved in pollution control
programmes.
6.7 BUSINESS ETHICS
From the social point of view, business
exists to supply goods and services to
the people. From the individual point of
view, the primary objective of a business
firm is to earn profit. One may expect
that the individual goals of the firm
would not be in conflict with the
objectives of society. However,  business
enterprises are run by human beings
whose decisions and actions may not
always be in accordance with the
expectations of society. An enterprise
may be good in terms of economic
performance (like revenue, costs and
profits) but poor in terms of social
performance like supplying products of
reasonable quality and at reasonable
prices. This raises the question of what
is right or wrong from society’s point of
view. The answer to this question is
important because business enterprises
are products of and are influenced by
society. They have to interpret and
adjust to the preferences or values
of society. The subject matter of ethics
is concerned with establishing linkages
between individual good and social
good.
6.7.1
Concept of Business Ethics
The word ‘ethics’ has its origin in the
Greek word ‘ethics’ meaning character;
norms, ideals or morals prevailing in a
group or society. Ethics is concerned
with what is right and what is wrong in
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
human behaviour judged on the basis
of a standard form of conduct/ehaviour
of individuals, as approved by society
in a particular field of activity. Ethics
may be viewed as the entire body of
moral values that society attaches to
the actions of human beings. Ethics can
also refer to codes or other system for
controlling means so that they serve
human ends. Ethical standards are
often enacted into laws. But ethical
behaviour is just and fair conduct
which goes beyond observing laws and
government regulations. It means
adhering to moral principles, being
guided by particular values, and
behaving in a way people ought to act.
The set of principles called ethics may
be written or unwritten codes or
principles governing a professional or
human activity.
Business ethics concerns itself with
the relationship between business
objectives, practices, and techniques
and the good of society. Business
ethics refer to the socially determined
moral principles which should govern
business activities. A few examples of
Environmental Protection in India
(Steps by the Government)
Laws: The directive principles of state policy in the Constitution of India lay
emphasis on protection of environment. Some of the laws enacted are as
under:
The Wildlife Protection Act, 1972
The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 amended in
1974 and 1988
iii. The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 amended in 1974
and 1988
iv. The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986
The Forests (Conservation Act, 1980 amended in 1988
vi. The Hazardous Wastes Act, 1989
Regulations: Administrative orders/policy guidelines have been laid down
by the government. A separate Department of Environment, Government of
India was created in 1980.
Certain regulatory bodies or quasi-judicial authorities have been established
such as:
National Afforestation and Eco-development Board, and
National Wastelands Development Board
Manufacturing units have been closed in cities. High Court of Delhi ordered
shifting of manufacturing units out of Delhi and closing them. Similarly,
courts have ordered removal of foundaries from Agra city, and shifting of
manufacturing factories from Kanpur.
Various programmes on environment education, and seminars on creating
awareness and resource are being organised regularly.
Government has also laid down Environment Action Plan (EAP).
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS AND BUSINESS ETHICS
business ethics are: charging fair prices
from customers, using fair weights for
measurement of commodities, giving
fair treatment to workers and earning
reasonable profits. A businessperson
behaves ethically when her or his
actions are upright and serve the
interest of society. This, of course, also
applies to those not in business. The
essential difference is perhaps that
businesspersons by virtue of their
widespread control over society’s
resources have a much greater effect
on what happens in a society than
persons in other areas of activity do.
Business people and politicians are
expected to have higher standards over
and above other people. This is perhaps
the price they pay for being allowed to
make decisions on behalf of society.
There is a growing realisation all
over the world that ethics is vitally
important for every business and for
the progress of any society. Ethical
business is good business. Ethical
business behaviour improves public
image, earns people’s confidence and
trust, and leads to greater success.
Ethics and profits go together in the long
run. Ethics alone, and not government
or laws, can make a society great. An
ethically responsible enterprise develops
a culture of caring for people and
environment and commands a high
degree of integrity in dealing with others.
Ethical activity is indeed valuable in
itself, for its own sake, because it
enhances the quality of our lives and
that of the work we do.
6.7.2
Elements of Business Ethics
Since ethical business behavior is good
for both the business enterprise and
society, it makes sense to discuss how
the enterprises can foster ethics in their
day-to-day working. Some of the basic
elements of business ethics while
running a business enterprise are as
under:
(i) Top management commitment:
Top management has a crucial role in
guiding the entire organisation towards
ethically upright behaviour. To achieve
Origin of Three Similar Concepts
(a) Corporate Social Responsibility: It originated in U.S.A where Government
had passed Anti-Trust Act against monopolistic practices, so as to protect
and improve the welfare of society.
(b) Business Ethics: This also originated in U.S.A in the 1970s.  Business ethics
highlighted social values and society’s  concerns in relation to business and
forced the corporates in that country to abstain from policies and practices
which were hostile to consumers and environmental protection.
(c) Corporate Governance: It originated in the U.K. for the purpose of improved
accountability of directors to shareholders, emphasis on more transparent
auditing and increased responsibilities of independent directors, and division
of roles of chairman and managing directors for safeguarding interests of
shareholders.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
results, the Chief Executive Officer (or
CEO) and other higher level managers
need to be openly and strongly
committed to ethical conduct. They
must give continuous leadership for
developing and upholding the values
of the organisation.
(ii) Publication of a ‘Code’: Enter-
prises with effective ethics programmes
do define the principles of conduct for
the whole organisation in the form of
written documents which is referred to
as the “code”. This generally covers
areas such as fundamental honesty
and adherence to laws; product safety
and quality; health and safety in the
workplace; conflicts of interest;
employment practices; fairness in
selling/marketing practices; and
financial reporting.
(iii) Establishment of compliance
mechanisms: In order to ensure that
actual decisions and actions comply
with the firm’s ethical standards,
suitable mechanisms should be
established. Some examples of such
mechanisms are: paying attention to
values and ethics in recruiting and
hiring; emphasising corporate ethics in
training; auditing performance
regularly to analyse the degree
of compliance; and instituting
communication systems to help
employees report incidents of unethical
behaviour.
(iv) Involving employees at all
levels: It is the employees at different
levels who implement ethics policies to
make ethical business a reality.
Therefore, their involvement in ethics
programmes becomes a must. For
example, small groups of employees
can be formed to discuss the important
ethics policies of firms and examine
attitudes of employees towards these
policies.
(v) Measuring results: Although it is
difficult to accurately measure the end
results of ethics programmes, the firms
can certainly audit to monitor
compliance with ethical standards. The
top management team and other
employees should then discuss the
results for further course of action.
Ground Rules of Ethics
The following are some of the universal virtues which every human being should
imbibe, develop and practice to be ethical in life:
(a) Be trustworthy
(b) Have respect for others
(c) Own responsibility
(d) Be fair in dealings
(e) Be caring towards well being of others
(f) Prove to be a good citizen — through civil virtues and duties
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS AND BUSINESS ETHICS
SUMMARY
Concept of social responsibility: Social responsibility of business refers
to its obligation to take those decisions and perform those actions which
are desirable in terms of the objectives and values of our society.
Need for social responsibility: Need for social responsibility of business
arises both because of firm’s interest and the interest of society. However,
there are arguments both for and against social responsibility.
Arguments for social responsibility: Major arguments are: (i) justification
for existence and growth, (ii) long-term interest and image of the firm,
(iii) avoidance of government regulation, (iv) maintenance of orderly society,
(v) availability of resources with business, (vi) converting problems into
opportunity, (vii) better environment for doing business, and (viii) holding
the business responsible for social problems.
Arguments against social responsibility: Major arguments against social
responsibility are: (i) violation of profit maximisation objective, (ii) burden
on consumers, (iii) lack of social skills and (iv) lack of broad public support.
Reality of social responsibility: Reality of social responsibility is that,
despite differing arguments relating to social responsibility, business
enterprises are concerned with social responsibility because of the influence
of certain external forces. These forces are: (i) threat of public regulation,
(ii) pressure of labour movement, (iii) impact of consumer consciousness,
(vi) development of social standard for businessmen, (v) development of
business education, (vi) relationship between social interest and business
interest, and  (vii) development of professional, managerial class.
Social responsibility towards different interest groups: Business
enterprises have responsibility towards (i) shareholders or owners,
(ii) workers, (iii) consumers and (iv) government and community giving fair
return on and safety of investment to shareholders, providing opportunities
to workers for meaningful work, supplying right quality and quantity of
goods and services to consumers and paying to the government, and
protecting natural environment are some of the social responsibilities of
business.
Key Terms
Social responsibility
Water pollution
Business ethics
Environment
Noise pollution
Legal responsibility
Environmental protection
Air pollution
Ethics
Pollution
Land pollution
Code of ethics
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Business and environment protection: Protection of the environment is
a serious issue that confronts managers and decision makers. The
environment is defined as the totality of man’s surroundings — both natural
and man-made. Pollution — the injection of harmful substances into the
environment is, in fact, largely the result of industrial production. Pollution
has harmful effects both for human life and the life of other species.
Causes of Pollution: Among the various sources of pollutions, industry is
a major generator of waste in terms of both its quantity and toxicity. Many
business enterprises have been responsible for causing air, water, land
and noise pollution.
Need for pollution control: Important reasons which make a case for
pollution control are: (i) reduction of health hazards, (ii) reduced risk
of liability, (iii) cost savings (iv) improved public image, and (v) other
social benefits.
Role of business in environmental protection: Each member of society
can do something to protect the environment. The business enterprises
should, however, take the lead in providing their own solutions to
environmental problems. Some of the steps that they can take are: top
management commitment, clear-out policies and programmes, abiding by
government regulations, participation in government programmes, periodical
assessment of pollution control programmes, and proper education and
training of concerned people.
Concept of business ethics: Ethics is concerned with what is right and
what is wrong in human behaviour judged on the basis of socially
determined standards of behaviour. Business ethics concerns itself with
relationship between objectives, practices, and techniques and the good of
society. Ethics is important for every business.
Elements of business ethics: An enterprise can foster ethics at the
workplace by following basic elements of business ethics, such as (i) top
management’s commitment, (ii) publication of a establishment of compliance
mechanism, (iv) involving employees at all levels and (v) measuring results.
EXERCISES
Multiple Choice Questions
Social responsibility is
Same as legal responsibility
Broader than legal
responsibility
Narrower than
legal responsibility
None of them
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS AND BUSINESS ETHICS
If business is to operate in a society which is full of diverse and
complicated problems, it may have
Little chance of success
Great chance of success
Little chance of failure
No relation with success
or failure.
Business people have the skills to solve
All social problems
Some social problems
No social problems
All economic problems
That an enterprise must behave as a good citizen is an example of its
responsibility towards
Owners
Workers
Consumers
Community
Environmental protection can best be done by the efforts of
Business people
Government
Scientists
All the people
Carbon monoxide emitted by automobiles directly contributes to
Water pollution
Noise pollution
Land pollution
All the people
Which of the following can explain the need for pollution control?
Cost savings
Reduced risk of liability
Reduction of health hazards
All of them
Which of the following is capable of doing maximum good to society?
Business success
Laws and regulations
Ethics
Professional management
Ethics is important for
Top management
Middle-level managers
Non-managerial employees
All of them
10. Which of the following alone can ensure effective ethics programme in a
business enterprise?
Publication of a code
Involvement of employees
Establishment of compliance
None of them
mechanisms
Short Answer Questions
What do you understand by social responsibility of business? How is it
different from legal responsibility?
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
What is environment? What is environmental pollution?
What is business ethics? Mention the basic elements of business ethics.
Briefly explain (a) Air Pollution, (b) Water pollution, and (c) Land pollution.
What are the major areas of social responsibility of business?
Long Answer Questions
Build up arguments for and against social responsibilities.
Discuss the forces which are responsible for increasing concern of
business enterprises toward social responsibility.
‘Business is essentially a social institution and not merely a profit
making activity’. Explain.
Why do the enterprises need to adopt pollution control measures?
What steps can an enterprise take to protect the environment from the
dangers of pollution?
Explain the various elements of business ethics.
Projects/Assignment
Develop and put in writing a code of ethics for use in the classroom.
Your document should include guidelines for students, teachers, and
the principal.
Using newspapers, magazines and other business references, identify
and describe at least three companies that you think are socially
responsible and three that you think are socially irresponsible.
© NCERT
not to be republished
PART-II
Corporate Organisation,
Finance and Trade
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
CHAPTER 7
FORMATION OF A COMPANY
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
specify the important stages in the formation of a company;
describe the steps involved in each stage of company formation;
specify the documents to be submitted to the registrar of
companies; and
state the need of certificate of incorporation and certificate to
commence business.
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMATION OF A COMPANY
INTRODUCTION
Modern day business requires large
amount of money. Also, due to
increasing competition and fast
changing technological environment,
the element of risk is increasing. As a
result, the company form of
organisation is being preferred by more
and more business firms, particularly
for setting up medium and large sized
organisations.
The steps which are required from
the time a business idea originates to
the time, a company is legally ready to
commence business are referred to as
stages in the formation of a company.
Those who are taking these steps and
the associated risks are promoting a
company and are called its promoters.
The present chapter describes in
some details the stages in the formation
of a company and also the steps
required to be taken in each stage so
that a fair idea about these aspects can
be made.
FORMATION OF A COMPANY
As discussed in an earlier chapter on
‘Forms of  organisations’, formation of
a company is a complex activity
involving completion of a lot of legal
formalities and procedures. To fully
understand the process one can
divide the formalities into four distinct
stages, which are: (i) P r o m o t i o n ;
(ii) Incorporation; (iii) Subscription of
capital; and (iv) Commencement of
business.
It may, however, be noted that these
stages are appropriate from the point
of view of formation of a public limited
company. As far as the private limited
companies are concerned only the first
two stages mentioned above are
appropriate. In other words, a private
company can start its business
immediately after obtaining the
certificate of incorporation. As it is
prohibited to raise funds from public,
it does not need to issue a prospectus
and complete the formality of minimum
subscription. A public company, on the
other hand, goes through the capital
subscription stage and then receives
the certificate of commencement. Thus,
it has to undergo all the four stages.
In the next section, we shall discuss
these four stages in the formation of a
company in some detail.
Avtar, a brilliant automobile engineer, has recently developed a new carburettor
in his factory which he is running as a sole proprietor. The new carburettor can
cut down petrol consumption of a car engine by 40 percent. He is now thinking
of producing it on a large scale for which he requires a large amount of money.
He is to evaluate different forms of organisations for doing the business of
manufacturing and marketing his carburettor. He decides against converting
his sole proprietorship to partnership as the requirement of funds for the project
is large and the product being new, there is a lot of risk involved. He is advised
to form a company. He wants to know about the formalities required for the
formation of a company.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
7.2.1 Promotion of a Company
Promotion is the first stage in the
formation of a company. It involves
conceiving a business opportunity and
taking an initiative to form a company
so that practical shape can be given to
exploiting the available business
opportunity. Thus, it begins with
somebody having discovered a potential
business opportunity. Any person or
a group of persons or even a company
may have discovered an opportunity.
If such a person or a group of persons
or a company proceeds to form a
company, then, they are said to be the
promoters of the company.
There is no statutory definition of
a promoter. A promoter is said to be
the one who undertakes to form a
company with reference to a given
project and to set it going and who
takes the necessary steps to accomplish
that purpose. Thus, apart from
conceiving a business opportunity the
promoters analyse its prospects and
bring together the men, materials,
machinery, managerial abilities and
financial resources and set the
organisation going.
After thoroughly examining the
feasibility of the idea, the promoters
assemble resources, prepare necessary
documents, give a name and perform
various other activities to get a
company registered and obtain the
necessary certificate enabling the
company to commence business.
Thus, the promoters perform various
functions to bring a company into
existence.
Functions of a Promoter
The important functions of promoters
may be listed as below:
(i) Identification of business
opportunity: The first and foremost
activity of a promoter is to identify a
business opportunity. The opportunity
may be in respect of producing a new
product or service or making some
product available through a different
channel or any other opportunity
having an investment potential. Such
opportunity is then analysed to see its
technical and economic feasibility.
(ii) Feasibility studies: It may not be
feasible or profitable to convert all
identified business opportunities into
real projects. The promoters, therefore,
undertake detailed feasibility studies
to investigate all aspects of the business
they intend to start. Depending upon
the nature of the project, the following
feasibility studies may be undertaken,
with the help of the specialists like
engineers, chartered accountants  etc.,
to examine whether the perceived
business opportunity can be profitably
exploited.
(a) Technical feasibility: Sometimes
an idea may be good but
technically not possible to execute.
It may be so because the required
raw material or technology is not
easily available. For example, in our
earlier story suppose Avtar needs
a particular metal to produce the
carburettor. If that metal is not
produced in the country and
because of poor political relations,
it can not be imported from the
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMATION OF A COMPANY
country which produces it, the
project would be technically
unfeasible until arrangements are
made to make the metal available
from alternative sources.
(b) Financial feasibility: Every
business activity requires funds.
The promoters have to estimate the
fund requirements for the identified
business opportunity. If the
required outlay for the project is so
large that it cannot easily be
arranged within the available
means, the project has to be given
up. For example, one may think
that developing townships is very
lucrative. It may turn out that the
required funds are in several crores
of rupees, which cannot be
arranged by floating a company by
the promoters. The idea may be
abandoned because of the lack of
financial feasibility of the project.
(c) Economic feasibility: Sometimes
it so happens that a project is
technically viable and financially
feasible but the chance of it being
profitable is very little. In such cases
as well, the idea may have to be
abondoned. Promoters usually take
the help of experts to conduct these
studies. It may be noted that these
experts do not become promoters
just because they are assisting the
promoters in these studies.
Only when these investigations
throw up positive results, the
promoters may decide to actually
launch a company.
(iii) Name approval: Having decided
to launch a company, the promoters
have to select a name for it and submit,
an application to the registrar of
companies of the state in which the
registered office of the company is to
be situated, for its approval. The
proposed name may be approved if it
is not considered undesirable. It may
happen that another company exists
with the same name or a very similar
name or the preferred name is
misleading, say, to suggest that the
Name Clause
A name is considered undesirable in the following cases:
(a) If it is identical with or too closely resembles the name of an existing
company
(b) If it is misleading. It is so considered if the name suggests that the company
is in a particular business or it is an association of a particular type when
it is not true
(c) If it is violative of the provisions of ‘The Emblem and Names (Prevention of
Improper Use) Act 1950, as given in the schedule to this Act. This schedule
specifies, inter alia, the name, emblem or official seal of the UNO and its
bodies like WHO, UNESCO etc. Government of India, State Governments,
President of India or Governer of any State, the Indian National Flag. The
Act also prohibits use of any name which may suggest patronage of
Government of India, or any state government or any local authority
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
company is in a particular business when
it is not true. In such cases the proposed
name is not accepted but some alternate
name may be approved. Therefore, three
names, in order of their priority are given
in the application to the Registrar of
Companies. (Performa Application for
availability of names (Form 1A) is given
at the end of the chapter.)
(iv) Fixing up Signatories to the
Memorandum of Association:
Promoters have to decide about the
members who will be signing the
Memorandum of Association of the
proposed company. Usually the people
signing memorandum are also the first
Directors of the Company. Their written
consent to act as Directors and to take
up the qualification shares in the
company is necessary.
(v) Appointment of professionals:
Certain professionals such as
mercantile bankers, auditors etc., are
appointed by the promoters to assist
them in the preparation of necessary
documents which are required to be
with the Registrar of Companies. The
names and addresses of shareholders
and the number of shares allotted to
each is submitted to the Registrar in a
statement called return of allotment.
(vi) Preparation of necessary
documents: The promoter takes up
steps to prepare certain legal
documents, which have to be
submitted under the law, to the
Registrar of the Companies for getting
the company registered. These
documents are Memorandum of
Association, Articles of Association and
Consent of Directors.
Documents
Required
Submitted
A. Memorandum of Association:
Memorandum of Association is the
most important document as it
defines the objectives of the
company. No company can legally
undertake activities that are not
contained in its Memorandum of
Association. The Memorandum of
Association contains different
clauses, which are given as follows:
(i) The name clause: This clause
contains the name of the company with
which the company will be known,
which has already been approved by
the Registrar of Companies.
(ii) Registered office clause: This
clause contains the name of the state,
in which the registered office of the
company is proposed to be situated.
The exact address of the registered
office is not required at this stage but
the same must be notified to the
Registrar within thirty days of the
incorporation of the company.
(iii) Objects clause: This is probably
the most important clause of the
memorandum. It defines the purpose
for which the company is formed. A
company is not legally entitled to
undertake an activity, which is beyond
the objects stated in this clause. The
object clause is divided into two sub-
clauses, which are:
• The main objects: The main
objects for which the company is
formed are listed in this sub-clause.
It must be observed that an act
which is either essential or incidental
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMATION OF A COMPANY
for the attainment of the main objects
of the company is deemed to be
valid, although it may not have been
stated explicitly in the sub-clause.
• Other objects: Objects not included
in the main objects could be stated
in this sub-clause. However, if a
company wishes to undertake a
business included in this sub-
clause, it has to either pass a special
resolution or pass an ordinary
resolution
central
government’s approval for the same.
(iv) Liability clause: This clause limits
the liability of the members to the
amount unpaid on the shares owned
by them.
For example, if a shareholder has
purchased 1000 shares of Rs.10 each
and has already paid Rs. 6 per share,
his/her liability is limited to Rs. 4 per
share. Thus, even in the worst case,
he/she may be called upon to pay
Rs. 4, 000 only.
(v) Capital clause: This clause
specifies the maximum capital which
the company will be authorised to raise
through the issue of shares. The
authorised share capital of the
proposed company along with its
division into the number of shares
having a fixed face value is specified in
this clause. For example, the
authorised share capital of the
company may be Rs. 25 with divided
into 2.5 lakh shares of Rs.10 each. The
said company cannot issue share
capital in excess of the amount
mentioned in this clause.
(vi) Association clause: In this
clause, the signatories to the
Memorandum of Association state their
intention to be associated with the
company and also give their consent
to purchase qualification shares.
The Memorandum of Association
must be signed by at least seven
persons in case of a public company
and by two persons in case of a private
company.
A copy of a Memorandum of
Association is given at the end of the
chapter.
B. Articles of Association: Articles of
Association are the rules regarding
internal management of a company.
These rules are subsidiary to the
Memorandum of Association and
hence, should not contradict or
exceed anything stated in the
Memorandum of Association. A
public limited company may adopt
Table A which is a model set of
articles given in the Companies Act.
Table A is a document containing
rules and regulations for the internal
management of a company. If a
company adopts Table A, there is no
need to prepare separate Articles of
Association. For companies not
Association Clause
The association clause reads as under:
“We, the several persons whose names and addresses are subscribed, are desirous
of being formed into a company in pursuance of this Memorandum of Association,
and we respectively agree to take the number of shares in the capital of the
company set opposite our respective names.”
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
adopting Table A, a copy of the
Articles of Association, stamped and
duly signed by signatories to the
Memorandum of Association is
required for registration.
C. Consent of Proposed Directors:
Apart from the Memorandum and
Articles of Association, a written
consent of each person named as a
director is required confirming that
they agree to act in that capacity
and undertake to buy and pay for
qualification shares, as mentioned
in the Articles of Association.
D. Agreement: The agreement, if any,
which the company proposes to
enter with any individual for
appointment as its Managing
Director or a whole time Director or
Manager is another document
which is required to be submitted
to the Registrar for getting the
company registered under the Act.
E. Statutory
Declaration:
declaration stating that all the legal
requirements
pertaining
registration have been complied
with is to be submitted to the
Registrar with the above mentioned
documents for getting the company
registered under the law. This
statement can be signed by an
advocate of High Court or Supreme
Court or by a Chartered Accountant
in full time practice or by a person
named in the articles as a director
or manager or secretary of the
company. Performa of statutory
declaration given.
F. Payment of fee: Along with the
above-mentioned documents,
necessary fees has to be paid for the
registration of the company. The
amount of such fees shall depend on
the authorised share capital of
the company.
Position of Promoters
Promoters undertake various activities
to get a company registered and get it
to the position of commencement of
business. But they are neither the
agents nor the trustees of the company.
They can’t be the agents as the
company is yet to be incorporated.
Therefore, they are personally liable for
all the contracts which are entered by
them, for the company before its
incorporation, in case the same are not
ratified by the company later on. Also
promoters are not the trustees of
the company.
Promoters of a company enjoy a
fiduciary position with the company,
which they must not misuse. They can
make a profit only if it is disclosed but
must not make any secret profits. In
the event of a non-disclosure, the
company can rescind the contract and
recover the purchase price paid to the
promoters. It can also claim damages
Qualification Shares
To ensure that the directors have some stake in the proposed company, the
Articles usually have a provision requiring them to buy a certain number of
shares. They have to pay for these shares before the company obtains Certificate
of Commencement of Business. These are called Qualification Shares.
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMATION OF A COMPANY
for the loss suffered due to the
non-disclosure of material information.
Promoters are not legally entitled to
claim the expenses incurred in the
promotion of the company. However,
the company may choose to reimburse
them for the pre-incorporation
expenses. The company may also
remunerate the promoters for their
efforts by paying a lump sum amount
or a commission on the purchase price
of property purchased through them
or on the shares sold. The company
may also allot them shares or
debentures or give them an option to
purchase the securities at a future date.
7.2.2 Incorporation
After completing the aforesaid
formalities, promoters make an
Performa for Statutory Declaration
“FORM NO.1”
The Companies Act. 1956
Declaration of Compliance with requirements of the Companies Act, 1956
on Application for Registration of a Company.
PURSUANT TO SECTION 33 (2)
NAME OF THE COMPANY
PRESENTED BY
SUSHIL KR.
CHARTERED ACCOUNTANT.
I, ........(NAME OF CA).......Partner of... (NAME OF CA FIRM & ITS ADDRESS)...,
do solemnly and sincerely declare that I am a Chartered Accountant in whole
time practice in India, who is engaged in the formation of the company
“M/s.———————————————— PRIVATE LIMITED”.
And that all the requirements of the Companies Act, 1956 and the rules
thereunder in respect of matters precedent to the registration of the said
company and incidental thereto have been complied with and I make this
solemn declaration conscientiously believing the same to be true.
PLACE  : NEW DELHI
(NAME OF CA)
DATED :
CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
application for the incorporation of
the company. The application is to be
filed with the Registrar of Companies
of the state within which they plan to
establish the registered office of the
company. The application for
registration must be accompanied
with certain documents about which
we have already discussed in the
previous sections. These may be
briefly mentioned again:
1. The Memorandum of Association
duly stamped, signed and
witnessed. In case of a public
company, at least seven members
must sign it. For a private
statement in lieu of the prospectus
is submitted, instead of Articles
of Association.
3. Written consent of the proposed
directors to act as directors and
an undertaking to purchase
qualification shares.
4. The agreement, if any, with the
proposed Managing Director,
Manager or whole-time director.
5. A copy of the Registrar’s letter
approving the name of the
company.
6. A statutory declaration affirming
that all legal requirements for
registration have been complied
company however the signatures
of two members are sufficient.
The signatories must also give
information about their address,
occupation and the number of
shares subscribed by them.
2. The Articles of Association duly
stamped and witnessed as in case
of the Memorandum. However, as
stated earlier, a public company
may adopt Table A, which is a
model set of Articles, given in the
Companies Act. In that case a
with. This must be signed by an
advocate of a High court or
Supreme Court or a signatory to
the Memorandum of Association
or a Chartered Accountant or
Company Secretary in whole time
practice in India.
7. A notice about the exact address
of the registered office may also be
submitted along with these
documents. However, if the same
is not submitted at the time of
incorporation, it can be submitted
Preliminary Contracts
During the promotion of the company, promoters enter into certain contracts
with third parties on behalf of the company. These are called preliminary contracts
or pre-incorporation contracts. These are not legally binding on the company. A
company after coming into existence may, if it so chooses, decide to enter into
fresh contracts with the same terms and conditions to honour the contracts
made by the promoters. Note that it cannot ratify a preliminary contract. A
company thus cannot be forced to honour a preliminary contract. Promoters,
however, remain personally liable to third parties for these contracts.
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMATION OF A COMPANY
within 30 days of the receipt of the
certificate of incorporation.
8. Documentary evidence of payment
of registration fees.
The Registrar upon submission of
the application along with the required
documents has to be satisfied that the
documents are in order and that all the
statutory requirements regarding the
registration have been complied with.
However, it is not his duty to carry out
a thorough investigation about the
authenticity of the facts mentioned in
the documents.
When the Registrar is satisfied,
about the completion of formalities
for registration, a Certificate of
Incorporation is issued to the company,
which signify the birth of the company.
The certificate of incorporation may
therefore be called the birth certificate
of the company.
With effect from November 1, 2000,
the Registrar of Companies allots a
CIN (Corporate Identity Number) to
the Company.
Effect of the Certificate of
Incorporation
A company is legally born on the date
printed on the Certificate of
SPECIMEN OF
CERTIFICATE OF INCORPORATION
I hereby certify that ....................................................... (name of the company)
is this day incorporated under the Companies Act 1956, and that the
Company is limited.
Given under my hand at Delhi, this seventh day of November, two
thousand and five.
Fees: Deed Stamp
Rs. ..........................
Stamp Duty on Capital
Rs. .........................
Registrar of Companies
Delhi
Corporate Identity Number
of Company : 1352 of 2005
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Incorporation. It becomes a legal entity
with perpetual succession on such
date. It becomes entitled to enter into
valid contracts. The Certificate of
Incorporation is a conclusive evidence
of the regularity of the incorporation of
a company. Imagine, what would
happen to an unsuspecting party with
which the company enters into a
contract, if it is later found that the
incorporation of the company was
improper and hence invalid. Therefore,
the legal situation is that once a
Certificate of Incorporation has been
issued, the company has become a
legal business entity irrespective of any
flaw in its registration. The Certificate
of Incorporation is thus conclusive
evidence of the legal existence of the
company. Some interesting examples
showing
impact
conclusiveness of the Certificate of
Incorporation are as under:
Documents for registration were
filed on 6th January. Certificate of
Incorporation was issued on 8th
January. But the date mentioned
on the Certificate was 6th January.
It was decided that the company
was in existence and the contracts
signed on 6th January were
considered valid.
(b) A person forged the signatures
of others on the Memorandum.
The Incorporation was still
considered valid.
Thus, whatever be the deficiency in
the formalities, the Certificate of
Incorporation once issued, is a
conclusive evidence of the existence of
the company. Even when a company
gets registered with illegal objects, the
birth of the company cannot be
questioned. The only remedy available
is to wind it up. Because the Certificate
of Incorporation is so crucial, the
Registrar has to go very carefully before
issuing it.
On the issue of Certificate of
Incorporation, a private company can
immediately commence its business. It
can raise necessary funds from
friends, relatives or through private
arrangement and proceed to start
business. A public company, however,
has to undergo two more stages in
its formation.
7.2.3 Capital Subscription
A public company can raise the
required funds from the public by
means of issue of shares and
debentures. For doing the same, it has
to issue a prospectus which is an
invitation to the public to subscribe to
the capital of the company and undergo
various other formalities. The following
steps are required for raising funds
from the public:
(i) SEBI Approval: SEBI (Securities
and Exchange Board of India) which is
the regulatory authority in our country
has issued guidelines for the disclosure
of information and investor protection.
A company inviting funds from the
general public must make adequate
disclosure of all relevant information
and must not conceal any material
information from the potential
investors. This is necessary for
protecting the interest of the investors.
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMATION OF A COMPANY
Prior approval from SEBI is, therefore,
required before going ahead with
raising funds from public.
(ii) Filing of Prospectus: A copy of
the prospectus or statement in lieu of
prospectus is filed with the Registrar
of Companies. A prospectus is ‘any
document described or issued as a
prospectus including any notice,
circular, advertisement or other
document inviting deposits from the
public or inviting offers from the public
for the subscription or purchase of any
shares or debentures of, a body
corporate’. In other words, it is an
invitation to the public to apply for
shares or debentures of the company
or to make deposits in the company.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Investors make up their minds about
investment in a company primarily on
the basis of the information contained
in this document. Therefore, there
must not be a mis-statement in
the prospectus and all significant
information must be fully disclosed.
(iii) Appointment of Bankers,
Brokers, Underwriters:  Raising funds
from the public is a stupendous task.
The application money is to be received
by the bankers of the company. The
brokers try to sell the shares
by distributing the forms and
encouraging the public to apply for the
shares. If the company is not
reasonably assured of a good public
response to the issue, it may appoint
underwriters to the issue. Underwriters
undertake to buy the shares if these
are not subscribed by the public. They
receive a commission for underwriting
the issue. Appointment of underwriters
is not necessary.
(iv) Minimum Subscription: In
order to prevent companies from
commencing business with inadequate
resources, it has been provided that the
company must receive applications for
a certain minimum number of shares
before going ahead with the allotment
of shares. According to the Companies
Act, this is called the ‘minimum
subscription’. The limit of minimum
subscription is 90 per cent of the size
of the issue. Thus, if applications
received for the shares are for an
amount less than 90 per cent of the
issue size, the allotment cannot be
made and the application money
received must be returned to the
applicants.
(v) Application to Stock Exchange:
An application is made to at least one
stock exchange for permission to deal
in its shares or debentures. If such
permission is not granted before the
expiry of ten weeks from the date of
closure of subscription list, the
allotment shall become void and all
money received from the applicants will
have to be returned to them within
eight days.
(vi) Allotment of Shares: In case the
number of shares allotted is less than
the number applied for, or where no
shares are allotted to the applicant, the
excess application money, if any, is to
be returned to applicants or adjusted
towards allotment money due from
them. Allotment letters are issued to
the successful allottees. Return of
allotment, signed by a director or
secretary is filed with the Registrar of
Companies within 30 days of allotment.
A public company may not invite
public to subscribe to its shares or
debentures. Instead, it can raise the
funds through friends, relatives or
some private arrangements as done by
Provisional Contract
These are contracts which are signed after incorporation but before the
commencement of business. These become enforceable only after the company
gets the Certificate of Commencement of Business.
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMATION OF A COMPANY
a private company. In such cases, there
is no need to issue a prospectus. A
‘Statement in Lieu of Prospectus’ is filed
with the Registrar at least three days
before making the allotment.
7.2.4 Commencement of Business
If the amount of minimum subscription
is raised through new issue of shares, a
public company applies to the Registrar
of Companies for the issue of Certificate
of Commencement of Business. The
following documents are required:
1. A declaration that shares payable
in cash have been subscribed for
and allotted up to the minimum
subscription mentioned in the
prospectus;
2. A declaration that every director
has paid in cash, the application
and allotment money on his shares
in the same proportion as others;
3. A declaration that no money is
payable or liable to become
payable to the applicants because
of the failure of the company to
either apply for or obtain
permission to deal in its securities
on a stock exchange; and
4. A statutory declaration that the
above requirements have been
complied with. This declaration can
be signed by a director or secretary
of the company.
A public company raising funds
privately, which has earlier filed a
Statement in lieu of prospectus, has to
submit only documents 2 and 4 listed
above.
The Registrar shall examine
these documents. If these are
found satisfactory, a ‘Certificate of
Commencement of Business’ will be
issued. This certificate is conclusive
evidence that the company is entitled
to do business. With the grant of this
certificate the formation of a public
company is complete and the company
can legally start doing business.
Certificate of commencement of Business
(Specimen)
I hereby certify that ........................ ltd. of ......................... which was
incorporated under The Companies  Act, 1956, on the  ................ day of
.................... 200.......... and which has this day filed a statutory declaration in
the prescribed form that the conditions of section 149 have been complied
with, is entitled to commence business.
Given under my hand at ...........................  this day of .................. two
thousand ..................
Registrar
Joint Stock Companies
.............................(State)
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Memorandum of Association
(Specimen)
Name: The name of the company is Excellent Educational Services Limited.
It is hereinafter referred to as EES Ltd.
Registered Office: The Registered office of the company shall be situated in
the NCT of Delhi and at present it is at: Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi-16.
(A) Main Objectives:
(a) To engage in the design, development and delivery of world class service
products in the sphere of education for domestic as well as global markets.
(b) To establish and strengthen presence/market share in the various segments
representing various stages in the education/re-education process in the
life-long learning context, viz., identification of prospects, curriculum-design,
pedagogy, examination and evaluation, anticipating societal/market needs,
content-delivery, placement services and human resource development and
renewal.
(c) To develop, publish/produce teaching, training and study materials,
journals, periodicals, reports, books, monographs and other multilingual
literature/multimedia products for promoting the objectives of the company.
(d) To organise programmes, conferences, lectures, seminars, symposia and
workshops on issues impacting education, industry, business and society.
(B) Ancillary Objectives:
(a) To develop special competencies and capabilities for designing, developing and
delivering service products for persons with physical and mental disabilities;
(b) To liaison and network with various individuals and institutions in
government and non-government sectors and fostering mutually beneficial
relationship in the field of education;
(c) To host a website for virtual learning;
(d) To build up a research and reference library and to undertake documentation
services;
(e) To own, purchase, lease, movable and immovable property in furtherance of
the aims and objectives of the company;
To offer prizes, grants, stipends and scholarships in furtherance of the
objectives of company;
(g) To provide a forum for raising, discussing and resolving of issues, problems
and challenges in the field of education; and
(h) To do generally all such other lawful things as are conducive or incidental to
the attainment of the above objectives.
Liability Clause: Liability of the members would be limited to the amount of
unpaid value of the share.
Capital Subscription Clause: The company shall be registered with a capital
of Rs. 2.5 crore divided into Rs. 25 lakh shares of Rs.10 each.
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMATION OF A COMPANY
We the following persons voluntarily agreed to be the signatories to the
Memorandum of Association:
Sunita
Vinita
Anil Kumar
Sunil Kumar
Avtar Singh
Anita
The name and address of the company signatures to Memorandum have
been modified.
FORM NO. 1-A
The Companies Act. 1961
(Application Form for Availability of Names*)
The Registrar of Companies,
Subject: Availability of Names-information Furnishing of:
We, the following applicants are desirous of forming a company to be
registered under the Companies Act, 1956, in the State Union Territory of
Name and full address of the person(s) applying for availability, of the name
(IN BLOCK LETTERS).
Proposed name of the Company.
State whether Public or Private.
In case the proposed name mentioned in item 2 is not available, 3 names to
be considered, in the order of preference.
Main objectives of the proposed Company.
Name and address of the prospective Directors of Promoters, etc.
Particulars of the names and situation of registered office of other companies
in the same group or under the same management.
Proposed authorised capital.
Please furnish particulars and results of any application moved to this or
any other Registrar previously for availability of name.
10. Particulars of remittance of fee
Situation
Dated
Signature of the applicant
*  Refer Rule 4 A of the Companies/Central Government’s/General Rules and Forms, 1956
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Key Terms
Promotion
Articles of Association
Prospectus
Incorporation
Capital subscription
Memorandum of Association
Preliminary contracts
Statutory declaration
Certificate of Commencement
SUMMARY
There are two stages in the formation of a private company, promotion and
incorporation. A public company has to undergo capital subscription stage
and then get certificate of commencement of business, to begin operations.
Promotion: It begins with a potential business idea. Certain feasibility
studies e.g. technical, financial and economic, are conducted to
determine whether the idea can be profitably exploited. In case, the
investigations yield favourable results, promoters may decide to form
the company. Persons who conceive the business idea, decide to form a
company, take necessary steps for the same, and assume associated
risks, are called promoters.
Steps in Promotion
Approval of company’s name is taken from the Registrar of
Companies
Signatories to the Memorandum of Association are fixed
Certain professionals are appropriated to assist the promoters
Documents necessary for registration are prepared
Necessary Documents
Memorandum of Association
Articles of Association
Consent of proposed directors
Agreement, if any, with proposed managing or whole time director
Statutory declaration
Incorporation: An application is made by promoters to the Registrar of
Companies alongwith necessary documents and registration fees. The
Registrar, after due scrutiny, issues certificate of incorporation. The
registration may be refused only in case of a major defect in the
documents. The certificate of incorporation is a conclusive evidence of
the legal existence of the company. Even if there has been a major
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMATION OF A COMPANY
defect in the incorporation, legal existence of the company can not be
rejected.
Capital Subscription: A public company raising funds from the public
needs to take following steps for fund raising:
SEBI approval;
File a copy of prospectus with the Registrar of Companies;
(iii)
Appointment of brokers, bankers and underwriters etc.;
Ensure that minimum subscription is received;
Application for listing of company’s securities;
Refund/adjust excess application money received;
(vii)
Issue allotment letters to successful applicants; and
(viii)
File return of allotment with the Registrar of Companies (ROC).
A public company, raising funds, raising funds from friends/relatives (not
public) has to file a statement in lieu of prospectus with the ROC at least
three days before allotment of shares and returns of allotment after
completing the allotment.
Commencement of Business: A public company raising funds from
public has to apply to the Registrar of Companies for the certificate of
commencement of business alongwith the following documents.
A declaration about meeting minimum subscription requirement;
A declaration about details in respect of allotment to directors;
(iii)
A declaration about no money being payable to applicants; and
A statutory declaration.
A public company raising funds privately has to submit only documents
(ii) and (iv) listed above.
The Registrar, upon satisfaction, issues Certificate of Commencement of
Business. This certificate is  also a conclusive evidence of completion of
formation requirements.
Preliminary Contracts: Contracts signed by promoters with third parties
before the incorporation of company.
Provisional Contracts: Contracts signed after incorporation but before
commencement of business.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
EXERCISES
Multiple Choice Questions
Minimum number of members to form a private company is
Minimum number of members to form a public company is
Application for approval of name of a company is to be made to
Registrar of Companies
Government of India
Government of the State
in which Company is to
be registered
A proposed name of Company is considered undesirable if
It is identical with the name
It resembles closely with
of an existing company
the name of an existing
company
It is an emblem of Government
In case of any of the above
of India, United Nations etc.
A prospectus is issued by
A private company
A public company seeking
investment from
public
A public enterprise
A public company
Stages in the formation of a public company are in the following order
Promotion, Commencement
Incorporation, Capital
of Business, Incorporation,
Subscription,
Capital Subscription
Commencement of
Business, Promotion
Promotion, Incorporation,
Capital Subscription,
Capital Subscription,
Promotion, Incorporation,
Commencement of Business
Commencement of
Business
Preliminary Contracts are signed
Before the incorporation
After incorporation but
before capital subscription
After incorporation but before
After commencement of
commencement of business
business
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORMATION OF A COMPANY
Preliminary Contracts are
binding on the Company
binding on the Company, if
ratified after incorporation
binding on the
not binding on the
Company, after incorporation
Company
True/False Answer Questions
It is necessary to get every company incorporated, whether private or
public.
Statement in lieu of prospectus can be filed by a public company going
for a public issue.
A private company can commence business after incorporation.
Experts who help promoters in the promotion of a company are also
called promoters.
A company can ratify preliminary contracts after incorporation.
If a company is registered on the basis of fictitious names, its
incorporation is invalid.
‘Articles of Association’ is the main document of a company.
Every company must file Articles of Association.
A provisional contract is signed by promoters before the incorporation
of the company.
10. If a company suffers heavy issues and its assets are not enough to pay
off its liabilities, the balance can be recovered from the private assets of
its members.
Short Answer Questions
Name the stages in the formation of a company.
List the documents required for the incorporation of a company.
What is a prospectus? Is it necessary for every company to file a
prospectus?
Explain the term, ‘Minimum Subscription’.
Briefly explain the term ‘Return of Allotment’.
At which stage in the formation of a company does it interact with SEBI.
Distinguish between ‘preliminary contracts’ and ‘provisional contracts’.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Long Answer Questions
What is meant by the term ‘Promotion’. Discuss the legal position of
promoters with respect to a company promoted by them.
Explain the steps taken by promoters in the promotion of a company.
What is a ‘Memorandum of Association’? Briefly explain its clauses.
Distinguish between ‘Memorandum of Association’ and ‘Articles of
Association.’
What is the effect of conclusiveness of the ‘Certificates of Incorporation’
and ‘Commencement of Business’?
Is it necessary for a public company to get its share listed on a stock
exchange? What happens if a public company going for a public issue
fails to apply to a stock exchange for permission to deal in its securities
or fails to get such permission?
Projects/Assignment
Find out from the office of the Registrar of Companies, the actual procedure
for formation of companies. Does it match with what you have studied.
What are the obstacles which companies face in getting themselves
registered.
© NCERT
not to be republished
CHAPTER 8
SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
state the meaning, nature and importance of business finance;
classify the various sources of business finance;
evaluate merits and limitations of various sources of finance;
identify the international sources of finance; and
examine the factors that affect the choice of an appropriate source
of finance.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
INTRODUCTION
This chapter provides an overview of the
various sources from where funds can
be procured for starting as also for
running a business. It also discusses
the advantages and limitations of
various sources and points out the
factors that determine the choice of a
suitable source of business finance.
It is important for any person who
wants to start a business to know about
the different sources from where money
can be raised. It is also important to
know the relative merits and demerits
of different sources so that choice of an
appropriate source can be made.
MEANING, NATURE  AND
SIGNIFICANCE OF BUSINESS
FINANCE
Business is concerned with the
production and distribution of goods
and services for the satisfaction of needs
of society. For carrying out various
activities, business requires money.
Finance, therefore, is called the
life blood of any business. The
requirements of funds by business to
carry out its various activities is called
business finance.
A business cannot function unless
adequate funds are made available to
it. The initial capital contributed by the
entrepreneur is not always sufficient to
take care of all financial requirements
of the business. A business person,
therefore, has to look for different other
sources from where the need for funds
can be met. A clear assessment of the
financial needs and the identification
of various sources of finance, therefore,
is a significant aspect of running a
business organisation.
The need for funds arises from the
stage when an entrepreneur makes a
decision to start a business. Some
funds are needed immediately say for
Mr. Anil Singh has been running a restaurant for the last two years. The excellent
quality of food has made the restaurant popular in no time. Motivated by the
success of his business, Mr. Singh is now contemplating the idea of opening a
chain of similar restaurants at different places. However, the money available
with him from his personal sources is not sufficient to meet the expansion
requirements of his business. His father told him that he can enter into a
partnership with the owner of another restaurant, who will bring in more funds
but it would also require sharing of profits and control of business. He is also
thinking of getting a bank loan. He is worried and confused, as he has no idea
as to how and from where he should obtain additional funds. He discusses the
problem with his friend Ramesh, who tells him about some other methods like
issue of shares and debentures, which are available only to a company form of
organisation. He further cautions him that each method has its own advantages
and limitations and his final choice should be based on factors like the purpose
and period for which funds are required. He wants to learn about these methods.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE
the purchase of plant and machinery,
furniture, and other fixed assets.
Similarly, some funds are required for
day-to-day operations, say to purchase
raw materials, pay salaries to
employees, etc. Also when the business
expands, it needs funds.
The financial needs of a business can
be categorised as follows:
(a) Fixed capital requirements: In
order to start business, funds are
required to purchase fixed assets like
land and building, plant and
machinery, and furniture and
fixtures. This is known as fixed
capital requirements of the
enterprise. The funds required in
fixed assets remain invested in the
business for a long period of time.
Different business units need varying
amount of fixed capital depending on
various factors such as the nature of
business, etc. A trading concern for
example, may require small amount
of fixed capital as compared to a
manufacturing concern. Likewise,
the need for fixed capital investment
would be greater for a large
enterprise, as compared to that of a
small enterprise.
(b) Working Capital requirements:
The financial requirements of an
enterprise do not end with the
procurement of fixed assets. No
matter how small or large a business
is, it needs funds for its day-to-day
operations. This is known as working
capital of an enterprise, which is used
for holding current assets such as
stock of material, bills receivables and
for meeting current expenses like
salaries, wages, taxes, and rent.
The amount of working capital
required varies from one business
concern to another depending on various
factors. A business unit selling goods on
credit, or having a slow sales turnover,
for example, would require more
working capital as compared to a
concern selling its goods and services on
cash basis or having a speedier turnover.
The requirement for fixed and
working capital increases with the
growth and expansion of business. At
times additional funds are required for
upgrading the technology employed so
that the cost of production or operations
can be reduced. Similarly, larger funds
may be required for building higher
inventories for the festive season or to
meet current debts or expand the
business or to shift to a new location. It
is, therefore, important to evaluate the
different sources from where funds can
be raised.
CLASSIFICATION OF SOURCES OF
FUNDS
In case of proprietary and partnership
concerns, the funds may be raised either
from personal sources or borrowings
from banks, friends etc. In case of
company form of organisation, the
different sources of business finance
which are available may be categorised
as given in Table 8.1
As shown in the table, the sources
of funds can be categorised using
different basis viz., on the basis of the
period, source of generation and the
ownership. A brief explanation of these
classifications and the sources is
provided as follows:
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Table 8.1    Classification of Sources of Funds
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE
8.3.1 Period Basis
On the basis of period, the different
sources of funds can be categorised
into three parts. These are long-term
sources, medium-term sources and
short-term sources.
The long-term sources fulfil the
financial requirements of an enterprise
for a period exceeding 5 years and
include sources such as shares and
debentures, long-term borrowings and
loans from financial institutions. Such
financing is generally required for the
acquisition of fixed assets such as
equipment, plant, etc.
Where the funds are required for a
period of more than one year but less
than five years, medium-term sources
of finance are used. These sources
include borrowings from commercial
banks, public deposits, lease financing
and loans from financial institutions.
Short-term funds are those which
are required for a period not exceeding
one year. Trade credit, loans from
commercial banks and commercial
papers are some of the examples of the
sources that provide funds for short
duration.
Short-term financing is most
common for financing of current assets
such as accounts receivable and
inventories. Seasonal businesses that
must build inventories in anticipation
of selling requirements often need short-
term financing for the interim period
between seasons. Wholesalers and
manufacturers with a major portion of
their assets tied up in inventories or
receivables also require large amount
of funds for a short period.
8.3.2 Ownership Basis
On the basis of ownership, the sources
can be classified into ‘owner’s funds’
and ‘borrowed funds’. Owner’s funds
means funds that are provided by the
owners of an enterprise, which may
be a sole trader or partners or
shareholders of a company. Apart
from capital, it also includes profits
reinvested in the business. The
owner’s capital remains invested in the
business for a longer duration and is
not required to be refunded during the
life period of the business. Such capital
forms the basis on which owners
acquire their right of control of
management. Issue of equity shares
and retained earnings are the two
important sources from where owner’s
funds can be obtained.
‘Borrowed funds’ on the other
hand, refer to the funds raised through
loans or borrowings. The sources for
raising borrowed funds include loans
from commercial banks, loans from
financial institutions, issue of
debentures, public deposits and trade
credit. Such sources provide funds for
a specified period, on certain terms
and conditions and have to be repaid
after the expiry of that period. A fixed
rate of interest is paid by the
borrowers on such funds. At times it
puts a lot of burden on the business
as payment of interest is to be made
even when the earnings are low or
when loss is incurred. Generally,
borrowed funds are provided on the
security of some fixed assets.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
8.3.3 Source of Generation Basis
Another basis of categorising the sources
of funds can be whether the funds are
generated from within the organisation or
from external sources. Internal sources
of funds are those that are generated from
within the business. A business, for
example, can generate funds internally by
accelerating collection of receivables,
disposing of surplus inventories and
ploughing back its profit. The internal
sources of funds can fulfill only limited
needs of the business.
External sources of funds include
those sources that lie outside an
organisation, such as suppliers,
lenders, and investors. When large
amount of money is required to be
raised, it is generally done through the
use of external sources. External funds
may be costly as compared to  those
raised through internal sources. In
some cases, business is required to
mortgage its assets as security while
obtaining funds from external sources.
Issue of debentures, borrowing from
commercial banks and financial
institutions and accepting public
deposits are some of the examples of
external sources of funds commonly
used by business organisations.
SOURCES OF FINANCE
A business can raise funds from
various sources. Each of the source has
unique characteristics, which must be
properly understood so that the best
available source of raising funds can
be identified. There is not a single best
source of funds for all organisations.
Depending on the situation, purpose,
cost and associated risk, a choice may
be made about the source to be used.
For example, if a business wants to
raise funds for meeting fixed capital
requirements, long term funds may be
required which can be raised in the form
of owned funds or borrowed funds.
Similarly, if the purpose is to meet the
day-to-day requirements of business,
the short term sources may be tapped.
A brief description of various sources,
along with their advantages and
limitations is given below.
8.4.1 Retained Earnings
A company generally does not distribute
all its earnings amongst the
shareholders as dividends. A portion of
the net earnings may be retained in the
business for use in the future. This is
known as retained earnings. It is a
source of internal financing or self-
financing or ‘ploughing back of profits’.
The profit available for ploughing back
in an organisation depends on many
factors like net profits, dividend policy
and age of the organisation.
Merits
The merits of retained earning as a
source of finance are as follows:
(i) Retained earnings is a permanent
source of funds available to an
organisation;
(ii) It does not involve any explicit cost
in the form of interest, dividend or
floatation cost;
(iii) As the funds are generated
internally, there is a greater degree
of operational freedom and
flexibility;
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE
(iv) It enhances the capacity of the
business to absorb unexpected
losses;
(v) It may lead to increase in the
market price of the equity shares
of a company.
Limitations
Retained earning as a source of funds
has the following limitations:
(i) Excessive ploughing back may
cause dissatisfaction amongst the
shareholders as they would get
lower dividends;
(ii) It is an uncertain source of funds
as the profits of business are
fluctuating;
(iii) The opportunity cost associated
with these funds is not recognised
by many firms. This may lead to
sub-optimal use of the funds.
8.4.2 Trade Credit
Trade credit is the credit extended by
one trader to another for the purchase
of goods and services. Trade credit
facilitates the purchase of supplies
without immediate payment. Such
credit appears in the records of the
buyer of goods as ‘sundry creditors’ or
‘accounts payable’. Trade credit is
commonly
business
organisations as a source of short-term
financing. It is granted to those
customers who have reasonable amount
of financial standing and goodwill. The
volume and period of credit extended
depends on factors such as reputation
of the purchasing firm, financial position
of the seller, volume of purchases, past
record of payment and degree of
competition in the market. Terms of
trade credit may vary from one industry
to another and from one person to
another. A firm may also offer different
credit terms to different customers.
Merits
The important merits of trade credit are
as follows:
(i) Trade credit is a convenient and
continuous source of funds;
(ii) Trade credit may be readily
available in case the credit
worthiness of the customers is
known to the seller;
(iii) Trade credit needs to promote the
sales of an organisation;
(iv) If an organisation wants to increase
its inventory level in order to meet
expected rise in the sales volume
in the near future, it may use trade
credit to, finance the same;
(v) It does not create any charge on
the assets of the firm while
providing funds.
Limitations
Trade credit as a source of funds has
certain limitations, which are given as
follows:
(i) Availability of easy and flexible
trade credit facilities may induce a
firm to indulge in overtrading,
which may add to the risks of the
firm;
(ii) Only limited amount of funds can
be generated through trade credit;
(iii) It is generally a costly source of
funds as compared to most other
sources of raising money.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
8.4.3 Factoring
Factoring is a financial service under
which the ‘factor’ renders various
services which includes:
(a) Discounting of bills (with or without
recourse) and collection of the client’s
debts. Under this, the receivables on
account of sale of goods or services
are sold to the factor at a certain
discount. The factor becomes
responsible for all credit control and
debt collection from the buyer and
provides protection against any bad
debt losses to the firm. There are two
methods of factoring — recourse and
non-recourse. Under recourse
factoring, the client is not protected
against the risk of bad debts. On the
other hand, the factor assumes the
entire credit risk under non-recourse
factoring i.e., full amount of invoice
is paid to the client in the event of
the debt becoming bad.
(b) Providing information about credit
worthiness of prospective client’s etc.,
Factors hold large amounts of
information about the trading
histories of the firms. This can be
valuable to those who are using
factoring services and can thereby
avoid doing business with customers
having poor payment record. Factors
may also offer relevant consultancy
services in the areas of finance,
marketing, etc.
The factor charges fees for the
services rendered. Factoring
appeared on the Indian financial
scene only in the early nineties as a
result of RBI initiatives. The
organisations that provides such
services include SBI Factors and
Commercial Services Ltd., Canbank
Factors Ltd., Foremost Factors Ltd.,
State Bank of India, Canara Bank,
Punjab National Bank, Allahabad
Bank. In addition, many non-banking
finance companies and other
agencies provide factoring service.
Merits
The merits of factoring as a source of
finance are as follows:
(i) Obtaining funds through factoring
is cheaper than financing through
other means such as bank credit;
(ii) With cash flow accelerated by
factoring, the client is able to meet
his/her liabilities promptly as and
when these arise;
(iii) Factoring as a source of funds is
flexible and ensures a definite
pattern of cash inflows from credit
sales. It provides security for a
debt that a firm might otherwise
be unable to obtain;
(iv) It does not create any charge on
the assets of the firm;
(v) The client can concentrate on other
functional areas of business as the
responsibility of credit control is
shouldered by the factor.
Limitations
The limitations of factoring  as a source
of finance are as follows:
(i) This source is expensive when the
invoices are numerous and
smaller in amount;
(ii) The advance finance provided by
the factor firm is generally available
at a higher interest cost than the
usual rate of interest;
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE
(iii) The factor is a third party to the
customer who may not feel
comfortable while dealing with it.
8.4.4 Lease Financing
A lease is a contractual agreement
whereby one party i.e., the owner of an
asset grants the other party the right
to use the asset in return for a periodic
payment. In other words it is a renting
of an asset for some specified period.
The owner of the assets is called the
‘lessor’ while the party that uses the
assets is known as the ‘lessee’ (see
Box A). The lessee pays a fixed periodic
amount called lease rental to the lessor
for the use of the asset. The terms and
conditions regulating the lease
arrangements are given in the lease
contract. At the end of the lease period,
the asset goes back to the lessor. Lease
finance provides an important means
of modernisation and diversification to
the firm. Such type of financing is more
prevalent in the acquisition of such
assets as computers and electronic
equipment which become obsolete
quicker because of the fast changing
technological developments. While
making the leasing decision, the cost
of leasing an asset must be compared
with the cost of owning the same.
Merits
The important merits of lease financing
are as follows:
(i) It enables the lessee to acquire the
asset with a lower investment;
(ii) Simple documentation makes it
easier to finance assets;
(iii) Lease rentals paid by the lessee are
deductible for computing taxable
profits;
(iv) It provides finance without
diluting the ownership or control
of business;
(v) The lease agreement does not affect
the debt raising capacity of an
enterprise;
(vi) The risk of obsolescence is borne
by the lesser. This allows greater
flexibility to the lessee to replace
the asset.
Limitations
The limitations of lease financing are
given as below:
(i) A lease arrangement may impose
certain restrictions on the use of
assets. For example, it may not
allow the lessee to make any
alteration or modification in the
asset;
(ii) The normal business operations
may be affected in case the lease
is not renewed;
(iii) It may result in higher payout
obligation in case the equipment
is not found useful and the lessee
opts for premature termination of
the lease agreement; and
(iv) The lessee never becomes the
owner of the asset. It deprives him
of the residual value of the asset.
8.4.5 Public Deposits
The deposits that are raised by
organisations directly from the public
are known as public deposits. Rates of
interest offered on public deposits are
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
usually higher than that offered on
bank deposits. Any person who is
interested in depositing money in an
organisation can do so by filling up a
prescribed form. The organisation in
return issues a deposit receipt as
acknowledgment of the debt. Public
deposits can take care of both medium
and short-term financial requirements
of a business. The deposits are
beneficial to both the depositor as well
as to the organisation. While the
depositors get higher interest rate than
that offered by banks, the cost of
deposits to the company is less than
the cost of borrowings from banks.
Companies generally invite public
deposits for a period upto three years.
The acceptance of public deposits is
regulated by the Reserve Bank of India.
Box A
The Lessors
Specialised leasing companies: There are about 400-odd large companies
which have an organisational focus on leasing, and hence, are known as
leasing companies.
Banks and bank-subsidiaries: In February 1994, the RBI allowed banks to
directly enter leasing. Till then, only bank subsidiaries were allowed to engage
in leasing operations, which was regarded by the RBI as a non-banking activity.
Specialised financial institutions: A number of financial institutions, at
the Central as well as the State level in India, use the lease instrument along
with traditional financing instruments. Significantly, the ICICI is one of the
pioneers in Indian leasing.
Manufacturer-lessors: As competition forces the manufacturer to add value
to his sales, he finds the best way to sell the product on lease. Vendor leasing
is gaining increasing importance. Presently, vendors of automobiles, consumer
durables, etc., have alliances or joint ventures with leasing companies to offer
lease finance against their products.
The Lessees
Public sector undertakings: This market has witnessed a good rate of growth
in the past. There is an increasing number of both centrally as well as State-
owned entities which have resorted to lease financing.
Mid-market companies: The mid-market companies (i.e. companies with
reasonably good creditworthiness but with lower public profile) have resorted
to lease financing basically as an alternative to bank/institutional financing.
Consumers: Recent bad experience with corporate financing has focussed
attention towards retail funding of consumer durables. For instance, car
leasing is a big market in India today.
Government deptts. and authorities: One of the latest entrants in leasing
markets is the government itself. Recently the Department of
Telecommunications of the central government took the lead by floating tenders
for lease finance worth about Rs. 1000 crores.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE
Merits
The merits of public deposits are:
(i) The procedure of obtaining
deposits is simple and does not
contain restrictive conditions as are
generally there in a loan agreement;
(ii) Cost of public deposits is generally
lower than the cost of borrowings
from banks and financial
institutions;
(iii) Public deposits do not usually
create any charge on the assets of
the company. The assets can be
used as security for raising loans
from other sources;
(iv) As the depositors do not have
voting rights, the control of the
company is not diluted.
Limitations
The major limitation of public deposits
are as follows:
(i) New companies generally find it
difficult to raise funds through
public deposits;
(ii) It is an unreliable source of finance
as the public may not respond
when the company needs money;
(iii) Collection of public deposits may
prove difficult, particularly when
the size of deposits required is large.
8.4.6 Commercial Paper (CP)
Commercial Paper emerged as a source
of short term finance in our country in
the early nineties. Commercial paper is
an unsecured promissory note issued
by a firm to raise funds for a short
period, varying from 90 days to 364
days. It is issued by one firm to other
business firms, insurance companies,
pension funds and banks. The amount
raised by CP is generally very large. As
the debt is totally unsecured, the firms
having good credit rating can issue the
CP. Its regulation comes under the
purview of the Reserve Bank of India.
The merits and limitations of a
Commercial Paper are as follows:
Merits
(i) A commercial paper is sold on an
unsecured basis and does not
contain any restrictive conditions;
(ii) As it is a freely transferable
instrument, it has high liquidity;
(iii) It provides more funds compared
to other sources. Generally, the
cost of CP to the issuing firm is
lower than the cost of commercial
bank loans;
(iv) A commercial paper provides a
continuous source of funds. This
is because their maturity can be
tailored to suit the requirements
of the issuing firm. Further,
maturing commercial paper can
be repaid by selling new
commercial paper;
(v) Companies can park their excess
funds in commercial paper
thereby earning some good return
on the same.
Limitations
(i) Only financially sound and highly
rated firms can raise money
through commercial papers. New
and moderately rated firms are
not in a position to raise funds by
this method;
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(ii) The size of money that can be
raised through commercial paper
is limited to the excess liquidity
available with the suppliers of
funds at a particular time;
(iii) Commercial paper is an impersonal
method of financing. As such if a
firm is not in a position to redeem
its paper due to financial
difficulties, extending the maturity
of a CP is not possible.
8.4.7 Issue of Shares
The capital obtained by issue of shares
is known as share capital. The capital
of a company is divided into small units
called shares. Each share has its
nominal value. For example, a
company can issue 1,00,000 shares
of Rs. 10 each for a total value of
Rs. 10,00,000. The person holding the
share is known as shareholder. There
are two types of shares  normally issued
by a company. These are equity shares
and preference shares. The money
raised by issue of equity shares is called
equity share capital, while the money
raised by issue of preference shares is
called preference share capital.
(a) Equity Shares
Equity shares is the most
important source of raising long
term capital by a company. Equity
shares represent the ownership of
a company and thus the capital
raised by issue of such shares is
known as ownership capital or
owner’s funds. Equity share
capital is a prerequisite to the
creation of a company. Equity
shareholders do not get a fixed
dividend but are paid on the basis
of earnings by the company. They
are referred to as ‘residual owners’
since they receive what is left after
all other claims on the company’s
income and assets have been
settled. They enjoy the reward as
well as bear the risk of ownership.
Their liability, however, is limited
to the extent of capital contributed
by them in the company. Further,
through their right to vote, these
shareholders have a right to
participate in the management of
the company.
Merits
The important merits of raising funds
through issuing equity shares are given
as below:
(i) Equity shares are suitable for
investors who are willing to
assume risk for higher returns;
(ii) Payment of dividend to the equity
shareholders is not compulsory.
Therefore, there is no burden on
the company in this respect;
(iii) Equity
capital
serves
permanent capital as it is to be
repaid only at the time of
liquidation of a company. As it
stands last in the list of claims, it
provides a cushion for creditors,
in the event of winding up of a
company;
(iv) Equity capital provides credit
worthiness to the company and
confidence to prospective loan
providers;
(v) Funds can be raised through
equity issue without creating
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE
any charge on the assets of the
company. The assets of a company
are, therefore, free to be mortgaged
for the purpose of borrowings, if the
need be;
(vi) Democratic
control
management of the company is
assured due to voting rights of
equity shareholders.
Limitations
The major limitations of raising funds
through issue of equity shares are as
follows:
(i) Investors who want steady income
may not prefer equity shares as
equity shares get fluctuating
returns;
(ii) The cost of equity shares is
generally more as compared to the
cost of raising funds through other
sources;
(iii) Issue of additional equity shares
dilutes the voting power, and
earnings of existing equity
shareholders;
(iv) More formalities and procedural
delays are involved while raising
funds through issue of equity
share.
(b) Preference Shares
The capital raised by issue of
preference shares is called
preference share capital. The
preference shareholders enjoy a
preferential position over equity
shareholders in two ways:
(i) receiving a fixed rate of dividend,
out of the net profits of the
company, before any dividend is
declared for equity shareholders;
and (ii) receiving their capital after
the claims of the company’s
creditors have been settled, at the
time of liquidation. In other words,
as compared to the equity
shareholders, the preference
shareholders have a preferential
claim over dividend and repayment
of capital. Preference shares
resemble debentures as they bear
fixed rate of return. Also as the
dividend is payable only at the
discretion of the directors and only
out of profit after tax, to that extent,
these resemble equity shares.
Thus, preference shares have some
characteristics of both equity
shares and debentures. Preference
shareholders generally do not
enjoy any voting rights. A company
can issue different types of
preference shares (see Box B).
Merits
The merits of preference shares are given
as follows:
(i) Preference
shares
provide
reasonably steady income in the
form of fixed rate of return and
safety of investment;
(ii) Preference shares are useful for
those investors who want fixed
rate of return with comparatively
low risk;
(iii) It does not affect the control of
equity shareholders over the
management as preference
shareholders don’t have voting
rights;
(iv) Payment of fixed rate of dividend
to preference shares may enable a
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
company to declare higher rates
of dividend for the equity
shareholders in good times;
(v) Preference shareholders have a
preferential right of repayment
over equity shareholders in the event
of liquidation of a company;
(vi) Preference capital does not create
any sort of charge against the
assets of a company.
Limitations
The major limitations of preference
shares as source of business finance
are as follows:
(i) Preference shares are not suitable
for those investors who are willing
to take risk and are interested in
higher returns;
(ii) Preference capital dilutes the
claims of equity shareholders over
assets of the company;
(iii) The rate of dividend on preference
shares is generally higher than the
rate of interest on debentures;
(iv) As the dividend on these shares is
to be paid only when the company
earns profit, there is no assured
return for the investors. Thus,
these shares may not be very
attractive to the investors;
(v) The dividend paid is not
deductible from profits as expense.
Thus, there is no tax saving as in
the case of interest on loans.
8.4.8 Debentures
Debentures are an important
instrument for raising long term debt
capital. A company can raise funds
through issue of debentures, which
bear a fixed rate of interest. The
debenture issued by a company is an
acknowledgment that the company has
borrowed a certain amount of money,
which it promises to repay at a future
date. Debenture holders are, therefore,
termed as creditors of the company.
Debenture holders are paid a fixed
stated amount of interest at specified
Box B
Types of Preference Shares
Cumulative and Non-Cumulative: The preference shares which enjoy the
right to accumulate unpaid dividends in the future years, in case the same
is not paid during a year are known as cumulative preference shares. On
the other hand, on non-cumulative shares, dividend is not accumulated if it
is not paid in a particular year.
Participating and Non-Participating: Preference shares which have a right
to participate in the further surplus of a company shares which after dividend
at a certain rate has been paid on equity shares are called participating
preference shares. The non-participating preference are such which do not
enjoy such rights of participation in the profits of the company.
Convertible and Non-Convertible: Preference shares that can be converted
into equity shares within a specified period of time are known as convertible
preference shares. On the other hand, non-convertible shares are such that
cannot be converted into equity shares.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE
intervals say six months or one year.
Public issue of debentures requires
that the issue be rated by a credit rating
agency like CRISIL (Credit Rating and
Information Services of India Ltd.) on
aspects like track record of the
company, its profitability, debt
servicing capacity, credit worthiness
and the perceived risk of lending. A
company can issue different types of
debentures (see Box C and D). Issue of
Zero Interest Debentures (ZID) which
do not carry any explicit rate of interest
has also become popular in recent
years. The difference between the face
value of the debenture and its purchase
price is the return to the investor.
Merits
The merits of raising funds through
debentures are given as follows:
(i) It is preferred by investors who
want fixed income at lesser risk;
(ii) Debentures are fixed charge funds
and do not participate in profits of
the company;
(iii) The issue of debentures is suitable
in the situation when the sales and
earnings are relatively stable;
(iv) As debentures do not carry
voting rights, financing through
debentures does not dilute control
of equity shareholders on
management;
Financing through debentures is
less costly as compared to cost of
preference or equity capital as the
interest payment on debentures is
tax deductible.
Limitations
Debentures as source of funds has
certain limitations. These are given as
follows:
(i) As fixed charge instruments,
debentures put a permanent
burden on the earnings of a
company. There is a greater risk
when earnings of the company
fluctuate;
(ii) In case of redeemable debentures,
the company has to make
provisions for repayment on the
specified date, even during periods
of financial difficulty;
(iii) Each company has certain
borrowing capacity. With the issue
of debentures, the capacity of a
company to further borrow funds
reduces.
8.4.9 Commercial Banks
Commercial banks occupy a vital
position as they provide funds for
different purposes as well as for different
time periods. Banks extend loans to
Box C
Companies issuing different Debentures
Mahindra and Mahindra was the first company in India to issue convertible
Zero Interest Debentures in January 1990. Recently, the board of Titan Industries
has approved the issue of partly convertible debentures on a rights basis to
raise around Rs. 126.83 crore. The issue will comprise 21 lakh partly convertible
debentures of Rs. 600 each in the ratio of one partly convertible debenture for
every 20 equity shares held in the company to the shareholders.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
firms of all sizes and in many ways, like,
cash credits, overdrafts, term loans,
purchase/discounting of bills, and
issue of letter of credit. The rate of
interest charged by banks depends
on various factors such as the
characteristics of the firm and the level
of interest rates in the economy. The
loan is repaid either in lump sum or in
installments.
Bank credit is not a permanent
source of funds. Though banks have
started extending loans for longer
periods, generally such loans are used
for medium to short periods. The
borrower is required to provide some
security or create a charge on the assets
of the firm before a loan is sanctioned
by a commercial bank.
Merits
The merits of raising funds from a
commercial bank are as follows:
(i) Banks provide timely assistance to
business by providing funds as
and when needed by it.
(ii) Secrecy of business can be
maintained as the information
supplied to the bank by the
borrowers is kept confidential;
(iii) Formalities such as issue of
prospectus and underwriting are
not required for raising loans from
a bank. This, therefore, is an easier
source of funds;
(iv) Loan from a bank is a flexible
source of finance as the loan
amount can be increased
according to business needs and
can be repaid in advance when
funds are not needed.
Limitations
The major limitations of commercial
banks as a source of finance are as
follows:
Box D
Types of Debentures
Secured and Unsecured: Secured debentures are such which create a charge
on the assets of the company, thereby mortgaging the assets of the company.
Unsecured debentures on the other hand do not carry any charge or security
on the assets of the company.
Registered and Bearer: Registered debentures are those which are duly
recorded in the register of debenture holders maintained by the company.
These can be transferred only through a regular instrument of transfer. In
contrast, the debentures which are transferable by mere delivery are called
bearer debentures.
Convertible and Non-Convertible: Convertible debentures are those
debentures that can be converted into equity shares after the expiry of a
specified period. On the other hand, non-convertible debentures are those
which cannot be converted into equity shares.
First and Second: Debentures that are repaid before other debentures are
repaid are known as first debentures. The second debentures are those which
are paid after the first debentures have been paid back.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE
(i) Funds are generally available for
short periods and its extension or
renewal is uncertain and difficult;
(ii) Banks make detailed investigation
of the company’s affairs, financial
structure etc., and may also ask for
security of assets and personal
sureties. This makes the procedure
of obtaining funds slightly
difficult;
(iii) In some cases, difficult terms and
conditions are imposed by banks.
for the grant of loan. For example,
restrictions may be imposed on the
sale of mortgaged goods, thus
making normal business working
difficult.
8.4.10 Financial Institutions
The government has established a
number of financial institutions all over
the country to provide finance to
business organisations (see Box E).
These institutions are established by
the central as well as state governments.
They provide both owned capital and
loan capital for long and medium term
requirements and supplement the
traditional financial agencies like
commercial
banks.
these
institutions aim at promoting the
industrial development of a country,
these are also called ‘development
banks’. In addition to providing
financial assistance, these institutions
also conduct market surveys and
provide technical assistance and
managerial services to people who run
the enterprises. This source of financing
is considered suitable when large funds
for longer duration are required for
expansion, reorganisation and
modernisation of an enterprise.
Merits
The merits of raising funds through
financial institutions are as follows:
(i) Financial institutions provide long-
term finance, which are not
provided by commercial banks;
(ii) Besides providing funds, many of
these institutions provide financial,
managerial and technical advice
and consultancy to business firms;
(iii) Obtaining loan from financial
institutions increases the goodwill
of the borrowing company in the
capital market. Consequently,
such a company can raise funds
easily from other sources as well;
(iv) As repayment of loan can be made
in easy instalments, it does not
prove to be much of a burden on
the business;
(v) The funds are made available even
during periods of depression, when
other sources of finance are not
available.
Limitations
The major limitations of raising funds
from financial institutions are as given
below:
(i) Financial institutions follow rigid
criteria for grant of loans. Too many
formalities make the procedure
time consuming and expensive;
(ii) Certain restrictions such as
restriction on dividend payment are
imposed on the powers of the
borrowing company by the
financial institutions;
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Box E
Special Financial Institutions
Industrial Finance Corporation of India (IFCI): It was established in July
1948 as a statutory corporation under the Industrial Finance Corporation
Act, 1948. Its objectives include assistance towards balanced regional
development and encouraging new entrepreneurs to enter into the priority
sectors of the economy. IFCI has also contributed to the development of
management education in the country.
State Financial Corporations (SFC): The State Financial Corporations Act,
1951 empowered the State Governments to establish State Financial
Corporations in their respective regions for providing medium and short term
finance to industries which are outside the scope of the IFCI. Its scope is wider
than IFCI, since the former covers not only public limited companies but also
private limited companies, partnership firms and proprietary concerns.
Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India (ICICI): This was
established in 1955 as a public limited company under the Companies Act.
ICICI assists the creation, expansion and modernisation of industrial
enterprises exclusively in the private sector. The corporation has also
encouraged the participation of foreign capital in the country.
Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI): It was established in 1964
under the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964 with an objective to
coordinate the activities of other financial institutions including commercial
banks. The bank performs three types of functions, namely, assistance to
other financial institutions, direct assistance to industrial concerns, and
promotion and coordination of financial-technical services.
State Industrial Development Corporations (SIDC): Many state governments
have set up State Industrial Development Corporations for the purpose of
promoting industrial development in their respective states. The objectives of
the SIDCs differ from one state to another.
Unit Trust of India (UTI): It was established by the Government of India in
1964 under the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963. The basic objective of UTI is to
mobilise the community’s savings and channelise them into productive
ventures. For this purpose, it sanctions direct assistance to industrial
concerns, invests in their shares and debentures, and participates with other
financial institutions.
Industrial Investment Bank of India Ltd.: It was initially set up as a   primary
agency for rehabilitation of sick units and was known as Industrial
Reconstruction Corporation of India. It was reconstituted and renamed as the
Industrial Reconstruction Bank of India in 1985 and again in 1997 its name
was changed to Industrial Investment Bank of India. The Bank assists sick
units in the reorganisation of their share capital, improvement in management
system, and provision of finance at liberal terms.
Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC): LIC was set up in 1956 under the
LIC Act, 1956 after nationalising 245 existing insurance companies. It mobilises
the community’s savings in the form of insurance premia and makes it available
to industrial concerns, both public as well as private, in the form of direct
loans and underwriting of and subscription to shares and debentures.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE
(iii) Financial institutions may have
their nominees on the Board of
Directors of the borrowing
company thereby restricting the
powers of the company.
INTERNATIONAL FINANCING
In addition to the sources discussed
above, there are various avenues for
organisations
raise
funds
internationally. With the opening up of
an economy and the operations of the
business organisations becoming
global, Indian companies have an
access to funds in global capital market.
Various international sources from
where funds may be generated include:
(i) Commercial Banks: Commercial
banks all over the world extend foreign
currency loans for business purposes.
They are an important source of
financing non-trade international
operations. The types of loans and
services provided by banks vary from
country to country. For example,
Standard Chartered emerged as a
major source of foreign currency loans
to the Indian industry.
(ii) International Agencies and
Development Banks:  A number
of international agencies and
development banks have emerged over
the years to finance international trade
and business. These bodies provide
long and medium term loans and
grants to promote the development of
economically backward areas in the
world. These bodies were set up by the
Governments of developed countries of
the world at national, regional and
international levels for funding various
projects. The more notable among them
include
International
Finance
Corporation (IFC), EXIM Bank and
Asian Development Bank.
(iii) International Capital Markets:
Modern organisations including
multinational companies depend upon
sizeable borrowings in rupees as well
as in foreign currency. Prominent
financial instruments used for this
purpose are:
(a) Global Depository Receipts
(GDR’s): The local currency shares
of a company are delivered to the
depository bank. The depository
bank issues depository receipts
against these shares. Such
depository receipts denominated in
US dollars are known as Global
Depository Receipts (GDR). GDR is
a negotiable instrument and can be
traded freely like any other security.
In the Indian context, a GDR is an
instrument issued abroad by an
Indian company to raise funds in
some foreign currency and is listed
and traded on a foreign stock
exchange. A holder of GDR can at
any time convert it into the number
of shares it represents. The holders
of GDRs do not carry any voting
rights but only dividends and
capital appreciation. Many Indian
companies such as Infosys,
Reliance, Wipro and ICICI have
raised money through issue of
GDRs (see Box F).
(b) American Depository Receipts
(ADR’s): The depository receipts
issued by a company in the USA
are known as American Depository
Receipts. ADRs are bought and sold
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
in American markets like regular
stocks. It is similar to a GDR except
that it can be issued only to
American citizens and can be listed
and traded on a stock exchange
of USA.
(c) Foreign Currency Convertible
Bonds (FCCB’s): Foreign currency
convertible bonds are equity linked
debt securities that are to be
converted into equity or depository
receipts after a specific period. Thus,
a holder of FCCB has the option of
either converting them into equity
shares at a predetermined price or
exchange rate, or retaining the
bonds. The FCCB’s are issued in a
foreign currency and carry a fixed
interest rate which is lower than the
rate of any other similar non-
convertible debt instrument.
FCCB’s are listed and traded in
foreign stock exchanges. FCCB’s
are very similar to the convertible
debentures issued in India.
FACTORS AFFECTING THE CHOICE
OF THE SOURCE OF FUNDS
Financial needs of a business are of
different types — long term, short term,
fixed and fluctuating. Therefore,
business firms resort to different types
of sources for raising funds. Short-term
borrowings offer the benefit of reduced
cost due to reduction of idle capital, but
long – term borrowings are  considered
a necessity on many grounds. Similarly
Box F
Companies rush to float GDR issues
It’s not the IPO (initial public offer) market alone which is humming with activity.
Companies — mostly small and medium-sized — are rushing to the overseas
market to raise funds through Global Depository Receipts (GDRs). Five firms
have already raised $464 million (around Rs 2,040 crore) from the international
markets through GDR offerings this year. This is almost double of $228.6 mn
raised by nine companies in 2004 and $63.09 mn mobilised by four companies
in 2003. Nearly 20 companies are waiting in the wings to launch GDR issues
worth over $1 bn in the coming months. On the other hand, though the number
of companies going for FCCB (Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds) issues has
come down, several companies are still in the FCCB race, thanks to lax rules
and disclosure norms. For example, Aarti Drugs Ltd. has decided to raise
$12 mn by issuing FCCBs.
Significantly, small and medium companies are now taking the GDR route to
raise funds this time even for a small amount. For example, Opto Circuits has
decided to go for a GDR issue of $20 mn with a green-shoe option of $5 mn. The
share price of this company shot up by 370 per cent from Rs 34 on May 17, 2004
to around Rs 160 on the BSE recently. Videocon Industries, Lyka Labs, Indian
Overseas Bank, Jubilant Organosys, Maharashtra Seamless, Moschip
Semiconductors, and Crew BOS are planning GDR issues. Two banks — UTI
Bank ($240 million) and Centurion Bank ($70 million) — raised funds from the
GDR market recently. Companies now prefer GDR over FCCB issues in view of
the rise in interest rates abroad.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE
equity capital has a role to play in the
scheme for raising funds in the
corporate sector.
As no source of funds is devoid of
limitations, it is advisable to use a
combination of sources, instead of
relying only on a single source. A
number of factors affect the choice of
this combination, making it a very
complex decision for the business. The
factors that affect the choice of source
of finance are briefly discussed below:
(i) Cost: There are two types of cost viz.,
the cost of procurement of funds and
cost of utilising the funds. Both these
costs should be taken into account
while deciding about the source of
funds that will be used by an
organisation.
(ii) Financial strength and stability
of operations: The financial strength
of a business is also a key determinant.
In the choice of source of funds
business should be in a sound financial
position so as to be able to repay the
principal amount and interest on the
borrowed amount. When the earnings
of the organisation are not stable, fixed
charged funds like preference shares
and debentures should be carefully
selected as these add to the financial
burden of the organisation.
(iii) Form of  organisation and legal
status: The form of business
organisation and status influences the
choice of a source for raising money. A
partnership firm, for example, cannot
raise money by issue of equity shares
as these can be issued only by a joint
stock company.
(iv) Purpose and time period:
Business should plan according to the
time period for which the funds are
required. A short-term need for
example can be met through borrowing
funds at low rate of interest through
trade credit, commercial paper, etc. For
long term finance, sources such as
issue of shares and debentures are
more appropriate. Similarly, the
purpose for which funds are required
need to be considered so that the
source is matched with the use. For
example, a long-term business
expansion plan should not be financed
by a bank overdraft which will be
required to be repaid in the short term.
(v) Risk profile: Business should
evaluate each of the source of finance
in terms of the risk involved. For
example, there is a least risk in equity
as the share capital has to be repaid
only at the time of winding up and
dividends need not be paid if no profits
are available. A loan on the other hand,
has a repayment schedule for both the
principal and the interest. The interest
is required to be paid irrespective of the
firm earning a profit or incurring a loss.
(vi) Control: A particular source of
fund may affect the control and power
of the owners on the management of a
firm. Issue of equity shares may mean
dilution of the control. For example, as
equity share holders enjoy voting
rights, financial institutions may take
control of the assets or impose
conditions as part of the loan
agreement. Thus, business firm should
choose a source keeping in mind the
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
extent to which they are willing to share
their control over business.
(vii) Effect on credit worthiness: The
dependence of business on certain
sources may affect its credit worthiness
in the market. For example, issue of
secured debentures may affect the
interest of unsecured creditors of the
company and may adversely affect
their willingness to extend further
loans as credit to the company.
(viii) Flexibility and ease: Another
aspect affecting the choice of a
source of finance is the flexibility and
ease of obtaining funds. Restrictive
provisions, detailed investigation and
documentation in case of borrowings
from banks and financial institutions
for example may be the reason that a
business organisations may not
prefer it, if other options are readily
available.
(ix) Tax benefits: Various sources
may also be weighed in terms of their
tax benefits. For example, while the
dividend on preference shares is not
tax deductible, interest paid on
debentures and loan is tax deductible
and may, therefore, be preferred by
organisations seeking tax advantage.
Key Terms
Finance
Owned capital
Fixed capital
Working capital
Borrowed capital
Short term sources
Restrictive conditions
Long term sources
Charge on assets
Voting power
Fixed charge funds
Accounts receivable
Bill discounting
Factoring
FCCBs
SUMMARY
Meaning and significance of business finance: Finance required by
business to establish and run its operations is known as business finance.
No business can function without adequate amount of funds for undertaking
various activities. The funds are required for purchasing fixed assets (fixed
capital requirement), for running day-to-day operations (working capital
requirement), and for undertaking growth and expansion plans in a business
organisation.
Classification of sources of funds: Various sources of funds available to a
business can be classified according to three major basis, which are
(i) time period (long, medium and short term), (ii) ownership (owner’s funds
and borrowed funds), and (iii) source of generation (internal sources and
external sources).
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE
Long, medium and short-term sources of funds: The sources that provide
funds for a period exceeding 5 years are called long-term sources. The
sources that fulfill the financial requirements for the period of more than
one year but not exceeding 5 years are called medium term sources and
the sources that provide funds for a period not exceeding one year are
termed as short term sources.
Owner’s funds and borrowed funds: Owner’s funds refer to the funds that
are provided by the owners of an enterprise. Borrowed capital, on the other
hand, refers to the funds that are generated through loans or borrowings
from other individuals or institutions.
Internal and external sources: Internal sources of capital are those sources
that are generated within the business say through ploughing back of profits.
External sources of capital, on the other hand are those that are outside
the business such as finance provided by suppliers, lenders, and investors.
Sources of business finance: The sources of funds available to a business
include retained earnings, trade credit, factoring, lease financing, public
deposits, commercial paper, issue of shares and debentures, loans from
commercial banks, financial institutions and international sources of
finance.
Retained earnings: The portion of the net earnings of the company that is
not distributed as dividends is known as retained earnings. The amount of
retained earnings available depends on the dividend policy of the company.
It is generally used for growth and expansion of the company.
Trade credit: The credit extended by one trader to another for purchasing
goods or services is known as trade credit. Trade credit facilitates the
purchase of supplies on credit. The terms of trade credit vary from one
industry to another and are specified on the invoice. Small and new firms
are usually more dependent on trade credit, as they find it relatively difficult
to obtain funds from other sources.
Factoring: Factoring has emerged as a popular source of short-term funds
in recent years. It is a financial service whereby the factor is responsible
for all credit control and debt collection from the buyer and provides
protection against any bad-debt losses to the firm. There are two methods
of factoring — recourse and non-recourse factoring.
Lease financing: A lease is a contractual agreement whereby the owner of
an asset (lessor) grants the right to use the asset to the other party (lessee).
The lessor charges a periodic payment for renting of an asset for some
specified period called lease rent.
Public deposits: A company can raise funds by inviting the public to deposit
their savings with their company. Pubic deposits may take care of both long
and short-term financial requirements of business. Rate of interest on deposits
is usually higher than that offered by banks and other financial institutions.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Commercial paper (CP): It is an unsecured promissory note issued by a
firm to raise funds for a short period The maturity period of commercial
paper usually ranges from 90 days to 364 days. Being unsecured, only
firms having good credit rating can issue the CP and its regulation comes
under the purview of the Reserve Bank of India.
Issue of equity shares: Equity shares represents the ownership capital of
a company. Due to their fluctuating earnings, equity shareholders are called
risk bearers of the company. These shareholders enjoy higher returns during
prosperity and have a say in the management of a company, through
exercising their voting rights.
Issue of preference shares: These shares provide a preferential right to
the shareholders with respect to payment of earnings and the repayment
of capital. Investors who prefer steady income without undertaking higher
risks prefer these shares. A company can issue different types of preference
shares.
Issue of debentures: Debenture represents the loan capital of a company
and the holders of debentures are the creditors. These are the fixed charged
funds that carry a fixed rate of interest. The issue of debentures is suitable
in the situation when the sales and earnings of the company are relatively
stable.
Commercial banks: Banks provide short and medium-term loans to firms
of all sizes. The loan is repaid either in lump sum or in instalments. The
rate of interest charged by a bank depends upon factors including the
characteristics of the borrowing firm and the level of interest rates in the
economy.
Financial institutions: Both central and state governments have
established a number of financial institutions all over the country to provide
industrial finance to companies engaged in business. They are also called
development banks. This source of financing is considered suitable when
large funds are required for expansion, reorganisation and modernisation
of the enterprise.
International financing: With liberalisation and globalisation of the
economy, Indian companies have started generating funds from
international markets. The international sources from where the funds
can be procured include foreign currency loans from commercial banks,
financial assistance provided by international agencies and development
banks, and issue of  financial instruments (GDRs/ ADRs/ FCCBs) in
international capital markets.
Factors affecting choice: An effective appraisal of various sources must
be instituted by the business to achieve its main objectives. The selection
of a source of business finance depends on factors such as cost, financial
strength, risk profile, tax benefits and flexibility of obtaining funds. These
factors should be analysed together while making the decision for the choice
of an appropriate source of funds.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE
EXERCISES
Multiple Choice Questions
Tick (9) the correct answer out of the given alternatives
Equity shareholders are called
Owners of the company
Partners of the company
Executives of the company
Guardian of the company
The term ‘redeemable’ is used for
Preference shares
Commercial paper
Equity shares
Public deposits
Funds required for purchasing current assets is an example of
Fixed capital requirement
Ploughing back of profits
Working capital requirement
Lease financing
ADRs are issued in
Canada
China
India
Public deposits are the deposits that are raised directly from
The public
The directors
The auditors
The owners
Under the lease agreement, the lessee gets the right to
Share profits earned
Participate in the
by the lessor
management of the
organisation
Use the asset for a
Sell the assets
specified period
Debentures represent
Fixed capital of the company
Permanent capital of the
company
Fluctuating capital of
Loan capital of the
the company
company
Under the factoring arrangement, the factor
Produces and distributes
Makes the payment on
the goods or services
behalf of the client
Collects the client’s debt
Transfer the goods from
or account receivables
one place to another
9. The maturity period of a commercial paper usually ranges from
20 to 40 days
60 to 90 days
120 to 365 days
90 to 364 days
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
10. Internal sources of capital are those that are
generated through outsiders
generated through loans
such as suppliers
from commercial banks
generated through issue
generated within
of shares
the business
Short Answer Questions
What is business finance? Why do businesses need funds? Explain.
List sources of raising long-term and short-term finance.
What is the difference between internal and external sources of raising
funds? Explain.
What preferential rights are enjoyed by preference shareholders.
Explain.
Name any three special financial institutions and state their objectives.
What is the difference between GDR and ADR? Explain.
Long Answer Questions
Explain trade credit and bank credit as sources of short-term finance
for business enterprises.
Discuss the sources from which a large industrial enterprise can raise
capital for financing modernisation and expansion.
What advantages does issue of debentures provide over the issue of
equity shares?
State the merits and demerits of public deposits and retained earnings
as methods of business finance.
Discuss the financial instruments used in international financing.
What is a commercial paper? What are its advantages and limitations.
Projects/Assignment
Collect information about the companies that have issued debentures
in recent years. Give suggestions to make debentures more popular.
Institutional financing has gained importance in recent years. In a
scrapbook paste detailed information about various financial
institutions that provide financial assistance to Indian companies.
On the basis of the sources discussed in the chapter, suggest suitable
options to solve the financial problem of the restaurant owner.
Prepare a comparative chart of all the sources of finance.
© NCERT
not to be republished
CHAPTER 9
SMALL BUSINESS
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
explain the meaning and nature of small business;
appreciate the role of small business in India;
analyse the problems of small business; and
classify the different forms of assistance provided by the
government to small business, particularly in rural and hilly areas.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
INTRODUCTION
In the pervious chapters, the concepts
of business, trade, commerce and
industry were discussed. The present
chapter discusses the issue of size of
business, with reference to small
industries and small business
establishments. It also describes the
role of small business and the major
problems faced by the small sector
units. Further, the assistance provided
by the government to small business,
particularly in the rural and hilly areas
has been discussed.
MEANING AND NATURE OF SMALL
BUSINESS
In India, the ‘village and small
industries sector’ consists of both
‘traditional’ and ‘modern’ small
industries. This sector has eight
subgroups. They are handlooms,
handicrafts, coir, sericulture, khadi and
village industries, small scale
industries and powerlooms. The last
two come under the modern small
industries, while the others come under
traditional industries. Village and small
industries together provide the largest
employment opportunities in India.
Before understanding the nature
and meaning of small business, it is
important to know how size is defined
in our country, with reference to small
industries and small business
establishments. Several parameters can
be used to measure the size of business
units. These include the number of
persons employed in business, capital
invested in business, volume of output
or value of output of business and
power consumed for business activities.
However, there is no parameter which
is without limitations. Depending on the
need the measures can vary.
Amar, Akbar and Anthony are three good friends who have completed a vocational
course in entrepreneurship, after their school education. Finding the job market
tough, they were contemplating the idea of setting up a small business, using the
skills they had learnt in their course. However, they knew very little about business.
They were wondering what business to start, where to locate it, how to procure
machinery and materials needed for the business, how to raise money and how
to market. They came across a notification given by the District Industries Centre
located near the Industrial Estate in Balanagar, Ranga Reddy district of Andhra
Pradesh regarding a seminar on government’s assistance for a small business,
aimed at young entrepreneurs. Excited with the news, the three friends decided
to attend the seminar. They were told about the financial and other assistance
offered by the Central and State Governments under the Rural Employment
Generation Programme to the educated youth. They found that toys were in
demand and decided to manufacture toys. They started a small scale industry in
their village by taking financial assistance with the help of Khadi and Village
Industries Commission. Today, they are successful makers of toys and in the
near future, they plan to get into export market as well.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SMALL BUSINESS
The definition used by the
Government of India to describe small
industries is based on the investment
in plant and machinery. This measure
seeks to keep in view the socio-economic
environment in India where capital is
scarce and labour is abundant. One
more important point to note is that a
definition exists only for small and tiny
units but not for large and medium
units. Medium and large sized
enterprises are not defined. Anything
that does not fall under the definition
of small can be large or medium.
Taking capital invested as the basis the
small business units in India can fall
under any of the following categories:
(i) Small scale industry: A small scale
industrial undertaking is defined as
one in which the investment in fixed
assets of plant and machinery does not
exceed rupees one crore. However, to
cater to the needs of small industries
whose thrust is on export promotion
and modernisation, investment ceiling
in plant and machinery is rupees
five crores.
(ii) Ancillary small industrial unit:
The small scale industry can enjoy the
status of an ancillary small industry if
it supplies not less than 50 per cent of
its production to another industry,
referred to as the parent unit. The
ancillary
small
industry
manufacture parts, components, sub-
assemblies, tools or intermediate
products for the parent unit. Apart from
catering to the needs of the parent unit,
it can do business on its own. Ancillary
units have the advantage of assured
demand from parent units. Normally,
the parent unit assists the ancillary
unit by giving technical guidance as
well as financial help.
(iii) Export oriented units: The small
scale industry can enjoy the status of
an export oriented unit if it exports
more than 50 per cent of its production.
It can avail the incentives like export
subsidies and other concessions offered
by the government for exporting units.
(iv) Small scale industries owned
and managed by women entre-
preneurs: An enterprise promoted by
women entrepreneurs is a small scale
industrial unit in which she/they
individually or jointly have share
capital of not less than 51 per cent.
Such units can avail the special
concessions offered by the government,
like low interest rates on loans, etc.
(v) Tiny industrial units: A tiny unit is
defined as an industrial or business
enterprise whose investment in plant and
machinery is not more than Rs. 25 lakhs.
(vi) Small scale service and business
(Industry related) enterprises: A
small scale service and business
enterprise is one whose investment in
fixed assets of plant and machinery
excluding land and building does not
exceed Rs. 10 lakhs.
(vii) Micro business enterprises:
Within the tiny and small business
sector, micro enterprises are those whose
investment in plant and machinery
does not exceed rupees one lakh.
(viii) Village industries: Village
Industry has been defined as any
industry located in a rural area which
produces any goods, renders any
service with or without the use of power
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
and in which the fixed capital investment
per head or artisan or worker does not
exceed Rs. 50,000 or such other sum as
may be specified by the central
government, from time to time.
(ix) Cottage industries: These are also
known as Rural Industries or
Traditional industries. They are not
defined by capital investment criteria
as in the case of other small scale
industries. However, cottage industries
are characterised by certain features
like the following:
these are organised by
individuals, with private
resources;
normally use family labour and
locally available talent;
the equipment used is simple;
capital investment is small;
produce simple products,
normally
their
premises;
production of goods using
indigenous technology.
ADMINISTRATIVE SETUP FOR THE
SMALL SCALE, AGRO AND RURAL
INDUSTRIES
The Government of India created the
ministry of Small Scale Industries and
Agro and Rural Industries as the nodal
ministry for formulation of policy and
coordination of central assistance for the
promotion and development of small
scale industries in India. The Ministry
was bifurcated into two separate
ministries, viz., Ministry of Small Scale
Industries and Ministry of Agro and
Rural Industries in September, 2001.
The Ministry of Small Scale Indus-
tries designs policies, programmes, and
schemes for the promotion and growth
of SSIs. The Small Industries
Development Organisation (SIDO), also
known as the Office of the Development
Commissioner (SSI) which is attached
to this ministry is responsible for
implementing and monitoring of
various policies and programmes
formulated.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SMALL BUSINESS
Ministry of Agro and Rural
Industries is the nodal agency for
coordination and development of
Village and Khadi industries, tiny and
micro enterprises in both urban and
rural areas. It also implements Prime
Minister’s Rojgar Yojana. The various
policies, programmes and schemes
related to agro and rural industries are
implemented by the ministry through
the Khadi and Village Industries
Commission (KVIC), Handicrafts Board,
Coir Board, Silk Board etc.
State Governments also execute
different
promotional
developmental projects and schemes to
provide number of supporting
incentives for development and
promotion of SSIs in their respective
states. These are executed through  the
State Directorate of Industries, who has
District Industries Centers (DICs)
under it to implement central/state
level schemes.
ROLE OF SMALL BUSINESS IN INDIA
Small Scale Industries in India enjoy a
distinct position in view of their
contribution to the socio-economic
development of the country. The
following points highlight their
contribution.
(i) Small industries in India account
for 95 per cent of the industrial
units in the country. They
contribute almost 40 per cent of
the gross industrial value added
and 45 per cent of the total exports
(direct and indirect exports) from
India.
(ii) Small industries are the second
largest employers of human
resources, after agriculture.
They generate more number of
employment opportunities per
unit of capital invested compared
to large industries. They are,
therefore, considered to be more
labour intensive and less capital
intensive. This is a boon for a
labour surplus country like India.
(iii) Small industries in our country
supply an enormous variety of
products which include mass
consumption goods, readymade
garments,
hosiery
goods,
stationery items, soaps and
detergents, domestic utensils,
leather, plastic and rubber goods,
processed foods and vegetables,
wood and steel furniture, paints,
varnishes, safety matches, etc.
Among the sophisticated items
manufactured are electric and
electronic goods like televisions,
calculators, electro-medical
equipment, electronic teaching
aids like overhead projectors, air
conditioning equipment, drugs
and pharmaceuticals, agricultural
tools and equipment and several
other engineering products. A
special mention should be made of
handlooms, handicrafts and other
products from traditional village
industries in view of their export
value. (see Box A which highlights
the major industry groups that
come under the purview of small
industries as per the classification
laid down by the government.)
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(iv) The contribution of small
industries to the balanced regional
development of our country is
noteworthy. Small industries
which produce simple products
using simple technologies and
depend on locally available
resources both material and labour
can be set up anywhere in the
country. Since they can be widely
spread without any locational
constraints, the benefits of
industrialisation can be reaped by
every region. They, thus, contribute
significantly to the balanced
development of the country.
(v) Small industries provide ample
opportunity for entrepreneurship.
The latent skills and talents of
people can be channelled into
business ideas which can be
converted into reality with little
capital investment and almost nil
formalities to start a small business.
Amar, Akbar and Anthony in our
story proved  that a small business
can be started, if one has the
determination to achieve.
(vi) Small industries also enjoy
the advantage of low cost of
production. Locally available
resources are less expensive.
Establishment and running costs
of small industries are on the lower
side because of low overhead
expenses. Infact, the low cost of
production which small industries
enjoy is their competitive strength.
(vii) Due to the small size of the
organisations, quick and timely
decisions can be taken without
consulting many people as
it happens in large sized
organisations. New business
opportunities can be captured at
the right time.
(viii) Small industries are best suited
for customised production. i.e.
designing the product as per the
tastes/preferences/needs of
individual customers, say for an
example tailor-made shirt or
trouser. The recent trend in the
market is to go in for customised
production of even non-traditional
products such as computers and
other such products. They can
produce according to the needs
of the customers as they use
simple and flexible production
techniques.
(ix) Last but not the least, small
industries have inherent strength
of adaptability and a personal
touch and therefore maintain good
personal relations with both
customers and employees. The
government does not have to
interfere in the functioning of a
small scale unit. Due to the small
size of the organisation quick and
timely decision can be taken
without consulting many people
as in large sized organisations.
New business opportunities can
be captured at the right time, thus
providing healthy competition to
big business which is good for the
economy.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SMALL BUSINESS
ROLE OF SMALL BUSINESS IN
RURAL INDIA
Traditionally, rural households in
developing countries have been viewed
as exclusively engaged in agriculture.
There is an increasing evidence that
rural households can have highly
varied and multiple sources of income
and that, rural households can and do
participate in a wide range of non-
agricultural activities such as wage
employment and self-employment in
commerce, manufacturing and
services, along with the traditional rural
activities of farming and agricultural
labour. This can be largely attributed
to the policy initiatives taken by the
Government of India, to encourage and
promote the setting up of agro-based
rural industries.
The emphasis on village and small
scale industries has always been an
integral part of India’s industrial
strategy, more so, after the second Five
Year Plan. Cottage and rural industries
play an important role in providing
employment opportunities in the rural
areas, especially for the traditional
artisans and the weaker sections of
society. Development of rural and
village industries can also prevent
migration of rural population to urban
areas in search of employment.
Village and small industries are
significant as producers of consumer
goods and absorbers of surplus labour,
thereby addressing the problems of
poverty and unemployment. These
industries contribute amply to other
socio-economic aspects, such as
Box A
Major Industry Groups in the Small Scale Sector
Food Products
Chemical and Chemical
Products
Basic Metal Industries
Metal Products
Electrical Machinery and Parts
Rubber and Plastic Products
Machinery and Parts except
Electrical Goods
Hosiery and Garments — Wool
Products
Non-metallic Mineral Products
Paper Products and Printing
Transport Equipment and
Parts
Leather and Leather Products
Miscellaneous Manufacturing
Industries
Beverages, Tobacco and
Tobacco Products
Repair Services
Cotton Textiles
Wool, Silk, Synthetic Fibre and
Textiles
Jute, Hemp and Mesta Textiles
Other Services
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
reduction in income inequalities,
dispersed development of industries
and linkage with other sectors of the
economy.
In fact promotion of small scale
industries and rural industrialisation
has been considered by the
Government of India as a powerful
instrument for realising the twin
objectives of ‘accelerated industrial
growth and creating additional
productive employment potential in
rural and backward areas.’
However, the potential of small
industries is often not realised fully,
because of several problems related to
size. We shall now examine some of the
major problems that small businesses
whether in urban or in rural areas are
encountering in their day-to-day
functioning.
PROBLEMS OF SMALL BUSINESS
Small scale industries are at a distinct
disadvantage as compared to large
scale industries. The scale of
operations, availability of finance,
ability to use modern technology,
procurement of raw materials are some
of these areas. This gives rise to several
problems.
Most of these problems can be
attributed to the small size of their
business, which prevents them from
taking advantages, which accrue to
large business organisations. However,
the problems faced are not similar to
all the categories of small businesses.
For instance, in the case of small
ancillary units, the major problems
include delayed payments, uncertainty
of getting orders from the parent units
and frequent changes in production
processes. The problems of traditional
small scale units include remote
location
developed
infrastructural facilities, lack of
managerial talent, poor quality,
traditional technology and inadequate
availability of finance.
The problems of exporting small
scale units include lack of adequate
data on foreign markets, lack of
market intelligence, exchange rate
fluctuations, quality standards, and
pre-shipment finance. In general the
small businesses are faced with the
following problems:
(i) Finance: One of the severe
problems faced by SSIs is that of non-
availability of adequate finance to carry
out its operations.
Generally a small business begins
with a small capital base. Many of the
units in the small sector lack the credit
worthiness required to raise as capital
from the capital markets. As a result,
they heavily depend on local financial
resources and are frequently the
victims of exploitation by the money
lenders. These units frequently suffer
from lack of adequate working capital,
either due to delayed payment of dues
to them or locking up of their capital in
unsold stocks. Banks also do not lend
money without adequate collateral
security or guarantees and margin
money, which many of them are not in
a position to provide.
(ii) Raw materials: Another major
problem of small business is the
procurement of raw materials. If the
© NCERT
not to be republished
SMALL BUSINESS
required materials are not available,
they have to compromise on the quality
or have to pay a high price to get good
quality materials. Their bargaining
power is relatively low due to the small
quantity of purchases made by them.
Also, they cannot afford to take the risk
of buying in bulk as they have no
facilities to store the materials. Because
of general scarcity of metals, chemicals
and extractive raw materials in the
economy, the small scale sector suffers
the most. This also means a waste of
production capacity for the economy
and loss of further units.
(iii) Managerial skills: Small business
is generally promoted and operated by
a single person, who may not possess
all the managerial skills required to run
the business. Many of the small
business entrepreneurs possess sound
technical knowledge but are less
successful in marketing the output.
Moreover, they may not find enough
time to take care of all functional
activities. At the same time they are not
in a position to afford professional
managers.
(iv) Labour: Small business firms
cannot afford to pay higher salaries to
the employees, which affects employee
willingness to work hard and produce
more. Thus, productivity per employee
is relatively low and employee turn over
is generally high. Because of lower
remuneration offered, attracting
talented people is a major problem in
small business organisations.
Unskilled workers join for low
remuneration but training them is a
time consuming process. Also, unlike
large organisations, division of labour
cannot be practised, which results
in lack of specialisation and
concentration.
(v) Marketing: Marketing is one of the
most important activities as it generates
revenue. Effective marketing of goods
requires a thorough understanding
of the customer’s needs and
requirements. In most cases, marketing
is a weaker area of small organisations.
These organisations have, therefore, to
depend excessively on middlemen, who
at times exploit them by paying low
price and delayed payments. Further,
direct marketing may not be feasible
for small business firms as they lack
the necessary infrastructure.
(vi) Quality: Many small business
organisations do not adhere to desired
standards of quality. Instead they
concentrate on cutting the cost and
keeping the prices low. They do not
have adequate resources to invest in
quality research and maintain the
standards of the industry, nor do they
have the expertise to upgrade
technology. In fact maintaining quality
is their weakest point, when competing
in global markets.
(vii) Capacity utilisation: Due to lack
of marketing skills or lack of demand,
many small business firms have to
operate below full capacity due to which
their operating costs tend to increase.
Gradually this leads to sickness and
closure of the business.
(viii) Technology: Use of outdated
technology is often stated as serious
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
lacunae in the case of small industries,
resulting in low productivity and
uneconomical production.
(ix) Sickness: Prevalence of sickness in
small industries has become a point of
worry to both the policy makers and the
entrepreneurs. The causes of sickness
are both internal and external. Internal
problems include lack of  skilled and
trained labour and managerial and
marketing skills. Some of the external
problems include delayed payment,
shortage of working capital, inadequate
loans and lack of demand for their
products.
(x) Global competition: Apart from the
problems stated above small businesses
are not without fears, especially in the
present context of liberalisation,
privatisation and globalisation (LPG)
policies being followed by several
countries across the world. Remember,
India too has taken the LPG path since
1991. Let us look into the areas where
small businesses feel threatened with
the onslaught of global competition.
(a) Competition is not only from
medium and large industries, but
also from multinational companies
which are giants in terms of their
size and business volumes.
Opening up of trade results in cut
throat competition for small scale
units.
(b) It is difficult to withstand the
quality standards, technological
skills, financial creditworthiness,
managerial and marketing capa-
bilities of the large industries and
multinationals.
There is limited access to markets
of developed countries due to the
stringent requirements of quality
certification like ISO 9000.
GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE TO
SMALL INDUSTRIES AND SMALL
BUSINESS UNITS
Keeping in view the contribution of
small business to employment
generation,
balanced
regional
development of the country, and
promotion of exports, the Government
of India’s policy thrust has been on
establishing, promoting and developing
the small business sector, particularly
the rural industries and the cottage and
village industries in backward areas.
Governments both at the central and
state level have been actively
participating in promoting self-
employment opportunities in rural
areas by providing assistance in respect
of infrastructure, finance, technology,
training, raw-materials, and marketing.
The various policies and schemes of
Government assistance for the
development of rural industries insist
on the utilisation of local resources and
raw materials and locally available
manpower. These are translated into
action through various agencies,
departments, corporations, etc., all
coming under the purview of the
industries department. All these are
primarily concerned with the promotion
of small and rural industries.
Some of the support measures and
programmes meant for the promotion
© NCERT
not to be republished
SMALL BUSINESS
of small and rural industries are
discussed below:
INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT
National Bank for Agriculture
Rural
Development
(NABARD)
NABARD was setup in 1982 to
promote integrated rural development.
Since then, it has been adopting a
multi-pronged, multi-purpose strategy
for the promotion of rural business
enterprises in the country. Apart from
agriculture, it supports small
industries, cottage and village
industries, and rural artisans using
credit and non-credit approaches. It
offers counselling and consultancy
services and organises training and
development programmes for rural
entrepreneurs.
The Rural Small Business
Development Centre (RSBDC)
It is the first of its kind set up by the
world association for small and
medium enterprises and is sponsored
by NABARD.  It works for the benefit
socially
economically
disadvantaged individuals and groups.
It aims at providing management and
technical support to current and
prospective
micro
small
entrepreneurs in rural areas.  Since its
inception, RSBDC has organised
several programmes on rural
entrepreneurship, skill upgradation
workshops, mobile clinics and trainers
training programmes, awareness
and counselling camps in various
villages of Noida, Greater Noida
and Ghaziabad. Through these
programmes it covers a large
number of rural unemployed youth
and women in several trades, which
includes food processing, soft toys
making, ready-made garments,
candle making, incense stick
making, two-wheeler repairing and
servicing, vermicomposting, and non
conventional building materials.
National Small Industries
Corporation (NSIC)
This was set up in1955 with a view to
promote, aid and foster the growth of
small business units in the country.
This focuses on the commercial aspects
of these functions.
• Supply indigenous and imported
machines on easy hire-purchase
terms.
• Procure, supply and distribute
indigenous and imported raw
materials.
• Export the products of small
business units and develop
export-worthiness.
• Mentoring and advisory services.
• Serve as technology business
incubators.
• Creating awareness on techno-
logical upgradation.
• Developing software technology
parks and technology transfer
centres.
A new scheme of ‘performance
and credit rating’ of small businesses
is implemented through National Small
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Industries Corporation (NSIC) with the
twin objectives of (i) sensitising the small
industries about the need for credit
rating and (ii) encouraging the small
business units to maintain good
financial track record. This is to ensure
that they score higher rating for their
credit requirements as and when they
approach the financial institutions for
their working capital and investment
requirements.
Small Industries Development
Bank of India (SIDBI)
• Set up as an apex bank to provide
direct/indirect financial assistance
under different schemes, to meet
credit needs of small business
organisations.
• To coordinate the functions of
other institutions in similar
activities.
Thus so far, we have learnt about
the various institutions operating at the
central level and state level in support
of the small industries.
The National Commission for
Enterprises in the Unorganised
Sector (NCEUS)
The NCEUS was constituted in
September, 2004, with the following
objectives:
recommend
measures
considered
necessary
improving the productivity of
small enterprises in the informal
sector.
• To generate more employment
opportunities on a sustainable
basis, particularly in the rural
areas.
• To enhance the competitiveness of
the sector in the emerging global
environment.
• To develop linkages of the sector
with other institutions in the
areas of credit, raw materials,
infrastructure,
technology
upgradation, marketing and
formulation of suitable arrange-
ments for skill development.
The commission has identified
the following issues for detailed
consideration:
• Growth poles for the informal
sector in the form of clusters/
hubs, in order to get external
economic aid.
• Potential for public-private
partnerships in imparting the skills
required by the informal sector.
• Provision of micro-finance and
related services to the informal
sector.
• Providing social security for the
workers in the informal sector.
Rural and Women
Entrepreneurship
Development (RWED)
The Rural and Women Entrepreneur-
ship Development programme aims at
promoting a conducive business
environment and at building
institutional and human capacities that
will encourage and support the
entrepreneurial initiatives of rural
people and women. RWE provides the
following services:
© NCERT
not to be republished
SMALL BUSINESS
• Creating a business environment
that encourages initiatives of rural
and women entrepreneurs.
• Enhancing the human and
institutional capacities required to
foster entrepreneurial dynamism
and enhance productivity.
• Providing training manuals for
women entrepreneurs and
training them.
• Rendering any other advisory
services.
World Association for Small
and Medium Enterprises
(WASME)
It is the only International Non-
Governmental Organisation of micro,
small and medium enterprises based
in India, which set up an International
Committee for Rural Industrialisation.
Its aim is to develop an action plan
model for sustained growth of rural
enterprises.
Apart from these, there are several
schemes to promote the non-farm
sector, mostly initiated by the
Government of India. For instance,
there are schemes for entrepreneurship
through subsidised loans like
Integrated Rural Development
Programme (IRDP), Prime Minister
Rojgar Yojana (PMRY), schemes to
provide skills like Training of Rural
Youth for Self Employment (TRYSEM),
and schemes to strengthen the gender
component like Development of Women
and Children in Rural Areas (DWCRA).
There are schemes to provide wage
employment like Jawahar Rojgar
Yojana (JRY), food for work etc., on
rural works programmes to achieve the
twin objectives of creation of rural
infrastructure and generation
of additional income for the rural
poor, particularly during the lean
agricultural season.  Last, but not the
least, there are schemes for specific
groups of industries such as khadi,
handlooms and handicrafts.
Scheme of Fund for Re-
generation of Traditional
Industries (SFURTI)
To make the traditional industries
more productive and competitive and
to facilitate their sustainable
development, the Central Government
set up this fund with Rs. 100 crores
allocation to begin within the year
2005. This has to be implemented by
the Ministry of Agro and Rural
Industries in collaboration with State
Governments. The main objectives of
the scheme are as follows:
• To develop clusters of traditional
industries in various parts of the
country;
• To build innovative and traditional
skills, improve technologies
and encourage public-private
partnerships, develop market
intelligence etc., to make them
competitive, profitable and
sustainable; and
• To create sustained employment
opportunities in traditional
industries.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
The District Industries Centers
(DICs)
The District Industries Centers
Programme was launched on May 1,
1978, with a view to providing an
integrated administrative framework at
the district level, which would look at
the problems of industrialisation in the
district, in a composite manner. In
other words District Industries Centers
is the institution at the district level
which provides all the services and
support facilities to the entrepreneurs
for setting up small and village
industries. Identification of suitable
schemes, preparation of feasibility
reports, arranging for credit, machinery
and equipment, provision of raw
materials and other extension services
are the main activities undertaken by
these centers. Broadly DICs are trying
to bring change in the attitude of the
rural entrepreneurs and all other
connected with economic development
in the rural areas. Even within the
narrow spectrum, an attempt is being
made to look at some of the neglected
factors such as the rural artisan, the
skilled craftsman and the handloom
operator and to tune up these activities
with the general process of rural
development being taken up through
other national programmes. The DIC
is thus emerging as the focal point for
economic and industrial growth at the
district level.
INCENTIVES
Special emphasis on the industrial
development of backward, tribal and
hilly areas has been the concern of the
Government of India expressed in all
the Five Year Plans and industrial policy
statements. Realising that backward
areas development is a long-term
process, several committees were
appointed to identify the criteria for
identifying backward areas and also to
suggest schemes to take up the
Herculean task of balanced regional
development. The implementation of
integrated
rural
development
programme is one such attempt made
by the government to develop
backward areas.  The rural industries
project programme initiated by the
Government of India was meant to
develop small business units in select
rural areas.  Though the backward area
development programmes varied from
state to state, they cumulatively
represented a significant package of
incentives to attract industries in
backward areas.
Some of the common incentives
offered are discussed as below:
Land: Every state offers developed plots
for setting up of industries.  The terms
and conditions may vary. Some states
don’t charge rent in the initial years,
while some allow payment in
instalments.
Power: Power is supplied at a
concessional rate of 50 per cent, while
some states exempt such units from
payment in the initial years.
Water: Water is supplied on a no-profit,
no-loss basis or with 50 per cent
concession or exemption from water
charges for a period of 5 years.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SMALL BUSINESS
Sales Tax: In all union territories,
industries are exempted from sales tax,
while some states extend exemption for
5 years period.
Octroi: Most states have abolished
octroi.
Raw materials: Units located in
backward areas get preferential
treatment in the matter of allotment of
scarce raw materials like cement, iron
and steel etc.
Finance: Subsidy of 10-15 per cent is
given for building capital assets.  Loans
are also offered at concessional rates.
Industrial estates: Some states
encourage setting up of industrial
estates in backward areas.
Tax holiday: Exemption from paying
taxes for 5 or 10 years is given to
industries established in backward,
hilly and tribal areas.
To sum up, it may be stated that the
small business sector in India is getting
the support of government through
various institutions in different forms
for different purposes. Despite  special
attention being given to backward
areas, it is observed that imbalances in
development are still there. There is a
need to develop infrastructural facilities
in these areas, as no amount of
subsidies or concessions can overcome
the natural handicaps caused by a lack
of such facilities.
THE FUTURE
The present era is the regime of the
World Trade Organisation (WTO), in
which the rules of trade are subject to
frequent changes as per global
expectations. As a founder member of
WTO, India too has committed itself to
the policy framework of WTO. As a
result, small business is also moving
away from the pre-liberalisation era of
protection. With the Indian economy
getting integrated with the global
economy, it is inevitable for the small
businesses to gear up their capabilities
to explore, penetrate and develop new
markets. They have to steadily reorient
themselves to face the challenges posed
by increased competition, domestically
and internationally too. With their
dynamism, flexibility and innovative
entrepreneurial spirit, small businesses
have to adapt themselves to the fast
changing needs of the market driven
economy. Government should reorient
its assistance to the small business
sector by acting as a facilitator and
promoter and not as a regulator. New
Forms of Support Offered to Small Industries by the Government
Institutional support in respect of credit facilities
Provision of developed sites for construction of sheds
Provision of training facilities
Supply of machinery on hire purchase terms
Assistance for domestic and export marketing
Technical and financial assistance for technological up-gradation
Special incentives for setting up of enterprises in backward areas
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
strategies have to be evolved to foster
partnership between large and small
industries, adopt cluster approach,
develop creative marketing, improve
technological skills by upgradation,
building export competitiveness by
identifying the core competencies of
the small businesses.
In fact small business sector
should view globalisation as an
opportunity for its active participation
as suppliers of specialised component
Key Terms
Small scale industries
Cottage industries
Micro business enterprises
Expert oriented units
Rural industries
Women enterprises
Ancillary
Khadi industries
Tiny industries
SUMMARY
On the basis of the capital invested, small business units can be categorised
into various categories, which include Small Scale Industry, Ancilliary Small
Industrial Units, Export Oriented Units, Small Scale Industries owned and
managed by Women Entrepreneurs, Tiny Industrial Units, Small Scale
Services and Business (Industry related) Enterprises, Micro Business
Enterprises, Village Industries and Cottage Industries.
Administrative setup: The administrative set up for small scale industry
consists of two ministries viz., the Ministry of Small Scale Industries and
Ministry of Agricultural and Rural Industry, Government of India, the
Ministry of SSIs is the nodal ministry for formulation of policy and
coordination of central assistance, for the promotion and development of
SSIs in India.
Similarly, the ministry of Agro and Rural Industries is the nodal agency for
coordination and development of village and Khadi Industries, Tiny and
Micro Enterprises in both urban and rural area. State Governments also
execute different promotional development projected schemes to provide a
number of supporting incentives for development and promotion of SSIs in
their respective states.
and parts. If small businesses are to
maintain their market share and
healthy growth, they have to create
a level-playing field for themselves.
The long-term competitive position
for the small businesses will depend
on how well they learn to manage,
adopt and improve their competitive
strength.
In short the mantra of success for
small businesses in this modern era
has to be ‘think global, act local.’
© NCERT
not to be republished
SMALL BUSINESS
Role of small business in India: Small Scale Industries play a very
important role in the socio economic development of the country. These
industries account for 95 per cent of industrial units, contributing up to 40
per cent of the gross industrial value added and 45 per cent of the total
exports. SSIs are the second largest employers of human resources, after
agriculture and produce a variety of products for the economy. These units
contribute to the balanced regional development of the country by using
locally available material and indigenous technology. These provide ample
scope for entrepreneurship; enjoy the advantage of low cost of production;
quick decision making, and have quick adaptability and are best suited to
customised production.
Role of small business in rural India: Small business units provide multiple
source of income, in wide range of non agricultural activities and provide
employment opportunities in rural areas, especially for the traditional
artisan and weaker sections of the society.
Problems of small industries: Small Industries suffer from various problems
including that of (i) Finance, (ii) Non-availability of raw material,
(iii) Managerial skills (iv) Skilled labour (v) Marketing of their goods
(vi) Maintaining Quality standards (vii) Low capacity utilisation, (viii) Use
of traditional technology (ix) Prevalence of sickness and (x) Facing global
competition.
Governmental assistance to small industries: In view of the contribution
of small business in various areas including employment generation,
balanced regional development, and promotion of export the central and
state government have been providing assistance in respect of
infrastructure, finance, technology, training etc., to SSI units.
Some of the major institutions providing support include National Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development, Rural Small Business Development
Centre, National Small Industries Corporation, Small Industries
Development Bank of India (SIDBI)), The National Commission for
Enterprises in Unorganised Sector (NCEUS), Rural and Women
Entrepreneurship Development (RWE), World Association for Small and
Medium Enterprises (WASME), Scheme of Fund for Regeneration of
Traditional Industries (SFURM) and the District Industries centre (DIC).
EXERCISES
Short Answer Questions
What are the different parameters used to measure the size of business?
What is the definition used by Government of India for Small Scale
Industries?
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
How would you differentiate between an ancillary unit and a tiny unit?
State the features of cottage industries.
Long Answer Questions
How do small scale industries contribute to the socio-economic
development of india?
Describe the role of small business in rural India.
Discuss the problems faced by small scale industries.
What measures has the government taken to solve the problem of
finance and marketing in the small scale sector?
What are the incentives provided by the Government for industries in
backward and hilly areas?
Projects/Assignments
Prepare a questionnaire to find out the actual problems faced by an
owner of a small scale unit. Prepare a project report on it.
Survey about five small scale units in your vicinity and find out if they
have received any assistance by the institutions set up by the
Government.
© NCERT
not to be republished
CHAPTER 10
INTERNAL TRADE
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
describe the meaning and types of internal trade;
specify the services of wholesalers to manufactures and retailers;
explain the services of retailers;
classify the types of retailers;
explain the forms of small scale and large scale retailers; and
state the role of Chambers of Commerce and industry in the
promotion of internal trade.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
INTRODUCTION
Trade refers to buying and selling of
goods and services with the objective
of earning profit. Mankind has been
engaged in trading, in some form or
the other, since early days of
civilisation. The importance of trade
in modern times has increased as new
products are being developed every
day and are being made available for
consumption throughout the world.
No individual or country can claim to
be self-sufficient in producing all the
goods and services required by it.
Thus, each one is engaged in
producing what it is best suited to
produce and exchanging the excess
produce with others.
On the basis of geographical
location of buyers and sellers, trade can
broadly be classified into two categories
(i) Internal trade; and (ii) External trade.
Trade which takes place within a
country is called internal trade. Trade
between two or more countries, on the
other hand, is called external trade. The
present chapter discusses in detail the
meaning and nature of internal trade
and explains its different types and the
role of chambers of commerce in
promoting internal trade.
INTERNAL TRADE
Buying and selling of goods and
services within the boundaries of a
nation are referred to as internal trade.
Whether the products are purchased
from a neighbourhood shop in a locality
or a central market or a departmental
store or a mall or even from any door-
to-door salesperson or from an
exhibition, all these are examples of
internal trade as the goods are
purchased from an individual or
establishment within a country. No
custom duty or import duty is levied
Have you ever thought if there were no markets, how products of different
manufacturers would reach us? We are all aware of our general provisions store
round the corner which is selling items of our daily need. But is that enough?
When we need to buy items of a specialised nature, we like to look at bigger
markets or shops with variety. Our observation tells us that there are different
types of shops selling different items or specialised goods and depending on our
requirements we purchase from certain shops or markets. In rural areas, we
may have noticed people selling their goods on the streets, these goods may
range from vegetables to clothes. This is a completely different scene from what
we see in the urban areas. In our country, all kinds of markets co-exist in
harmony. With the advent of imported goods and multinational corporations, we
have shops selling these products too. In big towns and cities, there are many
retail shops selling particular branded products only. Another aspect of all this
is, how these products reach the shops from the manufacturers? There must be
some middlemen doing this job. Are they really useful or do prices increase
because of them?
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNAL TRADE
on such trade as goods are part of
domestic production and are meant for
domestic consumption. Generally,
payment has to be made in the legal
tender of the country or any other
acceptable currency.
Internal trade can be classified into
two broad categories viz., (i) wholesale
trade and (ii) retail trade. Generally, for
products, which are to be distributed to
a large number of buyers who are
located over a wide geographical area, it
becomes very difficult for the producers
to reach all the consumers or users
directly. For example, if vegetable oil or
bathing soap or salt produced in a
factory in any part of the country are to
reach millions of consumers throughout
the country, the help of wholesalers and
retailers becomes very important.
Purchase and sale of goods and services
in large quantities for the purpose of
resale or intermediate use is referred to
as wholesale trade.
On the other hand, purchase and
sale of goods in relatively small
quantities, generally to the ultimate
consumers, is referred to as retail trade.
Traders dealing in wholesale trade are
called wholesale traders and those
dealing in retail trade are called
retailers. Both retailers and wholesalers
are important marketing intermediaries
who perform very useful functions in
the process of exchange of goods and
services  between producers and users
or ultimate consumers. Internal trade
aims at equitable distribution of goods
within a nation speedily and at
reasonable cost.
WHOLESALE TRADE
As discussed in the previous section,
wholesale trade refers to buying and
selling of goods and services in large
quantities for the purpose of resale or
intermediate use.
Wholesaling is concerned with the
activities of those persons or
establishments which sell to retailers
and other merchants, and/or to
industrial, institutional and commercial
users but who do not sell in significant
amount to ultimate consumers.
Wholesalers serve as an important link
between manufacturers and retailers.
They enable the producers not only to
reach large number of buyers spread
over a wide geographical area (through
retailers), but also  to perform a variety
of functions in the process of
distribution of goods and services. They
generally take the title of the goods and
bear the business risks by purchasing
and selling the goods in their own name.
They purchase in bulk and sell in small
lots to retailers or industrial users. They
undertake various activities such as
grading of products, packing into
smaller lots, storage, transportation,
promotion of goods, collection of market
information, collection of small and
scattered orders of retailers and
distribution of supplies to them. They
also relieve the retailers of maintaining
large stock of articles and extend credit
facilities to them. Most of the functions
performed by wholesalers are such
which cannot be eliminated. If there are
no wholesalers, these functions shall
have to be performed either by the
manufacturers or the retailers.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Services of Wholesalers
Wholesalers provide various services to
manufacturers as well as retailers and
provide immense help in the
distribution of goods and services. By
making the products available at a place
where these are needed and at a time
when these are needed for consumption
or use, they provide both the time and
place utility. The various services of
wholesalers to different sections are
discussed below:
10.3.1
Services to Manufacturers
Major services offered by wholesalers to
the producers of goods and services are
given as below:
(i) Facilitating large scale production:
Wholesalers collect small orders from a
number of retailers and pass on the pool
of such orders to the manufacturers and
make purchases in bulk quantities. This
enables the producers to undertake
production on a large scale and take
advantage of the economies of scale.
(ii) Bearing risk: The wholesale
merchants deal in goods in their own
name, take delivery of the goods and
keep the goods purchased in large lots
in their warehouses. In the process, they
bear variety of risks such as the risk of
fall in prices, theft, pilferage, spoilage,
fire, etc. To that extent, they relieve the
manufacturers from bearing these risks.
(iii) Financial assistance: The
wholesalers provide financial assistance
to the manufacturers in the sense that
they generally make cash payment for
the goods purchased by them. To that
extent, the manufacturers need not
block their capital in the stocks.
Sometimes they also advance money to
the producers for bulk orders placed
by them.
(iv) Expert advice: As the wholesalers
are in direct contact with the retailers,
they are in a position to advice the
manufacturers about various aspects
including customer’s tastes and
preferences, market conditions,
competitive activities and the features
preferred by the buyers. They serve as
an important source of market
information on these and related
aspects.
(v) Help in marketing function: The
wholesalers take care of the
distribution of goods to a number of
retailers who, in turn, sell these goods
to a large number of customers spread
over a large geographical area. This
relieves the manufacturers from many
of the marketing activities and enable
them to concentrate on the production
activity.
(vi) Facilitate production continuity:
The wholesalers facilitate continuity of
production activity throughout the
year by purchasing the goods as and
when these are produced and storing
them till the time these are demanded
by retailers or consumers in the
market.
(vii) Storage: Wholesalers take delivery
of goods when these are produced in
factory and keep them in their
godowns/warehouses. This reduces
the burden of manufacturers of
providing for storage facilities for the
finished products. They thus provide
time utility.
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNAL TRADE
10.3.2
Services to Retailers
The important services offered by
manufacturers to the retailers are
described as below:
(i) Availability of goods: Retailers
have to maintain adequate stock of
varied commodities so that they can
offer variety to their customers. The
wholesalers make the products of
various manufacturers readily
available to the retailers. This relieves
the retailers of the work of collecting
goods from several producers and
keeping big inventory of the same.
(ii) Marketing support: The whole-
salers perform various marketing
functions and provide support to the
retailers. They undertake advertising
and other sales promotional activities
to induce customers to purchase the
goods. The retailers are benefitted as it
helps them in increasing the demand
for various new products.
(iii) Grant of credit: The wholesalers
generally extend credit facilities to their
regular customers. This enables the
retailers to manage their business with
relatively small amount of working capital.
(iv) Specialised knowledge: The
wholesalers specialise in one line of
products and know the pulse of the
market. They pass on the benefit of
their specialised knowledge to the
retailers. They inform the retailers
about the new products, their uses,
quality, prices, etc. They may also
advise them on the decor of the retail
outlet, allocation of shelf space and
demonstration of certain products.
(v) Risk sharing: The wholesalers
purchase in bulk and sell in relatively
small quantities to the retailers. Being
able to purchase merchandise in
smaller quantities, retailers are in a
position to avoid the risk of storage,
pilferage, obsolescence, reduction in
prices and demand fluctuations in
respect of larger quantites of goods that
they would have to purchase in case
the services of wholesalers are not
available.
RETAIL TRADE
A retailer is a business enterprise that
is engaged in the sale of goods and
services directly to the ultimate
consumers. The retailer normally buys
goods in large quantities from the
wholesalers and sells them in small
quantities to the ultimate consumers.
The retails represents the final  stage
in the distribution where goods are
transferred from the hands of the
manufacturers or wholesalers to the
final consumers or users. Retailing is,
thus, that branch of business which is
devoted to the sale of goods and
services to the ultimate consumers for
their personal and non-business use.
There may be different ways of
selling the goods viz., personally, on
telephone, or through vending
machines. Also, the products may be
sold at different places, viz., in a store,
at the customer’s house or any other
place. Some of the common situations
that we encounter in our daily life, for
example, are the sale of ball pens or
some magic medicine or book of jokes
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
in the roadways buses; the sale of
cosmetics/detergent powder, on door-
to-door sales basis; and the sale of
vegetables by the road side by a small
farmer. But as long as the goods are
sold to ultimate consumers, these will
be treated as cases of retail selling.
Thus, irrespective of ‘how’ the products
are sold or ‘where’ the sale is made, if
the sales are made directly to the
consumers, it will be considered  as
retailing.
A retailer performs different
functions in the distribution of goods
and services. He/she purchases a
variety of products from the wholesale
distributors and others, arranges for
proper storage of goods, sells the goods
in small quantities, bears  business
risks, grades the products, collects
market information, extends credit to
the buyers and promotes the sale of
products
through
displays,
participation in various schemes, etc.
Services of Retailers
Retailers serve as an important link
between the producers and final
consumers in the distribution of
products and services. They provide
useful services to the consumers,
wholesalers and manufacturers. Some
of the important services of retailers are
described as below:
10.4.1
Services to Manufacturers
and Wholesalers
The invaluable services that the
retailers render to the wholesalers and
producers are given as here under:
(i) Help in distribution of goods: A
retailer’s most important service to the
wholesalers and manufacturers is to
provide help in the distribution of their
products by making these available to
the final consumers, who may be
scattered over a large geographic area.
They thus provide place utility.
(ii) Personal selling: In the process of
sale of most consumer goods, some
amount of personal selling effort is
necessary. By undertaking personal
selling efforts, the retailers relieve the
producers of this activity and greatly
help them in the process of actualising
the sale of the products.
(iii) Enabling large-scale operations:
On account of retailer’s services, the
manufacturers and wholesalers are
freed from the trouble of making
individual sales to consumers in small
quantities. This enables them to
operate on, at relatively large scale, and
thereby fully concentrate on their other
activities.
(iv) Collecting market information:
As retailers remain in direct and
constant touch with the buyers, they
serve as an important source of
collecting market information about
the tastes, preferences and attitudes of
customers. Such information is
considered very useful in taking
important marketing decisions in an
organisation.
(v) Help in promotion: From time-to-
time, manufacturers and distributors
have to carry on various promotional
activities in order to increase the sale
of their products. For example, they
have to advertise their products and
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNAL TRADE
offer short-term incentives in the form
of coupons, free gifts, sales contests,
and so on. Retailers participate in these
activities in various ways and, thereby,
help in promoting the sale of the
products.
10.4.2
Services to Consumers
Some of the important services of
retailers from the point of view of
consumers are as follows :
(i) Regular availability of products:
The most important service of a retailer
to consumers is to maintain regular
availability of various products
produced by different manufacturers.
This enables the buyers to buy
products as and when needed.
(ii) New products information: By
arranging for effective display of
products and through their personal
selling efforts, retailers provide
important information about the
arrival, special features, etc., of new
products to the customers. This serves
as an important factor in the buying
decision making process of the
purchase of such goods.
(iii) Convenience in buying: Retailers
generally buy goods in large quantities
and sell these in small quantities,
according to the requirements of their
customers. Also, they are normally
situated very near to the residential areas
and remain open for long hours. This
offers great convenience to the
customers in buying products of their
requirements.
(iv) Wide selection: Retailers generally
keep stock of a variety of products of
different manufacturers. This enables the
consumers to make their choice out of a
wide selection of goods.
(v) After-sales services: Retailers
provide important after-sales services
in the form of home delivery, supply of
spare parts and attending to
customers. This becomes an important
factor in the buyers’ decision for repeat
purchase of the products.
(vi) Provide credit facilities: The
retailers sometimes provide credit
facilities to their regular buyers. This
enables the latter to increase their level
of consumption and, thereby, their
standard of living.
TYPES OF RETAILING TRADE
There are many types of retailers in
India. For proper understanding, it
would be useful, to classify them into
certain common categories. Different
classifications have been used by
experts to categorise retailers into
different types. For example, on the
basis of ‘size of business’, they may be
categorised into large, medium and
small retailers. On the basis of ‘type of
ownership’, they may be categorised
into ‘sole trader’, ‘partnership firm’,
‘cooperative store’ and ‘company’.
Similarly, on the basis of  ‘merchandise
handled’, the different classifications
may be ‘speciality store’, ‘supermarket’
and ‘departmental store’. Another
common basis of classification is
whether or not they have a fixed place
of business. On this basis, there are
two categories of retailers:
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(a) Itinerant retailers, and
(b) Fixed shop retailers
Both these types of retailers have
been described in detail  in the sections
that follow here after.
10.5.1
Itinerant Retailers
Itinerant retailers are traders who do
not have a fixed place of business to
operate from. They keep on moving with
their wares from street to street or place
to place, in search of customers.
Characteristics
(a) They are small traders operating
with limited resources.
(b) They normally deal in consumer
products of daily use such as
toiletry products, fruits and
vegetables, and so on.
(c) The emphasis of such traders is
on providing greater customer
service by making the products
available at the very doorstep of
the customers.
(d) As they do not have any fixed
business establishment to operate
from, these retailers have to keep
their limited inventory of
merchandise either at home or at
some other place.
Some of the most common types of
itinerant retailers operating in India are
as below:
(i) Peddlers and hawkers: Peddlers
and hawkers are probably amongst the
oldest form of retailers in the market
place who have not lost their utility even
during the modern times. They are
small producers or petty traders who
carry the products on a bicycle, a hand
cart, a cycle-rickshaw or on their
heads, and move from place to place to
sell their merchandise at the doorstep
of the customers. They generally deal
in non-standardised and low-value
products such as toys, vegetables and
fruits, fabrics, carpets, snacks and ice
creams, etc. They are also found in
streets of residential areas, places of
exhibitions or meals, and outside
schools, during a lunch break.
The main advantage of this form of
retailing is the provision of convenient
service to the consumers. However,
one should be careful in dealing with them,
as the products they deal in are not always
reliable in terms of quality and price.
(ii) Market traders: Market traders are
the small retailers who open their shops
at different places on fixed days or
dates, such as every Saturday or
alternate Saturdays, and so on. These
traders may be dealing in one
particular line of merchandise, say
fabrics or ready-made garments, toys,
or crockery, or alternatively, they may
be general merchants. They are mainly
catering to lower-income group of
customers and deal in low-priced
consumer items of daily use.
(iii) Street traders (pavement
vendors): Street traders are the small
retailers who are commonly found at
places where huge floating population
gathers, for example, near railway
stations and bus stands, and sell
consumer items of common use, such
as stationery items, eatables, ready-
made garments, newspapers and
magazines. They are different from
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNAL TRADE
market traders in the sense that they
do not change their place of business
so frequently.
(iv) Cheap jacks: Cheap jacks are
petty retailers who have independent
shops of a temporary nature in a
business locality. They keep on
changing their business from one
locality to another, depending upon the
potentiality of the area. However, the
change of place is not as frequent as in
the case of hawkers or market traders.
They deal in consumer items as well as
services such as repair of watches,
shoes, buckets etc.
10.5.2
Fixed Shop Retailers
This is the most common type of
retailing in the market place. As is
evident from the name, these are retail
shops who maintain permanent
establishment to sell their merchandise.
They, therefore, do not move from
place to place to serve their customers.
Some of the other characteristics of
such traders are:
Characteristics
(a) Compared with the itinerant traders,
normally they have greater resources
and operate on a relatively large
scale. However, there are different
size groups of fixed shop retailers,
varying from very small to very
large.
(b) These retailers may be dealing in
different products, including
consumer durables as well as non-
durables.
(c) This category of retailers has greater
credibility in the minds of
customers, and they are in a position
to provide greater services to the
customers such as home delivery,
guarantees, repairs, credit facilities,
availability of spares, etc.
Types
The fixed-shop retailers can be
classified into two distinct types on the
basis of the size of their operations.
These are:
(a) small shop-keepers, and
(b) large retailers.
The different types of retailers falling
under the above two broad heads are
described below:
Fixed Shop Small Retailers
(i) General stores: General stores are
most commonly found in a local  market
and residential areas. As the name
indicates, these shops carry stock of a
variety of products required to satisfy the
day-to-day needs of the consumers
residing in nearby localities. Such stores
remain open for long hours at convenient
timings and often provide credit facilities
to some of their regular customers.
The biggest advantage of such
stores is in terms of convenience to the
customers in buying products of daily
use such as grocery items, soft drinks,
toiletry products, stationery and
confectionery. As most of their
customers are residents of the
same locality, an important factor
contributing to their success is the
image of the owner and the rapport he
has established with them.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(ii) Speciality shops: This type of retail
store is, of late, becoming very popular,
particularly in urban areas. Instead of
selling a variety of products of different
types, these retail stores specialise in
the sale of a specific line of products.
For example, shops selling children’s
garments, men’s wear, ladies shoes,
toys and gifts, school uniforms,
college books or consumer electronic
goods, etc. These are some of the
commonly found stores of this type in
the market place.
The speciality shops are generally
located in a central place where a large
number of customers can be attracted,
and they provide a wide choice to the
customers in the selection of goods.
(iii) Street stall holders: These small
vendors are commonly found at street
crossings or other places where flow of
traffic is heavy. They attract floating
customers and deal mainly in goods of
cheap variety like hosiery products,
toys, cigarettes, soft drinks, etc. They
get their supplies from local suppliers
as well as wholesalers. The total area
covered by a stall is very limited and,
therefore, they handle goods on a very
small scale. Their main advantage is in
providing convenient service to the
customers in buying some of the items
of their needs.
(iv) Secondhand goods shop: These
shops deal in secondhand or used
goods,
books,
clothes,
automobiles, furniture and other
household goods. Generally persons
with modest means purchase goods
from such shops. The goods are sold
at lower prices. Such shops may also
stock rare objects of historical value
and antique items which are sold at
rather heavy prices to people who have
special interest in such antique goods.
The shops, selling second hand
goods may be located at street
crossings or in busy streets in the form
of a stall having very little structure —
a table or a temporary platform to
display the books or may have
reasonably good infrastructure, as in
the case of those selling furniture or
used cars or scooters or motorcycles.
Fixed shop — Large stores
1. Departmental stores
A departmental store is a large
establishment offering a wide variety
of products, classified into well-
defined departments, aimed
at satisfying practically every
customer’s need under one roof. It
has a number of departments, each
one confining its activities to one kind
of product. For example, there may
be separate departments for
toiletries, medicines, furniture,
groceries, electronics, clothing and
dress material within a store. Thus,
they satisfy diverse market segments
with a wide variety of goods and
services. It is not uncommon for a
department store in the United States
of America to carry ‘needle to an
aeroplane’ or ‘all shopping under one
roof.’  Everything from ‘a pin
to an elephant’ is the spirit behind
a typical department store.
In India real departmental stores
have not yet come in a big way
in the retailing business. However,
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNAL TRADE
some stores on this line in
India include ‘Akberally’ in Mumbai
and ‘Spencers’ in Chennai.
Some of the important features
of a departmental store are
as follows:
A modern departmental store may
provide all facilities such as
restaurant, travel and information
bureau, telephone booth, rest-
rooms, etc. As such they try to
provide maximum service to higher
class of customers for whom price
is of secondary importance.
(b) These stores are generally located
at a central place in the heart of a
city, which caters to a large number
of customers.
As the size of these stores is very
large, they are generally formed as
a joint stock company managed by
a board of directors. There is a
managing director assisted by a
general manager and several
department managers.
(d) A departmental store combines
both the functions of retailing
warehousing.
They purchase directly from
manufacturers and operate
separate warehouses. That way they
help in eliminating undesirable
middlemen between the producers
and the customers.
They have centralised purchasing
arrangements. All the purchases in
a department store are made
centrally by the purchase
department of the store, whereas
sales are decentralised in different
departments.
Advantages
The major advantages of retailing
through departmental stores may be
listed as follows:
(i) Attract
large
number
customers: As these stores are usually
located at central places, they attract a
large number of customers during the
best part of the day.
(ii) Convenience in buying: By
offering large variety of goods under
one roof, the departmental stores
provide great convenience to customers
in buying almost all goods of their
requirements at one place. As a result,
customers do not have to run from one
place to the another to complete their
shopping.
(iii) Attractive services: A depart-
mental store aims at providing
maximum services to the customers.
Some of the services offered by it
include home delivery of goods,
execution of telephone orders, grant of
credit facilities and provision for rest-
rooms, telephone booths, restaurants,
saloons etc.
(iv) Economy
large-scale
operations: As these stores are
organised at a very large-scale, the
benefits of large-scale operations,
particularly, in respect of purchase of
goods are available to them.
(v) Promotion of sales: The depart-
mental stores are in a position to
spend considerable amount of money
on advertising and other promotional
activities, which help in boosting
their sales.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Limitations
However, there are certain limitations
of this type of retailing. These are
described as follows:
(i) Lack of personal attention:
Because of the large-scale operations,
it is very difficult to provide adequate
personal attention to the customers in
these stores.
(ii) High operating cost: As these
stores give more emphasis on providing
services, their operating costs tend to
be on the higher side. These costs, in
turn, make the prices of the goods high.
They are, therefore, not attractive to the
lower income group of people.
(iii) High possibility of loss: As a
result of high operating costs and large-
scale operations, the chances of
incurring losses in a departmental store
are high. For example, if there is any
change in the tastes of customers or
latest fashions, it necessitates selling of
such out-of-fashion articles in
clearance sale, to reduce the huge
inventory of goods built up.
(iv) Inconvenient location: As a
departmental store is generally situated
at a central location, it is not convenient
for the purchase of goods that are
needed at short notice.
In spite of some of these limitations
the departmental stores have been
popular in some of the western
countries of the world because of their
benefits to a certain class of customers.
2. Chain Stores or Multiple Shops:
Chain stores or multiple shops are
networks of retail shops that are
owned and operated by manu-
facturers or intermediaries. Under
this type of arrangement, a number
of shops with similar appearance are
established in localities, spread over
different parts of the country. These
different shops normally deal in
standardised
branded
consumer products, which have
rapid sales turnover. These shops
are run by the same organisation
and have identical merchandising
strategies, with identical products
and displays. Some of the important
features of such shops may be
described  here under:
(a) These shops are located in fairly
populous
localities,
where
sufficient number of customers
can be approached.  The idea is to
serve the customers at a point
which is nearest to their residence
or work place, rather than
attracting them to a central place.
(b) The manufacturing/procurement
of merchandise for all the retail
units is centralised at the head
office, from where the goods are
despatched to each of these shops
according to their requirements.
This results in savings in the cost
of operation of these stores.
(c) Each retail shop is under the direct
supervision of a Branch Manager,
who is held responsible for its day-
to-day management. The Branch
Manager sends daily reports to the
head office in respect of the sales,
cash deposits, and the require-
ments of the stock.
(d) All the branches are controlled by
the head office, which is concerned
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNAL TRADE
with formulating the policies and
getting them implemented.
(e) The prices of goods in such shops
are fixed and all sales are made on
cash basis.  The cash realised from
the sales of merchandise is
deposited daily into a local bank
account on behalf of the head
office, and a report is sent to the
head office in this regard.
(f) The head office normally appoints
inspectors, who are concerned with
day-to-day supervision of the
shops, in respect of quality of
customer service provided,
adherence to the policies of the
head office, and so on.
The chain operation is most
effective in handling high-volume
merchandise, whose sales are relatively
constant throughout the year.  In India,
Bata Shoe stores are typical examples
of such shops.  Similar type of retail
outlets are coming up in other products
also. For example, the exclusive
showrooms of D.C.M., Raymonds and
the fast food chains of Nirula’s and
McDonald.
Advantages
Multiple shops are offering various
advantages to the consumers, which
are described as follows:
(i) Economies of scale: As there is
central procurement, the multiple-
shop organisation enjoys the
economies of scale.
(ii) Elimination of middlemen: By
selling directly to the consumers, the
multiple-shop organisation is able to
eliminate unnecessary middlemen in
the sale of goods and services.
(iii) No bad debts: Since all the sales
in these shops are made on cash basis,
there are no losses on account of bad
debts.
(iv) Transfer of goods: The goods not
in demand in a particular locality may
be transferred to another locality where
it is in demand.  This reduces the
chances of dead stock in these shops.
(v) Diffusion of risk: The losses
incurred by one shop may be covered
by profits in other shops, reducing the
total risk of an organisation.
(vi) Low cost: Because of centralised
purchasing, elimination of middle-men,
centralised promotion of sales and
increased sales, the multiple shops
have lower cost of business.
(vii) Flexibility: Under this system, if
a shop is not operating at a profit, the
management may decide to close it or
shift it to some other place without
really affecting the profitability of the
organisation as a whole.
Limitations
(i) Limited selection of goods: Some
of the multiple shops deal only in
limited range of products. This is
especially the problem with the chain
stores which are owned and operated
by manufacterers, and as such mostly
sell the products produced by the
themselves. They do not sell products
of other manufacturers. In that way the
consumers get only a limited choice
of goods. This, however is not the case
with retailer owned chain stores such
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
as Big Apple or Reliance Retail which
sell products of a large number of
manufacturers.
(ii) Lack of initiative: The personnel
managing the multiple shops have to
obey the instructions received from the
head office.  This makes them habitual
of looking up to the head office for
guidance on all matters, and takes away
the initiative from them to use their
creative skills to satisfy the customers.
(iii) Lack of personal touch: Lack of
initiative in the employees sometimes
leads to indifference and lack of
personal touch in them.
(iv) Difficult to change demand: If
the demand for the merchandise
handled by multiple shops change
rapidly, the management may have
to sustain huge losses because of
large stocks lying unsold at the
central depot.
Difference between Departmental
stores and Multiple shops
Although both these types of retail
organisations are large establishments,
there
certain
differences
between the two.  Such differences are
given here below:
(i) Location: A departmental store is
located at a central place, where a large
number of customers can be attracted
to it.  However, the multiple stores are
located at a number of places for
approaching a large number of
customers.  Thus, central location is
not necessary for a multiple shop.
(ii) Range of products:  Departmental
stores aim at satisfying all the needs of
customers under one roof. As such,
they have to carry a variety of products
of different types. However, the multiple
stores generally aim to satisfy the
requirements of customers relating to
a specified range of their products only.
(iii) Services offered: The depart-
mental stores lay great emphasis on
providing maximum service to their
customers.  Some of the services,
provided by them include alteration of
garments, restaurant and so on. As
against this, the multiple shops provide
very limited service confined to
guarantees and repairs if  the sold out
goods turn out to be defective.
(iv) Pricing: The multiple shop chains
sell goods at fixed prices and maintain
uniform pricing policies for all the
shops. The departmental stores,
however, do not have uniform pricing
policy for all the departments; rather
they have to occasionally offer
discounts on certain products and
varieties to clear their stock.
(v) Class of customers: The depart-
mental stores cater to the needs of
relatively high income group of
customers who care more for the
services provided rather than the prices
of the product.  The multiple shops, on
the other hand, cater to different
types of customers, including those
belonging to the lower income groups,
who are interested in buying quality
goods at reasonable prices.
(vi) Credit facilities: All sales in the
multiple shops are made strictly on cash
basis. In contrast, the departmental
stores may provide credit facilities to
some of their regular customers.
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNAL TRADE
(vii) Flexibility: As the departmental
stores deal in a wide variety of
products, they have certain flexibility
in respect of the line of goods marketed.
However, there is not much scope for
flexibility in the chain stores, which deal
only in limited line of products.
Mail Order Houses
Mail order houses are the retail outlets
that sell their merchandise through
mail. There is generally no direct
personal contact between the buyers
and the sellers in this type of trading.
For obtaining orders, potential customers
are approached through advertisements
in newspapers or magazines, circulars,
catalogues, samples and bills, and price
lists sent to them by post. All the relevant
information about the products such as
the price, features, delivery terms, terms
of payment, etc., are described in the
advertisement. On receiving the orders,
the items are carefully scrutinised with
respect to the specifications asked for
by the buyers and are complied with
through the post office.
There can be different alternatives for
receiving payments. First, the customers
may be asked to make full payment in
advance. Second, the goods may be sent
by Value Payable Post (VPP). Under this
arrangement, the goods are sent through
post and are delivered to the customers
only on making full payment for the
same. Third, the goods may be sent
through a bank, which is instructed to
deliver the articles to the customers. In
this arrangement there is no risk of bad
debt, as the goods are handed over to
the buyers only after he makes full
payment. However, there is a need to
ensure the buyers that the goods
despatched are in accordance with their
specifications.
This type of business is not suitable
for all types of products. For example,
goods that are perishable in nature or
are bulky and cannot be easily handled,
are not recommended for mail-house
trading. Only the goods that can be
(i) graded and standardised, (ii) easily
transported at low cost, (iii) have ready
demand in the market, (iv) are available
in large quantity throughout the year,
(v) involve least possible competition in
the market and (vi) can be described
through pictures etc., are suitable for
this type of trading. Another important
point in this regard is that mail house
business cannot be successfully carried
out unless education is wide spread.
It is so because only the literate
people can be reached through
advertisements and other forms of
written communication.
Advantages
(i) Limited capital requirement: Mail
order business does not require heavy
expenditure on building and other
infrastructural facilities. Therefore, it
can be started with relatively low
amount of capital.
(ii) Elimination of middle men: The
biggest advantage of mail-order
business from the point of view of
consumers is that unnecessary
middlemen between the buyers and
sellers are eliminated. This may result
in lot of savings both to the buyers as
well as to the sellers.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(iii) Absence of bad debt: Since the
mail order houses do not extend credit
facilities to the customers, there are
no chances of any bad debt on account
of non payment of cash by the
customers.
(iv) Wide reach: Under this system the
goods can be sent to all the places
having postal services. This opens wide
scope for business as a large number
of people throughout the country can
be served through mail.
(v) Convenience: Under this system
goods are delivered at the doorstep of
the customers. This results in great
convenience to the customers in buying
these products.
Limitations
(i) Lack of personal contact: As there
is no personal contact between the
buyers and the sellers under the
system of mail order selling, there
are greater possibilities of mis-
understanding and mistrust between
the two. The buyers are not in a position
to examine the products before buying
and the sellers cannot pay personal
attention to the likes and dislikes of the
buyers and cannot clear all their doubts
through catalogues and advertisements.
(ii) High promotion cost: The mail
order business has to rely heavily on
advertisements and other methods of
promotion in order to inform and
persuade the potential buyers to buy
their products. As a result, there is
heavy expenditure on promotion of the
products.
(iii) No after sales service: In mail
order selling, the buyers and sellers
may be located very far away from each
other and there is no personal contact
between the two. As a result, there is
absence of after sales services which is
so important for the satisfaction of the
customers.
(iv) No credit facilities: The mail order
houses do not provide credit facilities
to the buyers. Thus, customers with
limited means may not be interested in
this type of trading.
(v) Delayed delivery: There is no
immediate delivery of goods to the
customers, as receipt and execution of
order through mail takes its own time.
(vi) Possibility of abuse: This type of
business provides greater possibility of
abuse to dishonest traders to cheat the
customers by making false claims
about the products or not honouring
the commitments made through hand
bills or advertisements.
(vii) High dependence on postal
services: The success of mail order
business depends heavily on the
availability of efficient postal services at
a place.  But in a vast country like ours,
where many places are still without
postal facilities, this type of business
has limited prospects.
Consumer Cooperative Store
A consumer cooperative store is an
organisation owned, managed and
controlled by consumers themselves.
The objective of such stores is to reduce
the number of middlemen who increase
the cost of produce, and thereby
provide service to the members.
The cooperative stores generally
buy in large quantity, directly from
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNAL TRADE
manufacturers or wholesalers and sell
them to the consumers at reasonable
prices. Since the middleman are
eliminated or reduced, the members get
products of good quality at cheaper
rates. The profits earned by consumer
cooperative stores during a year are
utilised for declaring bonus to
members and for strengthening the
general reserves and general welfare
funds or similar funds for social and
educational benefits of the members.
To start a consumer cooperative
store, at least 10 people have to come
together and form a voluntary
association and get it registered
under the Cooperative Societies Act.
The capital of a cooperative store is
raised by issue of shares to members.
The management of the store is
democratic and entrusted to an
elected managing committee where
one man one vote is the rule. The
liability of the members of a
cooperative store is generally limited
to the extent of the capital contributed
by them. To ensure fair management
of funds, the accounts of the stores
are audited by the Registrar of
Cooperative Societies or a person
authorised by him/her.
Advantages
The major advantages of a consumer
cooperative store are as follows:
(i) Ease information: It is easy to form
a consumer cooperative society. Any
ten people can come together to form a
voluntary association and get
themselves registered with the Registrar
of Cooperative Societies by completing
certain formalities.
(ii) Limited liability: The liability of
the members in a cooperative store is
limited to the extent of the capital
contributed by them. Over and above
that amount, they are not liable
personally to pay for the debts of
society, in case the liabilities are
greater than its assets.
(iii) Democratic management:
Cooperative societies are democrati-
cally managed through management
committees which are elected by the
members. Each member has one vote,
irrespective of the number of shares
held by him/her.
(iv) Lower prices: A cooperative store
purchases goods directly from the
manufacturers or wholesalers and
sells them to members and others.
Elimination of middlemen results in
lower prices for the consumer goods to
the members.
(v) Cash sales: The consumer
cooperative stores normally sell goods on
cash basis. As a result, the requirement
for working capital is reduced.
(vi) Convenient location: The
consumer cooperative stores are
generally opened at convenient public
places where the members and others
can easily buy the products as per their
requirements.
Limitations
The limitations of consumer cooperative
stores are given as below:
(i) Lack of initiative: As the cooperative
stores are managed by people who work
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
on honorary basis, there is a lack of
sufficient initiative and motivation
amongst them to work more effectively.
(ii) Shortage of funds: The primary
source of funds for a cooperative store
is the money raised from members by
issue of shares. The stores generally face
shortage of funds as membership is
limited. This comes in the way of growth
and expansion of the cooperative stores.
(iii) Lack of patronage: The members
of the cooperative stores generally do
not patronise them regularly. As a
result of this, the stores are not able to
operate successfully.
(iv) Lack of business training: The
people entrusted with the management
of cooperative stores lack expertise as
they are not trained in running the
stores efficiently.
Super Markets
A super market is a large retailing
business unit selling wide variety of
consumer goods on the basis of low price
appeal, wide variety and assortment,
self-service and heavy emphasis on
merchandising appeal. The goods traded
are generally food products and other low
priced, branded and widely used
consumer products such as grocery,
utensils, clothes, electronic appliances,
household goods, and medicines. Super
markets are generally situated at the
main shopping centres. Goods are kept
on racks with clearly labelled price and
quality tags in such stores. The
customers move into the store to pick up
goods of their requirements, bring them
to the cash counter, make payment and
take home the delivery.
Super markets are organised on
departmental basis where customers
can buy various types of goods under
one roof. However, as compared to
departmental stores, these markets do
not offer certain services such as free
home delivery, credit facilities, etc., and
also do not appoint sales persons to
convince customers about the quality
of products. Some of the important
characteristics of a super market are
as follows:
(i) A super market generally carries
a complete line of food items and
groceries, in addition to non-food
convenience goods.
(ii) The buyers can purchase different
products as per their requirements
under one roof in such markets.
(iii) A super market operates on the
principle of self-service. The
distribution cost is, therefore,
lower.
(iv) The prices of the products are
generally lower than other types
of retail stores because of bulk
purchasing, lower operational
cost, and low profit margins.
(v) The goods are sold on cash basis
only.
(vi) The super markets are generally
located at central locations to
secure high turnover.
Advantages
The following are the merits of super
markets:
(i) One roof, low cost: Super markets
offer a wide variety of products at low
cost under one roof. These outlets are,
therefore, not only convenient but also
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNAL TRADE
economical to the buyers for making
their purchases.
(ii) Central location: The super
markets are generally located in the
heart of the city. As a result, these are
easily accessible to large number of
people staying in the surrounding
localities.
(iii) Wide selection: Super markets
keep a wide variety of goods of different
designs, colour, etc., which enables the
buyers to make better selection.
(iv) No bad debts: As generally the
sales are made on cash basis, there are
no bad debts in super markets.
(v) Benefits of being large scale: A
super market is a large scale retailing
store. It enjoys all the benefits of large
scale buying and selling because of
which its operating costs are lower.
Limitations
The major limitations of super markets
are as follows:
(i) No credit: Super markets sell their
products on cash basis only. No credit
facilities are made available to the
buyers. This restricts the purchasing
power of buyers from such markets.
(ii) No personal attention: Super
markets work on the principle of self-
service. The customers, therefore, do
not get any personal attention. As a
result, such commodities that require
personal attention by sales people
cannot be handled effectively in super
markets.
(iii) Mishandling of goods: Some
customers handle the goods kept in the
shelf carelessly. This may raise costs
in super markets.
(iv) High overhead expenses: Super
market incur high overhead expenses.
As a result these have not been able to
create low price appeal among the
customers.
(v) Huge capital requirement:
Establishing and running a super
market requires huge investment. The
turnover of a store should be high so
that the overheads are kept under
reasonable level. This can be possible
in bigger towns but not in small towns.
Vending Machines
Vending machines are the newest
revolution in marketing methods.
Coin operated vending machines are
proving useful in selling several
products such as hot beverages,
platform tickets, milk, soft drinks,
chocolates, newspaper, etc., in many
countries. Apart from some of the
products mentioned here, the latest
area in which this concept is getting
popular in many parts of our country
(particularly in the urban areas) is
the case of Automated Teller Machines
(ATM) in the banking service. As the
name suggests, these machines have
altogether changed the concept of
banking and made it possible to
withdraw money at any time without
visiting any branch of a bank.
Vending machines can be useful for
selling pre-packed brands of low priced
products which have high turnover
and which are uniform in size and
weight. However, the initial cost of
installing a vending machine and the
expenditure on regular maintenance
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
and repair are quite high. Also
consumers cannot feel or see the
product before buying and do not have
the opportunity of returning unwanted
goods. Apart from that, special packs
have to be developed for the machines.
The machines have to be made reliable
in their operations. In spite of these
limitations, with the growth in the
economy, vending machines have
a promising future in retail sales of
high turnover and low priced
consumer products.
ROLE OF C OMMERCE AND
INDUSTRY ASSOCIATIONS IS IN
PROMOTION OF INTERNAL TRADE
Associations of business and industrial
houses are formed to promote and
protect their common interest and
goals. Many such associations have
been formed and are present in the
country such as Associated Chamber
Commerce
Industry
(ASSOCHAM), Confederation of Indian
Industry (CII) and Federation of Indian
Chambers of Commerce and Industry
(FICCI). These associations or
chambers act as the national guardians
of trade, commerce and industry.
These associations have been
playing
catalytic
strengthening internal trade to make
it an important part of overall
economic activity.The Chambers of
Commerce and Industry interact with
the government at different levels to
reorient or put in place policies which
reduce hindrances, increase interstate
movement of goods, introduce
transparency and remove multiple
layers of  inspection and bureaucratic
hurdles. Besides, the chambers also
aim at erecting  sound infrastructure
and simplifying and harmonising the
tax structures. The  interventions  are
mainly  in  the  following  areas:
(i) Interstate movement of goods:
The Chambers of Commerce and
Industry help in many activities
concerning inter state movement of
goods which include registration of
vehicles, surface transport policies,
construction of highways and roads.
For example, the construction of
golden quadrilateral corridor
announced by the Prime Minister of
India in one of the Annual General
Meetings of the Federation of Indian
Chambers of Commerce and
Industry (FICCI) will facilitate
internal trade.
(ii) Octroi and other local levies:
Octroi and local taxes are the important
sources of revenue of the local
government. These are collected on the
goods and from people entering the
state or the municipal limits. The
Chambers of Commerce try to ensure
that their imposition is not at the cost
of smooth  transportation and  local
trade.
(iii) Harmonisation of sales tax
structure and  Value  Added  Tax:
The Chambers of Commerce and
Industry play an important role in
interacting with the government to
harmonise the sales tax structure in
different states. The sales tax is an
important part of   the  state revenue. A
rational structure of the sales tax and
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNAL TRADE
its uniform rates across states, are
important for promoting a balance in
trade. As per the new policy of the
government, the Value Added Tax is
being levied in place of the sales tax
to remove  the cascading effect of the
sales tax.
(iv) Marketing of agro products and
related issues: The associations of
agriculturists and other federations
play an important role in the
marketing
products.
Streamlining of local subsidies and
marketing policies of organisations
selling agro products are some of the
areas where the Chambers of
Commerce and Industry can really
intervene and interact with concerned
agencies like farming cooperatives.
(v) Weights and Measures and
prevention of duplication brands:
Laws relating to  weights and
measures and protection of brands
are necessary to protect the interest of
the consumers as well as the traders.
These need to be enforced strictly. The
Chambers of Commerce and Industry
interact with the government to
formulate such laws and take action
against those who violate rules
and regulations.
(vi) Excise duty: Central  excise is  the
chief  source of  the  government
revenue levied  across  states  by  the
central  government. The  excise  policy
plays  an important  role  in  pricing
mechanism. The trade associations
need to interact with the government
to ensure streamlining of excise
duties.
(vii) Promoting sound infrastructure:
A sound infrastructure like road, port,
electricity, railways etc., play a catalytic
role in promoting trade. The Chambers
of Commerce and Industry hold
discussions with government agencies
for investments into these projects.
(viii) Labour legislation: A simple
and flexible labour legislation is
helpful in running industries,
maximising production and generating
employment. The Chambers of
Commerce and Industry and the
government are constantly interacting
on issues like labour laws, retrenchment
etc. with the government.
Key Terms
Internal trade
Wholesales
Market traders
Wholesale trade
Retailers
Cheap jacks
Retail trade
Internal retailers
Speciality stores
Departmental stores
Chain stores
Vending machines
Super markets
Chambers of Commerce
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
SUMMARY
Trade refers to buying and selling of goods and services with the objective of
earning profit on the basis of geographical location of buyers and sellers. It
can be classified into two categories (i) internal trade; and (ii) external trade.
Internal trade: Buying and selling of goods and services within the
boundaries of a nation are referred to as internal trade. No custom duties or
import duties are levied on such trade as goods are part of domestic production
and are meant for domestic consumption. Internal trade can be categorised
into two broad categories (i) wholesale trade; and (ii) retailing trade.
Wholesale trade: Purchase and sale of goods and services in large quantities
for the purposes of resale or intermediate use is referred to as wholesale
trade. Wholesalers perform a number of functions in the process of
distribution of goods and services and provide valuable services to
manufacturers and retailers.
Services of wholesalers: Wholesalers are an important link between
manufacturers and retailers. They add value by creating time and place utility.
Services of manufacturers: The services provided by wholesalers to
manufacturers include (i) facilitating large scale production; (ii) bearing
risk; (iii) providing financial assistance; (iv) expert advice; (v) help in
marketing function; (vi) facilitating continuity; and (vii) storage.
Services to retailers: The services provided by wholesalers to retailers
include (i) availability of goods (ii) marketing support (iii) grant of credit (iv)
specialised knowledge (v) risk sharing
Retail trade: A retailer is a business enterprise that is engaged in the sale
of goods and services directly to the ultimate consumers.
Services of retailers: Retailers are an important link between the producers
and final consumers. They provide useful service to consumers wholesalers
and manufacturers in the distribution of products and services.
Services to manufacturers/wholesalers: Different services provided by
retailers to wholesalers and manufacturers include (i) helping distribution
of goods; (ii) personal selling; (iii) enabling large scale operations; (iv) collecting
market information; and (v) help in promotion of goods and services.
Services to consumers: The different services provided by retailers to
consumers include (i) regular availability of products (ii) new product
information (iii) convenience of buying (iv) trade selection (v) after sales
services and (vi) providing credit facilities.
Types of retail trade: Retail trade can be classified into different types
according to their size, type of ownership, on the basis of merchandise
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNAL TRADE
handled and whether they have fixed place of business or not. Retailers
can be categorised as (i) itinerant retailers; and (ii) fixed shop retailers.
Itinerant retailers: Itinerant retailers are traders who don’t have a fixed
place of business to operate from. They are small traders operating with
limited resources who keep on moving with their wares from street to street
or place to place in search of customers. The major types of such retailers
(i) Peddlers and hawkers: They are small producers or petty traders who
carry the products on a bicycle or handcart or on their heads and move
from place to place, to sell their goods at the doorstep of the customers.
(ii) Market traders: Market traders are small retailers who open their shops
at different places on fixed days/dates, catering mainly to lower income group
of customers and dealing in low priced consumer items of daily use.
(iii) Street trades: Street traders are the small retailers who are commonly
found at places where huge floating population gathers.
(iv) Cheap jacks: Cheap jacks are those petty retailers who have independent
shops of a temporary nature in a business location. They deal in consumer
items and provide services to consumers in terms of making the products
available where needed.
Fixed shop retailers: On the basis of size of operations, (fixed shop retailers
can be classified as a) small shopkeepers and (b) large retailers.
Fixed shop small retailers
(i) General stores: General stores carry stock of a variety of products such as
grocery items, soft drinks, toiletry products, confectionery, and stationery,
needed to satisfy day-to-day needs of consumers, residing in nearby localities.
(ii) Speciality shops: Speciality shops specialise in the sale of specific line
of products such as children’s garments, men’s wear, ladies shoes, school
uniform, college books or consumer electronic goods, etc.,
(iii) Street stall holders: These small vendors are commonly found at
street crossing or other places where flow of traffic is heavy and deal
mainly in goods of cheap variety like hosiery products, toys, cigarettes,
soft drinks, etc.
(iv) Second hand goods shop: These shops deals in second hand or used
goods of different kinds like furniture, books, clothes and other household
articles which are sold at lower prices.
(v) Single line stores: Single line stores deal in a single product line such as
ready made garments, watches, shoes etc., and keep variety of items of the
same line and are situated at central location.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Fixed shop large stores: In fixed shop large stores, the volume and variety
of goods stocked is large.
Departmental stores: A departmental store is a large establishment offering
a wide variety of products, classified into well-designed departments, aimed
at satisfying practically every customer’s need under one roof.
Advantages: (a) attracts large number of customers (b) convenience in
buying (c) attractive services (d) economy of large scale operation
(e) promotion of sales.
Limitations: (a) lacks personal attention (b) high operating cost (c) high
possibility of loss (d) inconvenient location.
Chain stores or multiple shops: These shops are networks of retail shops
that are owned and operated by manufacturers or intermediaries dealing
in standardised and branded consumer products having rapid sales
turnover.
Advantages:  (a) economies of scale (b) elimination of middlemen (c) no bad
debts (d) transfer of goods (e) diffusion of risk (e) low cost (f) flexibility.
Limitations: (a) limited selection of goods (b) lack of initiative (c) lack of
personal touch (d) difficult to change demand.
Difference between Departmental Stores and Multiple Shops: (a) location
(b) range of products (c) services offered (d) pricing (e) class of customers
(f) credit facilities (g) flexibility.
Mail order houses: Mail order houses are retail outlets that sell their
merchandise through mail, without any direct personal contact with the
buyers.
Advantages: (a) limited capital requirements (b) elimination of middlemen,
(c) absence of bad debts (d) wide reach (e) convenience.
Limitations: (a) lack of personal contact, (b) high promotion cost (c) no after
sales services (d) no credit facilities (e) delayed delivery (f) possibility of
abuse (g) high dependence on postal services.
Consumer cooperative stores: A consumer cooperative store is an
organisation owned managed and controlled by consumers themselves
formed with the objective of reducing the number of middlemen and thereby
providing services to members.
Advantages: (i) ease in formation (ii) limited liability (iii) democratic
management (iv) lower prices (v) cash sales (vi) convenient location.
Limitations: (i) lack of initiative (ii)shortage of funds (iii) lack of patronage
(iv) lack of business training.
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNAL TRADE
Super markets: A super market is a large retailing business unit selling
wide variety of consumer goods on the basis of low margin appeal, wide
variety and assortment and heavy emphasis on merchandising appeal.
Advantages: (i) one roof, low cost (ii) central location (iii) wide selection (iv)
no bad debts (v) benefits of large scale.
Limitations: (a) no credit (b) no personal attention (c) mishandling of goods
(d) high over head expenses (e) huge capital requirements.
Vending Machines: Vending machines are proving useful in selling
pre-packed brands of low priced products which have high turnover and
which are uniform in size and weight.
EXERCISES
Short Answer Questions
What is meant by internal trade?
Specify the characteristics of fixed shop retailers.
What purpose is served by wholesalers providing warehousing facilities?
How does market information provided by the wholesalers benefit the
manufacturers?
How does the wholesaler help the manufacturer in availing the economies
of scale?
Distinguish between single line stores and speciality stores. Can you
identify such stores in your locality?
How would you differentiate between street traders and street shops?
Explain the services offered by wholesalers to manufacturers.
What are the services offered by retailers to wholesalers and consumers?
Long Answer Questions
Itinerant traders have been an integral part of internal trade in India.
Analyse the reasons for their survival in spite of competition from large
scale retailers.
Discuss the features of a departmental store. How are they different from
multiple shops or chain stores.
Why are consumer cooperative stores considered to be less expensive?
What are its relative advantages over other large scale retailers?
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Imagine life without your local market. What difficulties would a consumer
face if there is no retail shop?
Explain the usefulness of mail orders houses. What type of products are
generally handled by them? Specify.
Projects/Assignments
Identify various fixed shop retailers in your locality and classify them
according to the different types you have studied.
Do you know any retailers selling second-hand goods in your area? Find
out the category of the product that they deal in ? Which products are
suitable for resale? List some of your findings. What conclusions do you
draw?
Do you observe any difference in the retail business of yesterday and the
times to come. Prepare a brief write-up and discuss it in class.
From you own experience, compare the features of two retail stores selling
the same product. For example, the same products being sold at a small
scale retailer like a general store and in a big store like a departmental
store. What similarities and differences can you identify in terms of price,
service, variety, convenience, etc.
© NCERT
not to be republished
CHAPTER 11
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - I
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
explain the meaning of international business;
state as to why international business takes place and how does
it differ from domestic business;
describe the scope of international business and its benefits to
the nation and business firms;
identify and evaluate various modes of entry into international
business; and
analyse trends in India’s involvement in international business.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
INTRODUCTION
Countries all over the world are
undergoing a fundamental shift in the
way they produce and market various
products and services. The national
economies which so far were pursuing
the goal of self-reliance are now
becoming increasingly dependent upon
others for procuring as well as
supplying various kinds of goods and
services. Due to increased cross border
trade and investments, countries are
no more isolated.
The prime reason behind this
radical change is the development
of communication, technology,
infrastructure etc. Emergence of newer
modes of communication and
development of faster and more efficient
means of transportation have brought
nations closer to one another.
Countries that were cut-off from one
another due to geographical distances
and socio-economic differences have
now started increasingly interacting
with others. World Trade Organisation
(WTO) and reforms carried out by the
Mr. Sudhir Manchanda is a small manufacturer of automobile components. His
factory is located in Gurgaon and employs about 55 workers with an investment
of Rs. 9.2 million in plant and machinery. Due to recession in the domestic
market, he foresees prospects of his sales going up in the next few years in the
domestic market. He is exploring the possibility of going international. Some of
his competitors are already in export business. A casual talk with one of his
close friends in the tyre business reveals that there is a substantial market for
automobile components and accessories in South-East Asia and Middle East.
But his friend also tells him, “Doing business internationally is not the same as
carrying out business within the home country. International business is more
complex as one has to operate under market conditions that are different from
those that one faces in domestic business”. Mr. Manchanda is, moreover, not
sure as to how he should go about setting up international business. Should he
himself identify and contact some overseas customers and start exporting directly
to them or else route his products through export houses which specialise in
exporting products made by others?
Mr. Manchanda’s son who has just returned after an MBA in USA suggests that
they should set up a fully owned factory in Bangkok for supplying to customers
in South-East Asia and Middle East. Setting up a manufacturing plant there
will help them save costs of transporting goods from India. This would also help
them coming closer to the overseas customers. Mr. Manchanda is in a fix as to
what to do. In the face of difficulties involved in overseas ventures as pointed out
by his friend, he is wondering about the desirability of entering into global
business. He is also not sure as to what the different ways of entering into
international market are and which one will best suit his purpose.
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - I
governments of different countries
have also been a major contributory
factor to the increased interactions and
business relations amongst the
nations.
We are today living in a world
where the obstacles to cross-border
movement of goods and persons have
substantially come down. The national
economies are increasingly becoming
borderless and getting integrated into
the world economy.  Little wonder that
the world has today come to be known
as a ‘global village’. Business in the
present day is no longer restricted to
the boundaries of the domestic
country. More and more firms are
making forays into international
business which presents them with
numerous opportunities for growth
and increased profits.
India has been trading with other
countries for a long time. But it has of
late considerably speeded up its
process of integrating with the world
economy and increasing its foreign
trade and investments (see Box A:
India Embarks on the Path to
Globalisation).
11.1.1
Meaning of International
Business
Business transaction taking place
within the geographical boundaries of
a nation is known as domestic or
national business. It is also referred to
as internal business or home trade.
Manufacturing and trade beyond the
boundaries of one’s own country is
known as international business.
International or external business can,
therefore, be defined as those business
activities that take place across the
Box A
India Embarks on the Path to Globalisation
International business has entered into a new era of reforms. India too did not
remain cut-off from these developments. India was under a severe debt trap and
was facing crippling balance of payment crisis. In 1991, it approached the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) for raising funds to tide over its balance of
payment deficits. IMF agreed to lend money to India subject to the condition that
India would undergo structural changes to be able to ensure repayment of
borrowed funds.
India had no alternative but to agree to the proposal. It was the very conditions
imposed by IMF which more or less forced India to liberalise its economic policies.
Since then a fairly large amount of liberalisation at the economic front has
taken place.
Though the process of reforms has somewhat slowed down, India is very much
on the path to globalisation and integrating with the world economy. While, on
the one hand, many multinational corporations (MNCs) have ventured into Indian
market for selling their products and services; many Indian companies too have
stepped out of the country to market their products and services to consumers
in foreign countries.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
national frontiers. It involves not only
the international movements of goods
and services, but also of capital,
personnel, technology and intellectual
property like patents, trademarks,
know-how and copyrights.
It may be mentioned here that
mostly people think of international
business as international trade. But
this is not true. No doubt international
trade, comprising exports and imports
of goods, has historically been an
important component of international
business. But of late, the scope
of international business has
substantially expanded. International
trade in services such as international
travel and tourism, transportation,
communication, banking, ware-
housing, distribution and advertising
has considerably grown. The other
equally important developments are
increased foreign investments and
overseas production of goods and
services. Companies have started
increasingly making investments into
foreign countries and undertaking
production of goods and services in
foreign countries to come closer to
foreign customers and serve them
more effectively at lower costs. All these
activities form part of international
business. To conclude, we can say that
international business is a much
broader term and is comprised of both
the trade and production of goods and
services across frontiers.
11.1.2
Reason for International
Business
The fundamental reason behind
international business is that the
countries cannot produce equally well
or cheaply all that they need. This is
because of the unequal distribution of
natural resources among them or
differences in their productivity levels.
Availability of various factors of
production such as labour, capital and
raw materials that are required for
producing different goods and services
differ among nations. Moreover, labour
productivity and production costs
differ among nations due to various
socio-economic, geographical and
political reasons.
International business involves commercial activities that cross national frontiers.
Roger Bennett
International business consists of transactions that are devised and carried
out across national borders to satisfy the objectives of the individuals, companies
and organisations. These transactions take on various forms which are often
interrelated.
Michael R. Czinkota
International business is all business transactions — private and
governmental — that involve two or more countries. Private companies undertake
such transactions for profits; governments may or may not do the same in their
transactions.
John D. Daniels and Lee H. Radebaugh
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - I
Due to these differences, it is not
uncommon to find one particular
country being in a better position to
produce better quality products and/
or at lower costs than what other
nations can do.  In other words, we can
say that some countries are in an
advantageous position in producing
select goods and services which other
countries cannot produce that
effectively and efficiently, and vice-
versa. As a result, each country finds it
advantageous to produce those select
goods and services that it can produce
more effectively and efficiently at home,
and procuring the rest through trade
with other countries which the other
countries can produce at lower costs.
This is precisely the reason as to why
countries trade with others and engage
in what is known as international
business.
The international business as it
exists today is to a great extent the
result of geographical specialisation as
pointed out above. Fundamentally, it
is for the same reason that domestic
trade between two states or regions
within a country takes place. Most
states or regions within a country tend
to specialise in the production of goods
and services for which they are best
suited. In India, for example, while
West Bengal specialises in jute
products; Mumbai and neighbouring
areas in Maharashtra are more involved
with the production of cotton textiles.
The same principle of territorial division
of labour is applicable at the
international level too. Most developing
countries which are labour abundant,
for instance, specialise in producing and
exporting garments. Since they lack
capital and technology, they import
textile machinery from the developed
nations which the latter are in a position
to produce more efficiently.
What is true for the nation is more
or less true for firms. Firms too engage
in international business to import what
is available at lower prices in other
countries, and export goods to other
countries where they can fetch better
prices for their products. Besides price
considerations, there are several other
benefits which nations and firms derive
from international business. In a way,
these other benefits too provide an
impetus to nations and firms to engage
in international business. We shall turn
our attention to some of these benefits
accruing to nations and firms from
engaging in international business in a
later section.
11.1.3
International Business vs.
Domestic Business
Conducting and managing international
business operations is more complex
than undertaking domestic business.
Because of variations in political, social,
cultural and economic environments
across countries, business firms find it
difficult to extend their domestic
business strategy to foreign markets. To
be successful in the overseas markets,
they need to adapt their product,
pricing, promotion and distribution
strategies and overall business plans to
suit the specific requirements of the
target foreign markets (see Box B on
Firms need to be Cognisant of
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Environmental Differences). Key aspects
in respect of which domestic and
international businesses differ from each
other are discussed below.
(i) Nationality of buyers and sellers:
Nationality of the key participants (i.e.,
buyers and sellers) to the business deals
differs between domestic and
international businesses. In the case of
domestic business, both the buyers and
sellers are from the same country. This
makes it easier for both the parties to
understand each other and enter into
business deals. But this is not the case
with international business where
buyers and sellers come from different
countries. Because of differences in their
languages, attitudes, social customs
and business goals and practices, it
becomes relatively more difficult for
them to interact with one another and
finalise business transactions.
(ii) Nationality of other stakeholders:
Domestic and international businesses
also differ in respect of the nationalities
of the other stakeholders such as
employees, suppliers, shareholders/
partners and  general public who
interact with business firms. While in
the case of domestic business all such
factors belong to one country, and
therefore relatively speaking depict
more consistency in their value systems
and behaviours; decision making in
international business becomes much
more complex as the concerned
business firms have to take into
account a wider set of values and
aspirations of the stakeholders
belonging to different nations.
Box B
Firms need to be Cognisant of Environmental Differences
It is to be kept in mind that conducting and managing international business is
not an easy venture. It is more difficult to manage international business operations
due to variations in the political, social, cultural and economic environments
that differ from country to country.
Simply being aware of these differences is not sufficient. One also needs to be
sensitive and responsive to these changes by way of introducing adaptations in
their marketing programmes and business strategies. It is, for instance, a well
known fact that because of poor lower per capita income, consumers in most of
the developing African and Asian countries are price sensitive and prefer to buy
less expensive products. But consumers in the developed countries like Japan,
United States, Canada, France, Germany and Switzerland have a marked
preference for high quality and high priced products due to their better ability to
pay. Business prudence, therefore, demands that the firms interested in marketing
to these countries are aware of such differences among the countries, and design
their strategies accordingly. It will be in the fitness of things if the firms interested
in exporting to these countries produce less expensive products for the consumers
in the African and Asian regions, and design and develop high quality products
for consumers in Japan and most of the European and North American countries.
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - I
(iii) Mobility
factors
production: The degree of mobility of
factors like labour and capital is
generally less between countries than
within a country. While these factors of
movement can move freely within the
country, there exist various restrictions
to their movement across nations.
Apart from legal restrictions, even the
variations
socio-cultural
environments, geographic influences
and economic conditions come in a big
way in their movement across
countries. This is especially true of the
labour which finds it difficult to adjust
to the climatic, economic and socio-
cultural conditions that differ from
country to country.
(iv) Customer heterogeneity across
markets: Since buyers in international
markets hail from different countries,
they differ in their socio-cultural
background. Differences in their tastes,
fashions, languages, beliefs and
customs, attitudes and product
preferences cause variations in not only
their demand for different products and
services, but also in variations in their
communication patterns and purchase
behaviours. It is precisely because of
the socio-cultural differences that while
people in China prefer bicycles, the
Japanese in contrast like to ride bikes.
Similarly, while people in India use
right-hand driven cars, Americans drive
cars fitted with steering, brakes, etc.,
on the left side. Moreover, while people
in the United States change their TV,
bike and other consumer durables very
frequently — within two to three years
of their purchase, Indians mostly do not
go in for such replacements until the
products currently with them have
totally worn out.
Such variations greatly complicate
the task of designing products and
evolving strategies appropriate for
customers in different countries.
Though to some extent customers
within a country too differ in their tastes
and preferences. These differences
become more striking when we
compare customers across nations.
(v) Differences in business systems
and practices: The differences in
business systems and practices are
considerably much more among
countries than within a country.
Countries differ from one another in
terms of their socio-economic
development, availability, cost and
efficiency of economic infrastructure
and market support services, and
business customs and practices due to
their socio-economic milieu and
historical coincidences. All such
differences make it necessary for firms
interested in entering into international
markets to adapt their production,
finance, human resource and
marketing plans as per the conditions
prevailing in the international markets.
(vi) Political system and risks:
Political factors such as the type of
government, political party system,
political ideology, political risks, etc.,
have a profound impact on business
operations. Since a business person is
familiar with the political environment
of his/her country, he/she can well
understand it and predict its impact on
business operations. But this is not the
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
case with international business.
Political environment differs from one
country to another. One needs to make
special efforts to understand the differing
political environments and their
business implications. Since political
environment keeps on changing, one
needs to monitor political changes on
an ongoing basis in the concerned
countries and devise strategies to deal
with diverse political risks.
A major problem with a foreign
country’s political environment is a
tendency among nations to favour
products and services originating in
their own countries to those coming
from other countries. While this is not
a problem for business firms operating
domestically, it quite often becomes a
severe problem for the firms interested
in exporting their goods and services to
other nations or setting up their plants
in the overseas markets.
(vii) Business regulations and
policies: Coupled with its socio-
economic environment and political
philosophy, each country evolves its
own set of business laws and
regulations. Though these laws,
regulations and economic policies are
more or less uniformly applicable within
a country, they differ widely among
nations. Tariff and taxation policies,
import quota system, subsidies and
other controls adopted by a nation are
not the same as in other countries and
often discriminate against foreign
products, services and capital.
(viii) Currency used in business
transactions: Another important
difference between domestic and
international business is that the latter
involves the use of different currencies.
Since the exchange rate, i.e., the price of
one currency expressed in relation to
that of another country’s currency,
keeps on fluctuating, it adds to the
problems of international business firms
in fixing prices of their products and
hedging against foreign exchange risks.
11.1.4
Scope of International
Business
As pointed out earlier, international
business is much broader than
international trade. It includes not only
international trade (i.e., export and
import of goods and services), but also
a wide variety of other ways in which
the firms operate internationally. Major
forms of business operations that
constitute international business are as
follows.
(i) Merchandise exports and imports:
Merchandise means goods that are
tangible, i.e., those that can be seen and
touched. When viewed from this
perceptive, it is clear that while
merchandise exports means sending
tangible goods abroad, merchandise
imports means bringing tangible goods
from a foreign country to one’s own
country. Merchandise exports and
imports, also known as trade in goods,
include only tangible goods and
exclude trade in services.
(ii) Service exports and imports:
Service exports and imports involve
trade in intangibles. It is because of the
intangible aspect of services that trade
in services is also known as invisible
trade. A wide variety of services are
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - I
Basis
Nationality of
buyers and
sellers
Nationality of
other
stakeholders
Mobility of
factors of
production
Customer
heterogeneity
across markets
Differences
in business
systems and
practices
Political
system and
risks
Business
regulations
and policies
Currency
used in
business
transactions
Domestic business
People or organisations
from one nation parti-
cipate
domestic
business transactions.
Various
other
stake-
holders such as suppliers,
employees, middlemen,
shareholders and partners
are usually citizens of the
same country.
The degree of mobility of
factors of production like
labour and capital is
relatively more within a
country.
Domestic markets are
relatively more homo-
geneous in nature.
Business systems and
practices are relatively
more homogeneous within
a country.
Domestic business is
subject to political system
and risks of one single
country.
Domestic business is
subject to rules, laws and
policies, taxation system,
etc., of a single country.
Currency of domestic
country is used.
International business
People or organisations of
different countries participate
in international business
transactions.
Various other stakeholders
such as suppliers, employees,
middlemen, shareholders and
partners are from different
nations.
The degree of mobility of factors
of production like labour and
capital across nations is
relatively less.
International markets lack
homogeneity due to differences
in language, preferences,
customs, etc., across markets.
Business
systems
practices vary considerably
across countries.
Different countries have different
forms of political systems and
different degrees of risks which
often become a barrier to
international business.
International business trans-
actions are subject to rules, laws
and policies, tariffs and quotas,
etc. of multiple countries.
International business trans-
actions
involve
currencies of more than one
country.
Table 11.1    Major Difference between Domestic
and International Business
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
traded internationally and these
include: tourism and travel, boarding
and lodging (hotel and restaurants),
entertainment and recreation,
transportation, professional services
(such as training, recruitment,
consultancy
research),
communication (postal, telephone, fax,
courier and other audio-visual
services), construction and engineering,
marketing (e.g., wholesaling, retailing,
advertising, marketing research
and warehousing), educational and
financial services (such as banking
and insurance). Of these, tourism,
transportation and business services
are major constituents of world trade
in services (see Box C).
(iii) Licensing and franchising:
Permitting another party in a foreign
country to produce and sell goods
under your trademarks, patents or
copy rights in lieu of some fee is
another way of entering into
international business. It is under the
licensing system that Pepsi and Coca
Cola are produced and sold all over the
world by local bottlers in foreign
countries. Franchising is similar to
licensing, but it is a term used in
connection with the provision of
services. McDonalds, for instance,
operates fast food restaurants the world
over through its franchising system.
(iv) Foreign investments: Foreign
investment is another important form
of international business. Foreign
investment involves investments of
funds abroad in exchange for financial
return. Foreign investment can be of
two types: direct and portfolio
investments.
Direct investment takes place when
a company directly invests in properties
Box C
Tourism, Transportation and Business Services dominate
International Trade in Services
Tourism and transportation have emerged as major components of
international trade in services. Most of the airlines, shipping companies, travel
agencies and hotels get their major share of revenues from their overseas
customers and operations abroad. Several countries have come to heavily depend
on services as an important source of foreign exchange earnings and
employment. India, for example, earns a sizeable amount of foreign exchange
from exports of services related to travel and tourism.
Business services: When one country provides services to other country and in
the process earns foreign exchange, this is also treated as a form of international
business activity. Fee received for services like banking, insurance, rentals,
engineering and management services form part of country’s foreign exchange
earnings. Undertaking of construction projects in foreign countries is also an
example of export of business services. The other examples of such services
include overseas management contracts where arrangements are made by one
company of a country which provides personnel to perform general or specialised
management functions for another company in a foreign country in lieu of the
other country.
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - I
such as plant and machinery in foreign
countries with a view to undertaking
production and marketing of goods
and services in those countries. Direct
investment provides the investor a
controlling interest in a foreign
company. This is otherwise known as
Foreign Direct Investment, i.e., FDI.
When investments in production and
marketing facilities are made jointly
with one or more foreign parties, such
an operation is known as a joint
venture. A company, if it so desires, can
also set up a wholly owned subsidiary
abroad by making 100 per cent
investment in foreign ventures, and
thus acquiring full control over
subsidiary’s operations in the foreign
market.
A portfolio investment, on the other
hand, is an investment that a company
makes into another company by the
way of acquiring shares or providing
loans to the latter, and earns income
by way of dividends or interest on
loans. Unlike foreign direct investments,
the investor under portfolio investment
does not get directly involved into
production and marketing operations.
It simply earns an income by investing
in shares, bonds, bills, or notes in a
foreign country or providing loans to
foreign business firms.
11.1.5
Benefits of International
Business
Notwithstanding greater complexities
and risks, international business is
important to both nations and business
firms. It offers them several benefits.
Growing realisation of these benefits
over time has in fact been a contributory
factor to the expansion of trade and
investment amongst nations, resulting
in the phenomenon of globalisation.
Some of the benefits of international
business to the nations and business
firms are discussed below.
Benefits to Nations
(i) Earning of foreign exchange:
International business helps a country
to earn foreign exchange which it can
later use for meeting its imports of
capital goods, technology, petroleum
products and fertilisers, pharma-
ceutical products and a host of other
consumer products which otherwise
might not be available domestically.
(ii) More efficient use of resources:
As stated earlier, international business
operates on a simple principle —
produce what your country can
produce more efficiently, and trade the
surplus production so generated with
other countries to procure what they can
produce more efficiently. When
countries trade on this principle, they
end up producing much more than
what they can when each of them
attempts to produce all the goods and
services on its own. If such an enhanced
pool of goods and services is distributed
equitably amongst nations, it benefits
all the trading nations.
(iii) Improving growth prospects and
employment potentials: Producing
solely for the purposes of domestic
consumption severely restricts a
country’s prospects for growth and
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
employment. Many countries, espe-
cially the developing ones, could not
execute their plans to produce on a
larger scale, and thus create
employment for people because their
domestic market was not large enough
to absorb all that extra production.
Later on a few countries such as
Singapore, South Korea and China
which saw markets for their products
in the foreign countries embarked upon
the strategy ‘export and flourish’, and
soon became the star performers on the
world map. This helped them not only
in improving their growth prospects,
but also created opportunities for
employment of people living in these
countries.
(iv) Increased standard of living: In
the absence of international trade of goods
and services, it would not have been
possible for the world community to
consume goods and services produced
in other countries that the people in these
countries are able to consume and enjoy
a higher standard of living.
Benefits to Firms
(i) Prospects for higher profits:
International business can be more
profitable than the domestic business.
When the domestic prices are lower,
business firms can earn more profits
by selling their products in countries
where prices are high.
(ii) Increased capacity utilisation:
Many firms setup production
capacities for their products which
are in excess of demand in the
domestic market. By planning overseas
expansion and procuring orders from
foreign customers, they can think of
making use of their surplus production
capacities and also improving the
profitability of their operations.
Production on a larger scale often leads
to economies of scale, which in turn
lowers production cost and improves
per unit profit margin.
(iii) Prospects for growth: Business
firms find it quite frustrating when
demand for their products starts
getting saturated in the domestic
market. Such firms can considerably
improve prospects of their growth by
plunging into overseas markets. This
is precisely what has prompted many
of the multinationals from the
developed countries to enter into
markets of developing countries. While
demand in their home countries has got
almost saturated, they realised their
products were in demand in the
developing countries and demand was
picking up quite fast.
(iv) Way out to intense compe-
tition in domestic market: When
competition in the domestic market is
very intense, internationalisation seems
to be the only way to achieve significant
growth. Highly competitive domestic
market drives many companies to go
international in search of markets for
their products. International business
thus acts as a catalyst of growth for
firms facing tough market conditions
on the domestic turf.
(v) Improved business vision: The
growth of international business of
many companies is essentially a part
of their business policies or strategic
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - I
management. The vision to become
international comes from the urge to
grow, the need to become more
competitive, the need to diversify and
to gain strategic advantages of
internationalisation.
MODES
OF ENTRY
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
Simply speaking, the term mode means
the manner or way. The phrase ‘modes
of entry into international business’,
therefore, means various ways in which
a company can enter into international
business. While discussing the
meaning and scope of international
business, we have already familiarised
you with some of the modes of entry
into international business. In the
following sections, we shall discuss in
detail important ways of entering into
international business along with their
advantages and limitations. Such a
discussion will enable you to know as
to which mode is more suitable under
what conditions.
11.2.1
Exporting and Importing
Exporting refers to sending of goods
and services from the home country to
a foreign country. In a similar vein,
importing is purchase of foreign
products and bringing them into one’s
home country. There are two important
ways in which a firm can export or
import products: direct and indirect
exporting/importing. In the case of
direct exporting/importing, a firm
itself approaches the overseas buyers/
suppliers and looks after all the
formalities related to exporting/
importing activities including those
related to shipment and financing of
goods and services. Indirect exporting/
importing, on the other hand, is one
where the firm’s participation in
the export/import operations is
minimum, and most of the tasks
relating to export/import of the goods
are carried out by some middle men
such as export houses or buying
offices of overseas customers located
in the home country or wholesale
importers in the case of import
operations. Such firms do not directly
deal with overseas customers in the
case of exports and suppliers in the
case of imports.
Advantages
Major advantages of exporting include:
• As compared to other modes of
entry, exporting/importing is the
easiest way of gaining entry into
international markets. It is less
complex an activity than setting
up and managing joint-ventures
or wholly owned subsidiaries
abroad.
• Exporting/importing is less
involving in the sense that
business firms are not required to
invest that much time and money
as is needed when they desire to
enter into joint ventures or set up
manufacturing plants and
facilities in host countries.
• Since exporting/importing does
not require much of investment in
foreign countries, exposure to
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
foreign investment risks is nil or
much lower than that is present
when firms opt for other modes of
entry into international business.
Limitations
Major limitations of exporting/
importing as an entry mode of
international business are as follows:
• Since the goods physically move
from one country to another,
exporting/importing involves
additional packaging, trans-
portation and insurance costs.
Especially in the case of heavy
items, transportation costs alone
become an inhibiting factor to
their exports and imports. On
reaching the shores of foreign
countries, such products are
subject to custom duty and a
variety of other levies and charges.
Taken together, all these expenses
and payments substantially
increase product costs and make
them less competitive.
• Exporting is not a feasible option
when import restrictions exist in
a foreign country. In such a
situation, firms have no alternative
but to opt for other entry modes
such as licensing/franchising or
joint venture which makes it
feasible to make the product
available by way of producing and
marketing it locally in foreign
countries.
• Export firms basically operate
from their home country. They
produce in the home country and
then ship the goods to foreign
countries. Except a few visits made
by the executives of export firms
to foreign countries to promote
their products, the export firms in
general do not have much contact
with the foreign markets. This puts
the export firms in a disadvan-
tageous position vis-à-vis the local
firms which are very near the
customers and are able to better
understand and serve them.
Despite the above mentioned
limitations, exporting/importing is the
most preferred way for business firms
when they are getting initially involved
with international business. As usually
is the case, firms start their overseas
operations with exports and imports,
and later having gained familiarity with
the foreign market operations switch
over to other forms of international
business operations.
11.2.2
Contract Manufacturing
Contract manufacturing refers to a type
of international business where a firm
enters into a contract with one or a few
local manufacturers in foreign countries
to get certain components or goods
produced as per its specifications.
Contract manufacturing, also known as
outsourcing, can take three major forms:
• Production of certain components
such as automobile components
or shoe uppers to be used later for
producing final products such as
cars and shoes;
• Assembly of components into final
products such as assembly of hard
disk, mother board, floppy disk
drive and modem chip into
computers; and
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - I
• Complete manufacture of the
products such as garments.
The goods are produced or assembled
by the local manufacturers as per the
technology and management guidance
provided to them by the foreign
company. The goods so manufactured
or assembled by the local producers
are delivered to the international firm
for use in its final products or out
rightly sold as finished products by the
international firm under its brand
names in various countries including
the home, host and other countries. All
the major international companies such
as Nike, Reebok, Levis and Wrangler
today get their products or components
produced in the developing countries
under contract manufacturing.
Advantages
Contract manufacturing offers several
advantages to both the international
company and local producers in the
foreign countries.
• Contract manufacturing permits
the international firms to get the
goods produced on a large scale
without requiring investment in
setting up production facilities.
These firms make use of the
production facilities already
existing in the foreign countries.
• Since there is no or little
investment in the foreign
countries, there is hardly any
investment risk involved in the
foreign countries.
• Contract manufacturing also gives
an advantage to the international
company of getting products
manufactured or assembled at
lower costs especially if the local
producers happen to be situated
in countries which have lower
material and labour costs.
• Local producers in foreign
countries also gain from contract
manufacturing. If they have any
idle production capacities,
manufacturing jobs obtained on
contract basis in a way provide a
ready market for their products
and ensure greater utilisation of
their production capacities. This is
how the Godrej group is benefitting
from contract manufacturing in
India. It is manufacturing soaps
under
contract
multinationals including Dettol
soap for Reckitt and Colman. This
has considerably helped it in
making use of its excess soap
manufacturing capacity.
• The local manufacturer also gets
the opportunity to get involved with
international business and avail
incentives, if any, available to the
export firms in case the international
firm desires goods so produced  be
delivered to its home country or to
some other foreign countries.
Limitations
The major disadvantages of contract
manufacturing to international firm
and local producer in foreign countries
are as follows:
• Local firms might not adhere to
production design and quality
standards, thus causing serious
product quality problems to the
international firm.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
• Local manufacturer in the foreign
country loses his control over the
manufacturing process because
goods are produced strictly as per
the terms and specifications of the
contract.
• The local firm producing under
contract manufacturing is not free
to sell the contracted output as
per its will. It has to sell the goods
to the international company at
predetermined prices. This results
in lower profits for the local firm if
the open market prices for such
goods happen to be higher than
the prices agreed upon under the
contract.
11.2.3
Licensing and Franchising
Licensing is a contractual arrangement
in which one firm grants access to its
patents, trade secrets or technology to
another firm in a foreign country for a
fee called royalty. The firm that grants
such permission to the other firm is
known as licensor and the other firm
in the foreign country that acquires
such rights to use technology or
patents is called the licensee. It may
be mentioned here that it is not only
technology that is licensed. In the
fashion industry, a number of
designers license the use of their
names. In some cases, there is
exchange of technology between the
two firms. Sometimes there is mutual
exchange of knowledge, technology
and/or patents between the firms
which is known as cross-licensing.
Franchising is a term very similar
to licensing. One major distinction
between the two is that while the former
is used in connection with production
and marketing of goods, the term
franchising applies to service business.
The other point of difference between
the two is that franchising is relatively
more stringent than licensing.
Franchisers usually set strict rules and
regulations as to how the franchisees
should operate while running their
business.  Barring these two differences,
franchising is pretty much the same as
licensing.  Like in the case of licensing,
a franchising agreement too involves
grant of rights by one party to another
for use of technology, trademark and
patents in return of the agreed
payment for a certain period of time.
The parent company is called the
franchiser and the other party to the
“Franchising is basically a specialised form of licensing in which the franchisor
not only sells intangible property (normally a trademark) to the franchisee, but
also insists that the franchisee agrees to abide by strict rules as to how it does
business.”
Charles W.L. Hill
Franchising is a “form of licensing in which a parent company (the franchisor)
grants another independent entity (the franchisee) the right to do business in a
prescribed manner. This right can take the form of selling the franchisers
products, ‘using its name, production and marketing technique, or general
business approach.”
Donald W. Hackett
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - I
agreement is called franchisee. The
franchiser can be any service provider
be it a restaurant, hotel, travel agency,
bank wholesaler or even a retailer - who
has developed a unique technique for
creating and marketing of services
under its own name and trade mark. It
is the uniqueness of the technique that
gives the franchiser an edge over its
competitors in the field, and makes the
would-be-service providers interested
in joining the franchising system.
McDonald, Pizza Hut and Wal-Mart are
examples of some of the leading
franchisers operating worldwide.
Advantages
As compared to joint ventures and
wholly owned subsidiaries, licensing/
franchising is relatively a much easier
mode of entering into foreign markets
with proven product/technology
without much business risks and
investments. Some of the specific
advantages of licensing are as follows:
• Under the licensing/franchising
system, it is the licensor/
franchiser who sets up the
business unit and invests his/her
own money in the business. As
such, the licensor/franchiser has
to virtually make no investments
abroad. Licensing/franchising is,
therefore, considered a less
expensive mode of entering into
international business.
• Since no or very little foreign
investment is involved, licensor/
franchiser is not a party to the losses,
if any, that occur to foreign business.
Licensor/franchiser is paid by the
licensee/franchisee by way of fees
fixed in advance as a percentage of
production or sales turnover. This
royalty or fee keeps accruing to the
licensor/franchiser so long as the
production and sales keep on taking
place in the licensee’s/franchisee’s
business unit.
• Since the business in the foreign
country is managed by the
licensee/franchisee who is a local
person, there are lower risks of
business takeovers or government
interventions.
• Licensee/franchisee being a local
person has greater market
knowledge and contacts which
can prove quite helpful to the
licensor/franchiser in successfully
conducting
marketing
operations.
• As per the terms of the licensing/
franchising agreement, only the
parties to the licensing/franchising
agreement are legally entitled to
make use of the licens or’s/
franchiser’s copyrights, patents
and brand names in foreign
countries. As a result, other firms
in the foreign market cannot make
use of such trademarks and
patents.
Limitations
Licensing/franchising as a mode of
international business suffers from the
following weaknesses.
• When a licensee/franchisee
becomes skilled in the manu-
facture and marketing of the
licensed/franchised products,
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
there is a danger that the licensee
can start marketing an identical
product under a slightly different
brand name. This can cause
severe competition to the licenser/
franchiser.
• If not maintained properly, trade
secrets can get divulged to others
in the foreign markets. Such
lapses on the part of the licensee/
franchisee can cause severe losses
to the licensor/franchiser.
• Over time, conflicts often develop
between the licensor/franchiser
and licensee/franchisee over
issues such as maintenance of
accounts, payment of royalty and
non-adherence to norms relating
to production of quality products.
These differences often result in
costly litigations, causing harm to
both the parties.
11.2.4
Joint Ventures
Joint venture is a very common
strategy for entering into foreign
markets.  A joint venture means
establishing a firm that is jointly
owned by two or more otherwise
independent firms. In the widest sense
of the term, it can also be described
as any form of association which
implies collaboration for more than a
transitory period. A joint ownership
venture may be brought about in
three major ways:
(i) Foreign investor buying an
interest in a local company
(ii) Local firm acquiring an interest in
an existing foreign firm
(iii) Both the foreign and local
entrepreneurs jointly forming a
new enterprise.
Advantages
Major advantages of joint venture
include:
• Since the local partner also
contributes to the equity capital
venture,
international firm finds it
financially less burdensome to
expand globally.
• Joint ventures make it possible
to execute large projects
requiring huge capital outlays
and manpower.
• The foreign business firm
benefits from a local partner’s
knowledge of the host countries
regarding the competitive
conditions, culture, language,
political systems and business
systems.
• In many cases entering into a
foreign market is very costly and
risky. This can be avoided by
sharing costs and/or risks with
a local partner under joint
venture agreements.
Limitations
Major limitations of a joint venture are
discussed below:
• Foreign firms entering into joint
ventures share the technology and
trade secrets with local firms in
foreign countries, thus always
running the risks of such a
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - I
technology and secrets being
disclosed to others.
• The dual ownership arrangement
may lead to conflicts, resulting in
battle for control between the
investing firms.
11.2.5 Wholly Owned Subsidiaries
This entry mode of international
business is preferred by companies
which want to exercise full control over
their overseas operations. The parent
company acquires full control over the
foreign company by making 100 per
cent investment in its equity capital. A
wholly owned subsidiary in a foreign
market can be established in either of
the two ways:
(i) Setting up a new firm altogether
to start operations in a foreign
country — also referred to as a
green field venture, or
(ii) Acquiring an established firm in
the foreign country and using that
firm to manufacture and/or
promote its products in the host
nation.
Advantages
Major advantages of a wholly owned
subsidiary in a foreign country are as
follows:
• The parent firm is able to exercise
full control over its operations in
foreign countries.
• Since the parent company on its
own looks after the entire operations
of foreign subsidiary, it is not
required to disclose its technology
or trade secrets to others.
Limitations
The limitations of setting up a wholly
owned subsidiary abroad include:
• The parent company has to make
100 per cent equity investments
in the foreign subsidiaries. This
form of international business is,
therefore, not suitable for small
and medium size firms which do
not have enough funds with them
to invest abroad.
• Since the parent company owns
100 per cent equity in the foreign
company, it alone has to bear the
entire losses resulting from failure
of its foreign operations.
• Some countries are averse to
setting up of 100 per cent wholly
owned subsidiaries by foreigners
in their countries. This form of
international business operations,
therefore, becomes subject to
higher political risks.
INDIA’S INVOLVEMENT IN WORLD
BUSINESS
India is now the 10th largest economy
in the world and the fastest growing
economy, next only to China.  As per
the Goldman Sach Report 2004, India
is poised to be the second largest
economy by 2050. Despite these
features, India’s involvement with
international business is not very
impressive. India’s share in world trade
in 2003 was abysmally low i.e., just 0.8
per cent as compared to those of other
developing countries such as China
(5.9 per cent), Hong Kong (3.0 per cent),
South Korea (2.6 per cent), Malaysia
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(1.3 per cent), Singapore (1.9 per cent),
and Thailand (1.1 per cent). Even in
respect of foreign investments, India
has been considerably lagging behind
other countries. The following sections
provide an overview of the major trends
and developments in India’s foreign
trade and investments.
11.3.1
India’s Foreign Trade in
Goods
India accounts for a small share in
world trade, its exports and imports
Rs. 606 crores in 1950-51 which
increased to Rs. 2,93,367 crores in
2003-04, representing an increase of
over 480 times over the last five decades
or so (see Table 11.2). The country’s
imports too depict a similarly
phenomenal growth. Total imports which
stood at Rs. 608 crores in 1950-51
increased to Rs. 3,59,108 crores in
2003-04, thus registering a growth of
about 590 times during the same period.
Compostion wise, textiles and
garments, gems and jewellery,
constitute major economic activities for
the country. Due to faster growth
achieved at the external front, share of
foreign trade in the country’s Gross
Domestic
Product
(GDP)
considerably increased from 14.6 per
cent in 1990-91 to 24.1 per cent in
2003-04.
In absolute terms, both the
exports and imports have witnessed
phenomenal growth over the years.
India’s total merchandise exports were
engineering products and chemicals
and related products and agricultural
and allied products are India’s
major items of India’s exports (see
Table 11.3). Although in overall terms
India accounts for just 0.8 per cent
of world exports, in many individual
product items such as tea, pearls,
precious and semi-precious stones,
medicinal and pharmaceutical
products, rice, spices, iron ore and
concentrates, leather and leather
Table 11.2    India’s Exports and Imports: 1950-51 to 2003-04
(Value: Rs. crores)
Exports*
Imports
Trade balance
1950-51
1960-61
1970-71
1980-81
12549
-5838
1990-91
32553
43198
-10645
1995-96
106353
122678
-16325
2000-01
203571
230873
-27302
2001-02
209018
245200
-36182
2002-03
255137
297206
-42069
2003-04
293367
359108
-65741
Source: DGCIS
* Including re-exports.
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - I
manufactures, textile yarns fabrics,
garments and tobacco, its share is
much higher and ranges between 3
per cent to13 per cent. India even
holds the distinct position of being the
largest exporter in the world in select
commodities such as basmati rice,
tea, and ayurvedic products.
So far as imports are concerned,
products likes crude oil and petroleum
products, capital goods (i.e.,
machinery), electronic goods, pearl,
precious and semi-precious stones,
gold, silver and chemicals constitute
major items of India’s imports
(Table 11.4).
Table 11.4    Commodity Composition of India’s Imports
Product
Percentage share
2002-03
2003-04
Petroleum, oil and lubricants (POL)
Pearl, precious and semi-precious stones
Capital goods
Electronic goods
Gold and silver
Chemicals
Edible oils
Coke, coal and briquettes
Metal ferrous ores and metal scrap
Professional equipments and optical goods
Others
Total imports
100.0
100.0
Source: DGCIS, Calcutta as reported in Government of India, Economic Survey:
2004-2005, New Delhi.
Table 11.3    Commodity Composition of India’s Exports
Product
Percentage share
2002-03
2003-04
Primary  products
• Agricultural and allied
• Ores and minerals
II Manufactured goods
• Textiles including garments
• Gems and jewellery
• Engineering goods
• Chemicals and related products
• Leather and manufactures
III Petroleum, crude and related products
IV Others
Total exports
100.0 100.0
Source: DGCIS, Calcutta as reported in Government of India, Economic Survey:
2004-2005, New Delhi.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
India’s eleven major trading
partners include USA, UK, Belgium,
Germany, Japan, Switzerland, Hong
Kong, UAE, China, Singapore and
Malaysia. While USA has been India’s
leading trade partner with a share of
11.6 per cent in India’s total trade
(including both exports and imports),
shares of other ten countries have been
in the range of 2.1 per cent to 4.4 per
cent in 2003-04 (see Table 11.5).
11.3.2
India’s Trade in Services
India’s trade in services have also
grown manifold over the years.
Table 11.6 contains data on exports
and imports of India’s three services
which have been historically important
to India. It is obvious from the table that
both the exports and imports of services
relating to foreign travel, transportation
and insurance have increased
Table 11.5    India’s Major Trading Partners
Country
Percentage share in India’s
total trade (exports + imports)
2002-03
2003-04
Belgium
Germany
Japan
Switzerland
Hong Kong
China
10. Singapore
11. Malaysia
Sub total (1 to 11)
Others
Total imports
100.0
100.0
Source: DGCIS, Calcutta as reported in Government of India, Economic Survey:
2004-2005, New Delhi.
1960-61 1970-71 1980-81 1990-91 2000-01
2002-03
2004-05
Exports
• Foreign travel
16064
15991
18873
• Transportation
12261
14958
• Insurance
Imports
• Foreign travel
12741
16155
16111
•Transportation
16172
15826
10703
• Insurance
Table 11.6    India’s Trade in Services
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - I
spectacularly during the last four
decades. What is more remarkable is
the change in the composition of
services exports. Software and other
miscellaneous services (including
professional technical and business
services) have emerged as the main
categories of India’s exports of services.
While the relative share of travel and
transportation has declined from 64.3
per cent in 1995-96 to 29.6 per cent in
2003-2004, the share of software
exports has gone up from 10.2 per cent
to around 49 per cent in the
corresponding period (see Table 11.7).
Key Terms
International business
Licensing
International trade
Portfolio investment
Franchising
Merchandise trade
Exporting
Outsourcing
Invisible trade
Importing
Joint ventures
Foreign investment
Contract-
Wholly owned subsidiaries
manufacturing
11.3.3 India’s Foreign Investments
Data relating to India’s foreign
investments — both inward and
outward — are provided in Table 11.8.
It can be seen that there has been a
phenomenal increase in foreign
investments flow into and from India.
While the inward foreign investments
have grown more than 750 times from
just Rs. 201 crores in 1990-91 to Rs.
1,51,406 crores in 2003-04, India’s
investments abroad have increased much
more exponentially — around 4,927
times — from Rs. 19 crores in 1990-91
to Rs. 8,3,616 crores in 2003-04.
Table 11.8    Foreign Investment flows into and out of India
Value: Rs. crores
1990-91
2000-01
2001-02
2002-03
2003-04
Inflows
80824
73907
67756
151406
Outflows
54080
41987
47658
83616
26744
31920
22098
67592
Table 11.7    Percentage Shares of Major Services to Total Services Exports
Travel
Transportation
Software
Miscellaneous
1995-96
2000-01
2001-02
2002-03
2003-04
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
SUMMARY
International Business: International business refers to business activities
that take place across national frontiers. Though many people use the terms
international business and international trade synonymously, the former
is a much broader term. International business involves not only trade in
goods and services, but also other operations such as production and
marketing of goods and services in foreign countries.
Reasons: The primary reason for international business is that nations
cannot efficiently produce all that they require. Due to differences in resource
endowments and labour productivity, countries find it much more
advantageous to produce goods and services in which they have cost
advantage and trade the surplus in such goods and services with other
nations in exchange of goods and services which others can produce more
efficiently.
International vs Domestic business: Conducting and managing
international business operations is more complex than undertaking
domestic business. Differences in the nationality of parties involved,
relatively less mobility of factors of production, customer heterogeneity across
markets, variations in business practises and political systems, varied
business regulations and policies, use of different currencies are the key
aspects that differentiate international businesses from domestic business.
These, moreover, are the factors that make international business much
more complex and a difficult activity.
Scope: Scope of international business is quite wide. It includes not only
merchandise exports, but also trade in services, licensing and franchising
as well as foreign investments.
Benefits: International business benefits both the nations and firms. Nations
gain by way of earning foreign exchange, more efficient use of domestic
resources, greater prospects of growth and creation of employment
opportunities. The advantages to the business firms include: prospects for
higher profits, greater utilisation of production capacities, way out to intense
competition in domestic market and improved business vision.
Modes of entry: A firm desirous of entering into international business has
several options available to it. These range from exporting/importing to
contract manufacturing abroad, licensing and franchising, joint ventures
and setting up wholly owned subsidiaries abroad. Each entry mode has its
own advantages and disadvantages which the firm needs to take into
account while deciding as to which mode of entry it should prefer.
India’s involvement in world business: Since time immemorial, India has
been trading with foreign countries. Over the years, India’s trade has
registered spectacular growth. Currently, foreign trade accounts for about
24 per of the country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Textiles and garments,
gems and jewellery, engineering products and chemicals and related
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - I
products and agricultural and allied products are India’s major items of
exports. Important items of its imports include: crude oil and petroleum
products, capital goods (i.e., machinery), electronic goods, pearls, precious
and semi-precious stones, gold, silver and chemicals.
USA, UK, Belgium, Germany, Japan, Switzerland, Hong Kong, UAE, China,
Singapore and Malaysia are the major trading partners. These eleven
countries together accounted for about 48 per cent of India’s total trade
(comprising of both the exports and imports) in 2003-04.
Trade in Services: India’s trade in services have also undergone significant
changes over the years in terms of both the volume and composition of
trade. The most conspicuous change relates to emergence of software
exports which of late have to account for about 49 per cent of India’s total
services exports.
Data relating to India’s foreign investments (both inward and outward) too
show remarkable growth. While the inward foreign investments have grown
more than 750 times, from just Rs. 201 crores in 1990-91 to Rs. 1,51,406
in 2003-04, India’s investments abroad have increased much more
exponentially, around 4,927 times, from Rs. 19 crores in 1990-91 to
Rs. 83,616 crores in 2003-04.
India’s performance, however, does not appear very satisfactory in terms of
international comparison. India’s share in world trade is a mere 0.8 per
cent. Its position in respect of foreign investments too is poor. India continues
to lag considerably behind other developing countries which have emerged
as major destinations for foreign investments.
EXERCISES
Multiple Choice Questions
In which of the following modes of entry, does the domestic manufacturer
give the right to use intellectual property such as patent and trademark
to a manufacturer in a foreign country for a fee
Licensing
Contract
manufacturing
Joint venture
None of these
Outsourcing a part of or entire production and concentrating on
marketing operations in international business is known as
Licensing
Franchising
Contract manufacturing
Joint venture
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
When two or more firms come together to create a new business entity
that is legally separate and distinct from its parents it is known as
Contract manufacturing
Franchising
Joint ventures
Licensing
Which of the following is not an advantage of exporting?
Easier way to enter into
Comparatively lower
international markets
risks
Limited presence in
Less investment
foreign markets
requirements
Which one of the following modes of entry requires higher level of risks?
Licensing
Franchising
Contract manufacturing
Joint venture
Which one of the following modes of entry permits greatest degree of
control over overseas operations?
Licensing/franchising
Wholly owned
subsidiary
Contract manufacturing
Joint venture
Which one of the following modes of entry brings the firm closer to
international markets?
Licensing
Franchising
Contract manufacturing
Joint venture
Which one of the following is not amongst India’s major export items?
Textiles and garments
Gems and jewellery
Oil and petroleum products
Basmati rice
Which one of the following is not amongst India’s major import items?
Ayurvedic medicines
Oil and petroleum
products
Pearls and precious stones
Machinery
10. Which one of the following is not amongst India’s major trading partners?
Germany
New Zealand
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - I
Short Answer Questions
Differentiate between international trade and international business.
Discuss any three advantages of international business.
What is the major reason underlying trade between nations?
Discuss as to why nations trade.
Enumerate limitations of contract manufacturing.
Why is it said that licensing is an easier way to expand globally?
Differentiate between contract manufacturing and setting up wholly
owned production subsidiary abroad.
Distinguish between licensing and franchising.
List major items of India’s exports.
10. What are the major items that are exported from India?
11. List the major countries with whom India trades.
Long Answer Questions
What is international business? How is it different from domestic
business?
“International business is more than international trade”. Comment.
What benefits do firms derive by entering into international business?
In what ways is exporting a better way of entering into international
markets than setting up wholly owned subsidiaries abroad.
Discuss briefly the factors that govern the choice of mode of entry into
international business.
Discuss the major trends in India’s foreign trade. Also list the major
products that India trades with other countries.
What is invisible trade? Discuss salient aspects of India’s trade in
services.
© NCERT
not to be republished
CHAPTER 12
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - II
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
discuss important steps and documents involved in executing
export transactions;
explain major steps and documents involved in carrying out
import transactions;
identify various incentives and schemes available to international
firms;
identify and state the role of various organisations that have been
set up in the country to promote foreign trade; and
list major international institutions and agreements existing at
the global level and discuss their role in promoting international
trade and development.
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - II
INTRODUCTION
Exporting goods to foreign countries is
quite different from marketing products
domestically. One needs to be familiar
with various procedural formalities that
need to be complied with before goods
are actually shipped to foreign
destinations or imported from overseas
suppliers. In order to facilitate and
promote trade, government provides
several incentives schemes for
international firms to import goods at
zero or concessional rates of customs
duty for use in manufacture of
products meant for exports; exempt
them from payment of various other
After deliberations with his friend and son, Mr. Sudhir Manchanda feels convinced
that this is the right time for him to step into international markets. This will
enable him not only to tide over the problems of demand saturation for his
automotive parts in the domestic market, but would also help him reap various
benefits that accrue to international firms.
Since he has limited capital available with him right now and does not have any
past experience of overseas operations, he has decided to opt for exporting as
the mode of entry into international markets.
But the problem with him is that he does not know as to how to get into export
business. His friend in the tyre business tells him that exporting and importing
is not that simple an activity as operating domestically.
A number of formalities are needed to be performed and documents to be filled
in before goods are finally dispatched to export markets. A similar and somewhat
tedious process is needed in case he desires to import some of the tools and raw
materials for producing export quality products. Mr. Manchanda is once again
in a fix. He does not have any idea of what the various formalities and documents
involved in exporting and importing are.
Mr. Manchanda is also wondering as to how he will protect himself against
export risks. He is, moreover, worried about the additional costs that he would
have to incur in making goods export worthy. He is contemplating making use of
some imported machines and raw materials.
But would not the import duties on such imports substantially increase his
product cost? In addition, he will be incurring additional costs on transportation,
packaging and insurance as required in connection with export to foreign
destinations.
Mr. Manchanda’s friend in the tyre business tells him he need not worry that
much about these problems. After all, so many firms from India are already
engaged in export business and have soaring exports.
He should have patience and not get disturbed by these hiccups. He can seek
advice from some trade expert for faimiliarising himself with the export import
procedures and documentation. He also tells him that though he does not have
any specific details with him, he is aware there exist various foreign trade
promotion measures and organisations that can be helpful to him in overcoming
his problem and making his products more competitive in the world markets!
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
duties and taxes; and carry out their
import-export transactions in a less
cumbersome environment. The
government has also set up a wide
variety of organisations to collect and
disseminate information about
international markets, promote exports
of specific products, train executives of
international business firms, and
ensure proper quality and packaging
of export goods. At the international
level, various organisations such as the
World Bank, International Monetary
Fund (IMF) and World Trade
Organisation
(WTO)
exist
accelerating the pace of development
and trade amongst the nations.
This chapter is devoted to the
discussion of major steps and
documents involved in foreign trade.
The chapter also identifies and
examines the role of various trade
promotion measures and organisations
set up for promotion of international
business. The concluding section of the
chapter is devoted to an analysis of
major international institutions that
operate at the global level to promote
world development and trade.
EXPORT-IMPORT PROCEDURES
AND DOCUMENTATION
A major distinction between domestic
and international operations is the
complexity of the latter. Export and
import of goods is not that straight
forward as buying and selling in the
domestic market. Since foreign trade
transactions involves movement of
goods across frontiers and use of
foreign exchange, a number of
formalities are needed to be performed
before the goods leave the boundaries
of a country and enter into that of
another. Following sections are devoted
to a discussion of major steps that need
to be undertaken for completing export
and import transactions.
12.2.1
Export Procedure
The number of steps and the sequence
in which these are taken vary from one
export transaction to another. Steps
involved in a typical export transaction
are as follows.
(i) Receipt of enquiry and sending
quotations: The prospective buyer of a
product sends an enquiry to different
exporters requesting them to send
information regarding price, quality and
terms and conditions for export of
goods. Exporters can be informed of
such an enquiry even by way of
advertisement in the press put in by the
importer. The exporter sends a reply to
the enquiry in the form of a quotation —
referred to as proforma invoice. The
proforma invoice contains information
about the price at which the exporter is
ready to sell the goods and also provides
information about the quality, grade,
size, weight, mode of delivery, type of
packing and payment terms.
(ii) Receipt of order or indent: In
case the prospective buyer (i.e.,
importing firm) finds the export price
and other terms and conditions
acceptable, it places an order for the
goods to be despatched. This order, also
known as indent, contains a description
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - II
of the goods ordered, prices to be paid,
delivery terms, packing and marking
details and delivery instructions.
(iii) Assessing importer’s credit-
worthiness and securing a guarantee
for payments: After receipt of the
indent, the exporter makes necessary
enquiry about the creditworthiness of
the importer. The purpose underlying
the enquiry is to assess the risks of non
payment by the importer once the
goods reach the import destination. To
minimise such risks, most exporters
demand a letter of credit from the
importer. A letter of credit is a guarantee
issued by the importer’s bank that it
will honour payment up to a certain
amount of export bills to the bank of
the exporter. Letter of credit is the most
appropriate and secure method of
payment adopted to settle international
transactions
(iv) Obtaining export licence: Having
become assured about payments, the
exporting firm initiates the steps
relating to compliance of export
regulations. Export of goods in India
is subject to custom laws which
demand that the export firm must have
an export licence before it proceeds
with exports. Important pre-requisites
for getting an export licence are as
follows:
• Opening a bank account in any
bank authorised by the Reserve
Bank of India (RBI) and getting an
account number.
• Obtaining Import Export Code
(IEC) number from the Directorate
General Foreign Trade (DGFT) or
Regional Import Export Licensing
Authority.
• Registering with appropriate
export promotion council.
• Registering with Export Credit and
Guarantee Corporation (ECGC) in
order to safeguard against risks
of non payments.
An export firm needs to have the
Import Export Code (IEC) number as
it needs to be filled in various export/
import documents. For obtaining the
IEC number, a firm has to apply to the
Director General for Foreign Trade
(DGFT) with documents such as
exporter/importer profile, bank receipt
for requisite fee, certificate from the
banker on the prescribed form, two
copies of photographs attested by the
banker, details of the non-resident
interest and declaration about the
applicant’s non association with
caution listed firms.
It is obligatory for every exporter to
get registered with the appropriate
export promotion council. Various
export promotion councils such as
Engineering Export Promotion Council
(EEPC) and Apparel Export Promotion
Council (AEPC) have been set up by the
Government of India to promote and
develop exports of different categories
of products. We shall discuss about
export promotion councils in a later
section. But it may be mentioned here
that it is necessary for the exporter to
become a member of the appropriate
export promotion council and obtain
a Registration cum Membership
Certificate (RCMC) for availing benefits
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
available to export firms from the
Government.
Registration with the ECGC is
necessary in order to protect overseas
payments
political
commercial risks. Such a registration
also helps the export firm in getting
financial assistance from commercial
banks and other financial institutions.
(v) Obtaining pre-shipment finance:
Once a confirmed order and also a letter
of credit have been received, the
exporter approaches his banker for
obtaining pre-shipment finance to
undertake export production. Pre-
shipment finance is the finance that the
exporter needs for procuring raw
materials and other components,
processing and packing of goods and
transportation of goods to the port of
shipment.
(vi) Production or procurement of
goods: Having obtained the pre-
shipment finance from the bank, the
exporter proceeds to get the goods
ready as per the specifications of the
importer. Either the firm itself goes in
for producing the goods or else it buys
from the market.
(vii) Pre-shipment inspection: The
Government of India has initiated many
steps to ensure that only good quality
products are exported from the
country. One such step is compulsory
inspection of certain products by a
competent agency as designated by the
government. The government has
passed Export Quality Control and
Inspection Act, 1963 for this purpose.
and has authorised some agencies to
act as inspection agencies. If the
product to be exported comes under
such a category, the exporter needs to
contact the Export Inspection Agency
(EIA) or the other designated agency for
obtaining inspection certificate. The
pre-shipment inspection report is
required to be submitted along with
other export documents at the time of
exports. Such an inspection is not
compulsory in case the goods are being
exported by star trading houses,
trading houses, export houses,
industrial units setup in export
processing zones/special economic
zones (EPZs/SEZs) and 100 per cent
export oriented units (EOUs). We shall
discuss about these special types of
export firms in a later section.
(viii) Excise clearance: As per the
Central Excise Tariff Act, excise duty is
payable on the materials used in
manufacturing goods. The exporter,
therefore, has to apply to the concerned
Excise Commissioner in the region with
an invoice. If the Excise Commissioner
is satisfied, he may issue the excise
clearance.  But in many cases the
government exempts payment of excise
duty or later on refunds it if the goods
so manufactured are meant for exports.
The idea underlying such exemption
or refund is to provide an incentive to
the exporters to export more and also
to make the export products more
competitive in the world markets. The
refund of excise duty is known as duty
drawback. This scheme of duty
drawback is presently administered by
the Directorate of Drawback under the
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - II
Ministry of Finance which is responsible
for fixing the rates of drawback for
different products.  The work relating
to sanction and payment of drawback
is, however, looked after by the
Commissioner of Customs or Central
Excise Incharge of the concerned port/
airport/land custom station from
where the export of goods is considered
to have taken place.
(ix) Obtaining certificate of origin:
Some importing countries provide tariff
concessions or other exemptions to the
goods coming from a particular
country. For availing such benefits, the
importer may ask the exporter to send
a certificate of origin. The certificate of
origin acts as a proof that the goods
have actually been manufactured in the
country from where the export is
taking place. This certificate can be
obtained from the trade consulate
located in the exporter’s country.
(x) Reservation of shipping space:
The exporting firm applies to the
shipping company for provision of
shipping space. It has to specify the
types of goods to be exported, probable
date of shipment and the port of
destination. On acceptance of
application for shipping, the shipping
company issues a shipping order. A
shipping order is an instruction to the
captain of the ship that the specified
goods after their customs clearance at
a designated port be received on board.
(xi) Packing and forwarding: The
goods are then properly packed and
marked with necessary details such as
name and address of the importer, gross
and net weight, port of shipment and
destination, country of origin, etc. The
exporter then makes necessary
arrangement for transportation of goods
to the port. On loading goods into the
railway wagon, the railway authorities
issue a ‘railway receipt’ which serves as
a title to the goods. The exporter
endorses the railway receipt in favour
of his agent to enable him to take
delivery of goods at the port of shipment.
(xii) Insurance of goods: The exporter
then gets the goods insured with an
insurance company to protect against
the risks of loss or damage of the goods
due to the perils of the sea during the
transit.
(xiii) Customs clearance: The goods
must be cleared from the customs
before these can be loaded on the ship.
For obtaining customs clearance, the
exporter prepares the shipping bill.
Shipping bill is the main document on
the basis of which the customs office
gives the permission for export.
Shipping bill contains particulars of the
goods being exported, the name of the
vessel, the port at which goods are to
be discharged, country of final
destination, exporter’s name and
address, etc.
Five copies of the shipping bill along
with the following documents are then
submitted to the Customs Appraiser at
the Customs House:
• Export Contract or Export Order
• Letter of Credit
• Commercial Invoice
• Certificate of Origin
• Certificate of Inspection, where
necessary
• Marine Insurance Policy
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
After submission of these docu-
ments, the Superintendent of the
concerned port trust is approached for
obtaining the carting order. Carting
order is the instruction to the staff at
the gate of the port to permit the entry
of the cargo inside the dock. After
obtaining the carting order, the cargo
is physically moved into the port area
and stored in the appropriate shed.
Since the exporter cannot make himself
or herself available all the time for
performing all these formalities, these
tasks are entrusted to an agent —
referred to as Clearing and Forwarding
(C&F) agent.
(xiv) Obtaining mates receipt: The
goods are then loaded on board the
ship for which the mate or the captain
of the ship issues mate’s receipt to the
port superintendent. A mate receipt is
a receipt issued by the commanding
officer of the ship when the cargo is
loaded on board, and contains the
information about the name of the
vessel, berth, date of shipment,
descripton of packages, marks and
numbers, condition of the cargo at the
time of receipt on board the ship, etc.
The port superintendent, on receipt of
port dues, hands over the mate’s
receipt to the C&F agent.
(xv) Payment of freight and issuance
of bill of lading: The C&F agent
surrenders the mates receipt to the
shipping company for computation of
freight. After receipt of the freight, the
shipping company issues a bill of
lading which serves as an evidence that
the shipping company has accepted the
goods for carrying to the designated
destination. In the case the goods are
being sent by air, this document is
referred to as airway bill.
(xvi) Preparation of invoice: After
sending the goods, an invoice of the
despatched goods is prepared. The
invoice states the quantity of goods sent
and the amount to be paid by the
importer. The C&F agent gets it duly
attested by the customs.
(xvii) Securing payment: After
the shipment of goods, the exporter
informs the importer about the
shipment of goods. The importer needs
various documents to claim the title of
goods on their arrival at his/her
country and getting them customs
cleared. The documents that are
needed in this connection include
certified copy of invoice, bill of lading,
packing list, insurance policy,
certificate of origin and letter of credit.
The exporter sends these documents
through his/her banker with the
instruction that these may be delivered
to the importer after acceptance of the
bill of exchange — a document which
is sent along with the above mentioned
documents. Submission of the relevant
documents to the bank for the purpose
of getting the payment from the bank
is called ‘negotiation of the documents’.
Bill of exchange is an order to the
importer to pay a certain amount of
money to, or to the order of, a certain
person or to the bearer of the
instrument. It can be of two types:
document against sight (sight draft) or
document against acceptance (usance
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - II
draft). In case of sight draft, the
documents are handed over to the
importer only against payment. The
moment the importer agrees to sign the
sight draft, the relevant documents are
delivered. In the case of usance draft,
on the other hand, the documents are
delivered to the importer against his or
her acceptance of the bill of exchange
for making payment at the end of a
specified period, say three months.
On receiving the bill of exchange,
the importer releases the payment in
case of sight draft or accepts the usance
draft for making payment on maturity
of the bill of exchange. The exporter’s
bank receives the payment through the
importer’s bank and is credited to the
exporter’s account.
The exporter, however, need not
wait for the payment till the release of
money by the importer. The exporter
can get immediate payment from his/
her bank on the submission of
documents by signing a letter of
indemnity. By signing the letter, the
exporter undertakes to indemnify the
bank in the event of non-receipt of
payment from the importer along with
accrued interest.
Having received the payment for
exports, the exporter needs to get a bank
certificate of payment. Bank certificate of
payment is a certificate which says that
the necessary documents (including bill
of exchange) relating to the particular
export consignment has been negotiated
(i.e., presented to the importer for
payment) and the payment has been
received in accordance with the exchange
control regulations.
12.2.2 Import Procedure
Import trade refers to purchase of
goods from a foreign country. Import
procedure differs from country to
country depending upon the country’s
import and custom policies and other
statutory requirements. The following
paragraphs discuss various steps
involved in a typical import transaction
for bringing goods into Indian territory.
(i) Trade enquiry: The first thing that
the importing firm has to do is to gather
information about the countries and
firms which export the given product.
The importer can gather such
information from the trade directories
and/or trade associations and
organisations. Having identified the
countries and firms that export
the product, the importing firm
approaches the export firms with the
help of a trade enquiry for collecting
information about their export prices
and terms of exports. A trade enquiry
is a written request by an importing
firm to the exporter for supply of
information regarding the price and
various terms and conditions on which
the latter is ready to exports goods.
After receiving a trade enquiry, the
exporter prepares a quotation and
sends it to the importer. The quotation
is known as profor ma invoice. A
proforma invoice is a document that
contains details as to the quality, grade,
design, size, weight and price of the
export product, and the terms and
conditions on which their export will
take place.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Major Documents needed in Connection with Export Transaction
Documents related to goods
Export invoice: Export invoice is a sellers’ bill for merchandise and contains
information about goods such as quantity, total value, number of packages, marks
on packing, port of destination, name of ship, bill of lading number, terms of delivery
and payments, etc.
Packing list: A packing list is a statement of the number of cases or packs and the
details of the goods contained in these packs. It gives details of the nature of
goods which are being exported and the form in which these are being sent.
Certificate of origin: This is a certificate which specifies the country in which the
goods are being produced. This certificate entitles the importer to claim tariff
concessions or other exemptions such as non-applicability of quota restrictions
on goods originating from certain pre-specified countries.  This certificate is also
required when there is a ban on imports of certain goods from select countries.
The goods are allowed to be brought into the importing country if these are not
originating from the banned countries.
Certificate of inspection: For ensuring quality, the government has made it
compulsory for certain products that these be inspected by some authorised
agency. Export Inspection Council of India (EICI) is one such agency which carries
out such inspections and issues the certificate that the consignment has been
inspected as required under the Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 1963,
and satisfies the conditions relating to quality control and inspection as applicable
to it, and is export worthy. Some countries have made this certificate mandatory
for the goods being imported to their countries.
Documents related to shipment
Mate’s receipt: This receipt is given by the commanding officer of the ship to the
exporter after the cargo is loaded on the ship. The mate’s receipt indicates the
name of the vessel, berth, date of shipment, description of packages, marks and
numbers, condition of the cargo at the time of receipt on board the ship, etc. The
shipping company does not issue the bill of lading unless it receives the mate’s
receipt.
Shipping Bill: The shipping bill is the main document on the basis of which customs
office grants permission for the export. The shipping bill contains particulars of
the goods being exported, the name of the vessel, the port at which goods are to be
discharged, country of final destination, exporter’s name and address, etc.
Bill of lading: Bill of lading is a document wherein a shipping company gives its
official receipt of the goods put on board its vessel and at the same time gives an
undertaking to carry them to the port of destination. It is also a document of title
to the goods and as such is freely transferable by the endorsement and delivery.
Airway Bill: Like a bill of lading, an airway bill is a document wherein an airline
company gives its official receipt of the goods on board its aircraft and at the same
time gives an undertaking to carry them to the port of destination. It is also a
document of title to the goods and as such is freely transferable by the endorsement
and delivery.
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - II
(ii) Procurement of import licence:
There are certain goods that can be
imported freely, while others need
licensing. The importer needs to
consult the Export Import (EXIM)
policy in force to know whether the
goods that he or she wants to import
are subject to import licensing. In case
goods can be imported only against the
licence, the importer needs to procure
an import licence. In India, it is
obligatory for every importer (and also
for exporter) to get registered with the
Directorate General Foreign Trade
(DGFT) or Regional Import Export
Licensing Authority, and obtain an
Import Export Code (IEC) number. This
number is required to be mentioned on
most of the import documents.
(iii) Obtaining foreign exchange:
Since the supplier in the context of an
import transaction resides in a foreign
country, he/she demands payment in
a foreign currency. Payment in foreign
currency involves exchange of Indian
currency into foreign currency. In India,
all foreign exchange transactions are
regulated by the Exchange Control
Department of the Reserve Bank of
India (RBI). As per the rules in force,
every importer is required to secure the
sanction of foreign exchange. For
obtaining such a sanction, the importer
has to make an application to a bank
Marine insurance policy: It is a certificate of insurance contract whereby the
insurance company agrees in consideration of a payment called premium to
indemnify the insured against loss incurred by the latter in respect of goods
exposed to perils of the sea.
Cart ticket: A cart ticket is also known as a cart chit, vehicle or gate pass. It is
prepared by the exporter and includes details of the export cargo in terms of the
shipper’s name, number of packages, shipping bill number, port of destination
and the number of the vehicle carrying the cargo.
Documents related to payment
Letter of credit: A letter of credit is a guarantee issued by the importer’s bank
that it will honour up to a certain amount the payment of export bills to the
bank of the exporter. Letter of credit is the most appropriate and secure method
of payment adopted to settle international transactions
Bill of exchange: It is a written instrument whereby the person issuing the
instrument directs the other party to pay a specified amount to a certain person
or the bearer of the instrument. In the context of an export-import transaction,
bill of exchange is drawn by exporter on the importer asking the latter to pay a
certain amount to a certain person or the bearer of the bill of exchange. The
documents giving title to the export consignment are passed on to the importer
only when the importer accepts the order contained in the bill of exchange.
Bank certificate of payment: Bank certificate of payment is a certificate that the
necessary documents (including bill of exchange) relating to the particular export
consignment has been negotiated (i.e., presented to the importer for payment)
and the payment has been received in accordance with the exchange control
regulations.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
authorised by RBI to issue foreign
exchange. The application is made in a
prescribed form along with the import
licence as per the provisions of
Exchange Control Act. After proper
scrutiny of the application, the bank
sanctions the necessary foreign
exchange for the import transaction.
(iv) Placing order or indent: After
obtaining the import licence, the
importer places an import order or
indent with the exporter for supply of
the specified products. The import
order contains information about the
price, quantity size, grade and quality
of goods ordered and the instructions
relating to packing, shipping, ports of
shipment and destination, delivery
schedule, insurance and mode of
payment. The import order should be
carefully drafted so as to avoid any
ambiguity and consequent conflict
between the importer and exporter.
(v) Obtaining letter of credit: If the
payment terms agreed between the
importer and the overseas supplier is
a letter of credit, then the importer
should obtain the letter of credit from
its bank and forward it to the overseas
supplier.  As stated previously, a letter
of credit is a guarantee issued by the
importer’s bank that it will honour
payment up to a certain amount of
export bills to the bank of the exporter.
Letter of credit is the most appropriate
and secured method of payment
adopted to settle international
transactions. The exporter wants this
document to be sure that there is no
risk of non-payment.
(vi) Arranging for finance: The
importer should make arrangements in
advance to pay to the exporter on
arrival of goods at the port. Advanced
planning for financing imports is
necessary so as to avoid huge
demurrages (i.e., penalties) on the
imported goods lying uncleared at the
port for want of payments.
(vii) Receipt of shipment advice:
After loading the goods on the vessel,
the overseas supplier dispatches the
shipment advice to the importer. A
shipment advice contains information
about the shipment of goods. The
information provided in the shipment
advice includes details such as invoice
number, bill of lading/airways bill
number and date, name of the vessel
with date, the port of export,
description of goods and quantity, and
the date of sailing of vessel.
(viii) Retirement of import docu-
ments: Having shipped the goods, the
overseas supplier prepares a set of
necessary documents as per the terms
of contract and letter of credit and
hands it over to his or her banker for
their onward transmission and
negotiation to the importer in the
manner as specified in the letter of
credit. The set of documents normally
contains bill of exchange, commercial
invoice, bill of lading/airway bill,
packing list, certificate of origin, marine
insurance policy, etc.
The bill of exchange accompanying
the above documents is known as the
documentary bill of exchange. As
mentioned earlier in connection with
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - II
the export procedure, documentary bill
of exchange can be of two types:
documents against payment (sight
draft) and documents against
acceptance (usance draft). In the case
of sight draft, the drawer instructs the
bank to hand over the relevant
documents to the importer only against
payment. But in the case of usance
draft, the drawer instructs the bank to
hand over the relevant documents to
the importer against acceptance of the
bill of exchange. The acceptance of bill
of exchange for the purpose of getting
delivery of the documents is known as
retirement of import documents. Once
the retirement is over, the bank hands
over the import documents to the
importer.
(ix) Arrival of goods: Goods are
shipped by the overseas supplier as per
the contract. The person in charge of
the carrier (ship or airway) informs the
officer in charge at the dock or the
airport about the arrival of goods in the
importing country. He provides the
document called import general
manifest.  Import general manifest is a
document that contains the details of
the imported goods. It is a document
on the basis of which unloading of
cargo takes place.
(x) Customs clearance and release
of goods: All the goods imported into
India have to pass through customs
clearance after they cross the Indian
borders.  Customs clearance is a
somewhat tedious process and calls for
completing a number of formalities.  It
is, therefore, advised that importers
appoint C&F agents who are well
versed with such formalities and play
an important role in getting the goods
customs cleared.
Firstly, the importer has to obtain
a delivery order which is otherwise
known as endorsement for delivery.
Generally when the ship arrives at the
port, the importer obtains the
endorsement on the back of the bill of
lading. This endorsement is done by
the concerned shipping company. In
some cases instead of endorsing the bill,
the shipping company issues a delivery
order. This order entitles the importer
to take the delivery of goods. Of course,
the importer has to first pay the freight
charges (if these have not been paid by
the exporter) before he or she can take
possession of the goods.
The importer has to also pay dock
dues and obtain port trust dues
receipt. For this, the importer has to
submit to the ‘Landing and Shipping
Dues Office’ two copies of a duly filled
in form — known as ‘application to
import’. The ‘Landing and Shipping
Dues Office’ levies a charge for services
of dock authorities which has to be
borne by the importer. After payment
of dock charges, the importer is given
back one copy of the application as a
receipt. This receipt is known as ‘port
trust dues receipt’.
The importer then fills in a form ‘bill
of entry’ for assessment of customs
import duty. One appraiser examines
the document carefully and gives the
examination order. The importer
procures the said document prepared
by the appraiser and pays the duty,
if any.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Major Documents used in an Import Transaction
Trade enquiry: A trade enquiry is a written request by an importing firm to the
exporter for supply of information regarding the price and various terms and
conditions on which the latter exports goods.
Proforma invoice: A proforma invoice is a document that contains details as to the
quality, grade, design, size, weight and price of the export product, and the terms
and conditions on which their export will take place.
Import order or indent: It is a document in which the buyer (importer) orders for
supply of requisite goods to the supplier (exporter). The order or indent contains the
information such as quantity and quality of goods to be imported, price to be charged,
method of forwarding the goods, nature of packing, mode of payment, etc.
Letter of credit: It is document that contains a guarantee from the importer bank
to the exporter’s bank that it is undertaking to honour the payment up to a certain
amount of the bills issued by the exporter for exports of the goods to the importer.
Shipment advice: The shipment advice is a document that the exporter sends to
the importer informing him that the shipment of goods has been made. Shipment
of advice contains invoice number, bill of lading/airways bill number and date,
name of the vessel with date, the port of export, description of goods and quantity,
and the date of sailing of the vessel.
Bill of lading: It is a document prepared and signed by the master of the ship
acknowledging the receipt of goods on board. It contains terms and conditions on
which the goods are to be taken to the port of destination.
Airway Bill: Like a bill of lading, an airway bill is a document wherein an airline/
shipping company gives its official receipt of the goods on board its aircraft and at
the same time gives an undertaking to carry them to the port of destination. It is
also a document of title to the goods and as such is freely transferable by the
endorsement and delivery.
Bill of entry: Bill of entry is a form supplied by the customs office to the importer. It is
to be filled in by the importer at the time of receiving the goods. It has to be in triplicate
and is to be submitted to the customs office. The bill of entry contains information
such as name and address of the importer, name of the ship, number of packages,
marks on the package, description of goods, quantity and value of goods, name and
address of the exporter, port of destination, and customs duty payable.
Bill of exchange: It is a written instrument whereby the person issuing the
instrument directs the other party to pay a specified amount to a certain person
or the bearer of the instrument. In the context of an export-import transaction,
bill of exchange is drawn by the exporter on the importer asking the latter to pay
a certain amount to a certain person or the bearer of the bill of exchange. The
documents giving title to the export consignment are passed on to the importer
only when the importer accepts the order contained in the bill of exchange.
Sight draft: It is a type of bill of exchange wherein the drawer of the bill of exchange
instructs the bank to hand over the relevant documents to the importer only
against payment.
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - II
After payment of the import duty,
the bill of entry has to be presented to
the dock superintendent. The same has
to be marked by the superintendent
and an examiner will be asked to
physically examine the goods imported.
The examiner gives his report on the
bill of entry. The importer or his agent
presents the bill of entry to the port
authority. After receiving necessary
charges, the port authority issues the
release order.
FOREIGN TRADE PROMOTION:
INCENTIVES AND
ORGANISATIONAL SUPPORT
Various incentives and schemes are
operational in the country to help
business firms improve competitiveness
of their exports. From time-to-time, the
government has also setup a number
of organisations to provide infra-
structural support and marketing
assistance to firms engaged in
international business. Major foreign
trade promotion schemes and
organisations are discussed in the
following sections.
12.3.1 Foreign Trade Promotion
Measures and Schemes
Details of various trade promotion
measures and schemes available to
business firms to facilitate their export
and import operations are announced
by the government in its export-import
(EXIM) policy. Major trade promotion
measures (especially those related to
exports) are as follows:
(i) Duty drawback scheme: Since
goods meant for exports are not
consumed domestically, these are not
subjected to payment of various excise
and customs duties. Any such duties
paid on export goods are, therefore,
refunded to exporters on production of
proof of exports of these goods to the
concerned authorities. Such refunds
are called duty draw backs. Some
major duty draw backs include refund
of excise duties paid on goods meant
for exports, refund of customs duties
paid on raw materials and machines
imported for export production. The
latter is also called customs drawback.
(ii) Export manufacturing under
bond scheme: This facility entitles
firms to produce goods without
Usance draft: It is a type of bill of exchange wherein the drawer of the bill of exchange
instructs the bank to hand over the relevant documents to the importer only
against acceptance of the bill of exchange.
Import general manifest.  Import general manifest is a document that contains the
details of the imported good. It is the document on the basis of which unloading of
cargo takes place.
Dock challan: Dock charges are to be paid when all the formalities of the customs
are completed. While paying the dock dues, the importer or his clearing agent
specifies the amount of dock dues in a challan or form which is known as dock
challan.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
payment of excise and other duties.
The firms desirous of availing such
facility have to give an undertaking
(i.e., bond) that they are manufacturing
goods for export purposes and
will export such products on their
production.
(iii) Exemption from payment of
sales taxes: Goods meant for export
purposes are not subject to sales tax.
Even for a long time, income derived
from export operations had been
exempt from payment of income tax.
Now this benefit of exemption from
income tax is available only to 100 per
cent Export Oriented Units (100 per
cent EOUs) and units set up in Export
Processing Zones (EPZs)/Special
Economic Zones (SEZs) for select years.
We shall shortly discuss about the 100
per cent Export Oriented Units (100 per
cent EOUs) and units set up in Export
Processing Zones (EPZs)/Special
Economic Zones (SEZs) in the
succeeding paragraphs.
(iv) Advance licence scheme: It is a
scheme under which an exporter is
allowed duty free supply of domestic as
well as imported inputs required for the
manufacture of export goods. As such
the exporter is not required to pay
customs duty on goods imported for
use in the manufacture of export goods.
The advance licences are available to
both the types of exporters — those who
export on a regular basis and also to
those who export on an adhoc basis. The
regular exporters can avail such
licences against their production
programmes. The firms exporting
intermittently can also obtain these
licences against specific export orders.
(v) Export Promotion Capital Goods
Scheme (EPCG): The main objective of
this scheme is to encourage the import
of capital goods for export production.
This scheme allows export firms to
import capital goods at negligible or
lower rates of customs duties subject
to actual user condition and fulfilment
of specified export obligations. If the
said conditions are fulfilled by the
manufacturers, then they can import the
capital goods either at zero or
concessional rate of import duty.
Supporting manufacturers and service
providers are also eligible to import
capital goods under this scheme. This
scheme is especially beneficial to the
industrial units interested in
modernisation and upgradation of their
existing plant and machinery. Now
service export firms can also avail of this
facility for importing items such as
computer software systems required for
developing softwares for purposes
of exports.
(vi) Scheme of recognising export
firms as export house, trading house
and superstar trading house: With
an objective to promote established
exporters and assist them in marketing
their products in international
markets, the government grants the
status of Export House, Trading
House, Star Trading House to select
export firms. This status is granted to
a firm on its achieving a prescribed
average export of performance in past
select years. Besides attaining a
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - II
minimum of past average export
performance, such export firms have to
also fulfill other conditions as laid
down in the import-export policy.
Various categories of export houses
have been recognised with a view to
building marketing infrastructure
and expertise required for export
promotion. These houses are given
national recognition for export
promotion. They are required to operate
as highly professional and dynamic
institutions and act as an important
instrument of export growth.
(vii) Export of Services:  In order to
boost the export of services, various
categories of service houses have been
recognised. These houses are recognised
on the basis of the export performance
of the service providers. They are
referred to as Service Export House,
International Service Export House,
International Star Service Export House
based on their export performance.
(viii) Export finance: Exporters
require finance for the manufacture of
goods.  Finance is also needed after the
shipment of the goods because it may
take sometime to receive payment from
the importers. Therefore, two types of
export finances are made available to
the exporters by authorised banks.
They are termed as pre-shipment
finance or packaging credit and post-
shipment finance. Under the pre-
shipment finance, finance is provided
to an exporter for financing the
purchase, processing, manufacturing
or packaging of goods for export
purpose. Under the post-shipment
finance scheme, finance is provided to
the exporter from the date of extending
the credit after the shipment of goods
to the export country. The finance is
available at concessional rates of
interest to the exporters.
(ix) Export Processing Zones (EPZs):
Export Processing Zones are industrial
estates, which form enclaves from the
Domestic Tariff Areas (DTA). These are
usually situated near seaports or
airports.  They are intended to provide
an internationally competitive duty free
environment for export production at
low cost.  This enables the products of
EPZs to be competitive, both quality-
wise and price-wise, in the international
markets.  These zones have been set
up at various places in India which
include: Kandla (Gujarat), Santa Cruz
(Mumbai), Falta (West Bengal), Noida
(Uttar Pradesh), Cochin (Kerala),
Chennai
(Tamil
Nadu),
Vishakapatnam (Andhra Pradesh).
Santa Cruz zone is exclusively
meant for electronic goods and gem and
jewellery items. All other EPZs deal with
multifarious items. Recently the EPZs
have been converted to Special
Economic Zones (SEZs) which are more
advanced form of export processing
zones. These SEZs are free from all
rules and regulations governing
imports and exports units except
relating to labour and banking
Government has also permitted
development of EPZs by private, state
or joint sector.  The inter-ministerial
committee on private EPZs has already
cleared proposals for setting up of
private EPZs in Mumbai, Surat and
Kanchipuram.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
(x) 100 per cent Export Oriented
Units (100 per cent EOUs):  The
100 per cent Export Oriented Units
scheme, introduced in early 1981, is
complementary to the EPZ scheme.  It
adopts the same production regime,
but offers a wider option in location
with reference to factors like source of
raw materials, ports, hinterland
facilities, availability of technological
skills, existence of an industrial base
and the need for a larger area of land
for the project. EOUs have been
established with a view to generating
additional production capacity for
exports by providing an appropriate
policy framework, flexibility of
operations and incentives.
12.3.2 Organisational Support
Government of India has also set up
from time-to-time various institutions
in order to facilitate the process of
foreign trade in our country. Some of
the important institutions are as follows:
Department of Commerce: Depart-
ment of Commerce in the Ministry of
Commerce, Government of India is the
apex body responsible for the country’s
external trade and all matters
connected with it. This may be in the
form of increasing commercial relations
with other countries, state trading,
export promotional measures and the
development, and regulation of certain
export oriented industries and
commodities. The Department of
Commerce formulates policies in the
sphere of foreign trade. It also frames
the import and export policy of the
country in general.
Export Promotion Councils (EPCs):
Export Promotion Councils are non
profit organisations registered under
the Companies Act or the Societies
Registration Act, as the case may be.
The basic objective of the export
promotion councils is to promote and
develop the country’s exports of
particular products falling under their
jurisdiction. At present there are
21 EPC’s dealing with different
commodities.
Commodity Boards: Commodity
Boards are the boards which have
been specially established by the
Government of India for the
development of production of
traditional
commodities
their exports. These boards are
supplementary to the EPCs.  The
functions of commodity boards are
similar to those of EPCs. At present
there are seven commodity boards
in India: Coffee Board, Rubber Board,
Tobacco Board, Spice Board, Central
Silk Board, Tea Board, and Coir Board.
Export Inspection Council (EIC):
Export Inspection Council of India was
setup by the Government of India
under Section 3 of the Export Quality
Control and Inspection Act 1963. The
council aims at sound development of
export trade through quality control
and pre-shipment inspection. The
council is an apex body for controlling
the activities related to quality control
and pre-shipment inspection of
commodities meant for export. Barring
a few exceptions, all the commodities
destined for exports must be passed
by EIC.
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - II
Indian Trade Promotion Organi-
sation
(ITPO):
Indian
Trade
Promotion Organisation was setup
on 1st January 1992 under the
Companies Act 1956 by the Ministry
of Commerce, Government of India.  Its
headquarter is at New Delhi. ITPO was
formed by merging the two erstwhile
agencies viz., Trade Development
Authority and Trade Fair Authority of
India. ITPO is a service organisation
and maintains regular and close
interaction with trade, industry and
Government. It serves the industry by
organising trade fairs and exhibitions—
both within the country and outside, It
helps export firms participate in
international
trade
fairs
exhibitions, developing exports of new
items, providing support and updated
commercial business information. ITPO
has five regional offices at Mumbai,
Bangalore, Kolkata, Kanpur and
Chennai and four international offices
at Germany, Japan, UAE and USA.
Indian Institute of Foreign Trade
(IIFT):  Indian Institute of Foreign
Trade is an institution that was setup
in 1963 by the Government of India as
an autonomous body registered under
the Societies Registration Act with the
prime objective of professionalising the
country’s foreign trade management. It
has recently been recognised as
Deemed University. It provides training
in international trade, conduct
researches in areas of international
business, and analysing and
disseminating data relating to
international trade and investments.
Indian Institute of Packaging (IIP):
The Indian Institute of Packaging was
set up as a national institute jointly by
the Ministry of Commerce, Government
of India, and the Indian Packaging
industry and allied interests in 1966.
Its headquarters and principal
laboratory is situated at Mumbai and
three regional laboratories are located
at Kolkata, Delhi and Chennai. It is a
training-cum-research institute
pertaining to packaging and testing.  It
has excellent infrastructural facilities
that cater to the various needs of the
package manufacturing and package
user industries. It caters to the
packaging needs with regard to both
the domestic and export markets. It
also undertakes technical consultancy,
testing services on packaging
developments, training and edu-
cational programmes, promotional
award contests, information services
and other allied activities.
State Trading Organisations: A large
number of domestic firms in India
found it very difficult to compete in the
world market.  At the same time, the
existing trade channels were
unsuitable for promotion of exports
and bringing about diversification of
trade with countries other than
European countries.  It was under these
circumstances that the State Trading
Organisation (STC) was setup in May
1956.  The main objective of the STC is
to stimulate trade, primarily export
trade among different trading partners
of the world.  Later the government set
up many more organisations such as
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
Metals and Minerals Trading
Corporation (MMTC), Handloom and
Handicrafts Export Corporation
(HHEC).
INTERNATIONAL TRADE
INSTITUTIONS AND TRADE
AGREEMENTS
The First World War (1914-1919) and
the Second World War (1939-45) were
accompanied by massive destruction
of life and property the world over.
Almost all the economies of the world
were adversely affected. Due to scarcity
of resources, countries were not in a
position to take up any reconstruction
or developmental works. Even the
international trade amongst nations got
adversely affected because of the
disruption of the world’s currency
system. There was no system of
generally accepted exchange rate. It
was at that juncture that representative
of forty-four nations under the
leadership of J.M. Keynes — a noted
economist joined together at Bretton
Woods, New Hampshire to identify
measures to restore peace and
normalcy in the world.
The meeting was concluded with
the setting up of three international
institutions, namely the International
Monetary Fund (IMF), International
Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
(IBRD)
International Trade Organisation (ITO).
considered
these
three
organisations as three pillars of
economic development of the world.
While the World Bank was assigned
with the task of reconstructing war-torn
economies — especially the ones in
Europe, the IMF was entrusted with the
responsibility of ensuring stabilisation
of exchange rates to pave way for the
expansion of world trade. The main
objective of the ITO as they could
foresee at that time was to promote and
facilitate international trade among the
member countries by overcoming
various restrictions and discrimi-
nations that were being practiced at
that time.
The first two institutions, viz., IBRD
and IMF, came into existence
immediately. The idea of setting up of
ITO, however, could not materialise due
to stiff opposition from the United
States. Instead of an organisation,
what eventually emerged was an
arrangement to liberalise international
trade from high customs tariffs and
various other types of restrictions. This
arrangement came to be known as the
General Agreement for Tariffs and
Trade (GATT).  India was one of the
founding members of these three
international bodies. The major
objectives and functions of these three
international institutions are discussed
in more detail in the following sections.
12.4.1
World Bank
The International Bank for Re-
construction and Development (IBRD),
commonly known as World Bank, was
result of the Bretton Woods Conference.
The main objectives behind setting up
this international organisation were to
aid the task of reconstruction of the
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - II
war-affected economies of Europe and
assist in the development of the
underdeveloped nations of the world.
For the first few years, the World Bank
remained preoccupied with the task of
restoring war-torn nations in Europe.
Having
achieved
success
accomplishing this task by late 1950s,
the World Bank turned its attention to
the development of underdeveloped
nations. It realised that by investing
more and more in these countries,
especially in social sectors like
health and education; it could bring
about the needed social and
economic transformation of the
developing countries. To give shape
to this investment aspect in
the underdeveloped nations, the
International Development Association
(IDA) was formed in the year 1960. The
main objective underlying setting up
IDA has been to provide loans on
concessional terms and conditions to
those countries whose per capita
incomes are below a critical level.
Concessional terms and conditions
mean that (i) repayment period is much
longer than the repayment period of
IBRD, and (ii) the borrowing nation
need not pay any interest on the
borrowed amount. IDA, thus, provides
interest free long-term loans to the poor
nations. IBRD also provides loans but
these carry interest charged on
commercial basis.
Over the time, additional organi-
sations have been set up under the
umbrella of the World Bank. As of
today, the World Bank is a group of five
international organisations responsible
for providing finance to different
countries. The group and its affiliates
headquartered in Washington DC
catering to various financial needs are
listed in the Box A on World Bank and
its affiliates.
Functions of the World Bank
As mentioned earlier, the World Bank
is entrusted with the task of economic
growth and widening of the scope of
international trade. During its initial
years of inception, it placed more
emphasis on developing infrastructure
facilities like energy, transportation and
others. No doubt all this has benefited
the under-developed nations too, but
the results were not found to be very
satisfactory due to poor administrative
structure, lack of institutional
framework and non-availability of
skilled labour in these countries.
Moreover, since the underdeveloped
Box A
World Bank and its Affiliates
Institution
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)
International Financial Corporation (IFC)
International Development Association (IDA)
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID)
Year of
establishment
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
countries
depend heavily
agriculture and small industries, the
attempt to develop infrastructure had
hardly any effect on these two sectors.
Realising these problems, the World
Bank later decided to divert resources
to bring about industrial and
agricultural development in these
countries. Assistance is extended to
different countries for raising cash
crops so that their incomes rise and
they may export the same for earning
foreign exchange. The bank has also
been providing resources for education,
sanitation, health care and small scale
enterprises.
Today, the services provided by the
World Bank have increased manifold.
The World Bank is no longer confined to
simply providing financial assistance for
infrastructure development, agriculture,
industry, health and sanitation.  It is
rather significantly involved in areas like
removal of rural poverty through raising
productivity, increasing income of the
rural poor, providing technical support,
and initiating research and cooperative
ventures.
12.4.2 International Development
Association
International Development Association
(IDA) was set up in 1960 as an affiliate
of the World Bank. IDA was established
primarily to provide finance to the less
developed member countries on a soft
loan basis. It is due to its objective of
providing soft loans that it is called the
Soft Loan Window of the IBRD.
Major objectives of IDA include
• To provide development finance
on easy terms to the less
developed member countries,
• To provide assistance for poverty
alleviation in the poorest
countries,
• To provide finance at concessional
interest rates in order to promote
economic development, raise
productivity and living standards
in less developed nations, and
• To extend macro economic
management services such as
those relating to health, edu-
cation, nutrition, human resource
development and population
control.
12.4.3 International Finance
Corporation (IFC)
IFC was established in July 1956 in
order to provide finance to the private
sector of developing countries. IFC is
also an affiliate of the World Bank, but
it has its own separate legal entity,
funds and functions. All the members
of the World Bank are eligible to
become members of IFC.
12.4.4 The Multinational
Investment Guarantee
Agency (MIGA)
The Multinational Investment Gua-
rantee Agency was established in April
1988 to supplement the functions of
the World Bank and IFC.
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - II
Major objectives of MIGA are
• To encourage flow of direct
foreign investment into the less
developed member countries;
• To provide insurance cover to
investors against political risks;
• To provide guarantee against non-
commercial risks (like dangers
involved in currency transfer, war
and civil disturbances and breach
of contract);
• To insure new investments,
expansion of existing investments,
privatisation and financial re-
structuring;
• To provide promotional and
advisory services; and
• To establish credibility.
12.4.5 International Monetary
International Monetary Fund (IMF) is
the second international organisation
next to the World Bank. IMF which
came into existence in 1945 has its
headquarters located in Washington DC.
In 2005, it had 191 countries as its
members. The major idea underlying
the setting up of the IMF is to evolve an
orderly international monetary system,
i.e., facilitating system of international
payments and adjustments in
exchange rates among national
currencies.
Major objectives of IMF include
promote
international
monetary cooperation through a
permanent institution,
• To facilitate expansion of balanced
growth of international trade and
to contribute thereby to the
promotion and maintenance of
high levels of employment and real
income,
• To promote exchange stability
with a view to maintain orderly
exchange arrangements among
member countries, and
• To assist in the establishment of a
multilateral system of payments
in respect of current transactions
between members.
Functions of IMF
Various functions are performed by the
IMF to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
Some of the important functions of IMF
include:
• Acting as a short-term credit
institution;
• Providing machinery for the
orderly adjustment of exchange
rates;
• Acting as a reservoir of the
currencies of all the member
countries, from which a borrower
nation can borrow the currency of
other nations;
• Acting as a lending institution of
foreign currency and current
transaction;
• Determining the value of a
country’s currency and altering it,
if needed, so as to bring about an
orderly adjustment of exchange
rates of member countries; and
• Providing machinery for inter-
national consultations.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
12.4.6 World Trade Organisation
(WTO) and Major
Agreements
Like on the lines of IMF and the World
Bank, it was initially decided at the
Bretton Woods conference to set up the
International Trade Organisation (ITO)
to promote and facilitate international
trade among the member countries
and to overcome various restrictions
and discriminations as were being
practiced at that time. But the idea
could not materialise due to stiff
opposition from the United States.
Instead of altogether abandoning the
idea, the countries that were
participants to the Bretton Woods
conference agreed upon having some
arrangement among themselves so as
to liberalise the world from high
customs tariffs and various other types
of restrictions that were in vogue at that
time. This arrangement came to be
known as the General Agreement for
Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
GATT came into existence with
effect from 1st January 1948 and
remained in force till December 1994.
Various rounds of negotiations have
taken place under the auspices of
GATT to reduce tariff and non-tariff
barriers. The last one, known as the
Uruguay Round, was the most
comprehensive one in terms of coverage
of issues, and also the lengthiest one
from the point of view of duration of
negotiations which lasted over a period
of seven years from 1986 to 1994.
One of the key achievements of the
Uruguay Round of GATT negotiations
was the decision to set up a permanent
institution for looking after the
promotion of free and fair trade
amongst nations. Consequent to this
decision, the GATT was transformed into
World Trade Organisation (WTO) with
effect from 1st January 1995. The head
quarters of WTO are situated at Geneva,
Switzerland. Establishment of WTO,
thus, represents the implementation of
the original proposal of setting up of the
ITO as evolved almost five decades back.
Though, WTO is a successor to
GATT, it is a much more powerful body
than GATT. It governs trade not only in
goods, but also in services and
intellectual property rights. Unlike
GATT, the WTO is a permanent
organisation created by an international
treaty ratified by the governments and
legislatures of member states. It is,
moreover, a member driven rule-based
organisation in the sense that all
the decisions are taken by the
member governments on the basis of a
general consensus. As the principal
international body concerned with
solving trade problems between
countries and providing a forum for
multilateral trade negotiations, it has a
global status similar to that of the IMF
and the World Bank. India is a founding
member of WTO. As on 11th December
2005, there were 149 members in WTO.
Objectives of WTO
The basic objectives of WTO are similar
to those of GATT, i.e., raising standards
of living and incomes, ensuring full
employment, expanding production and
trade, and optimal use of the world’s
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - II
resources.  The major difference between
the objectives of GATT and WTO is that
the objectives of WTO are more specific
and also extend the scope of WTO to cover
trade in services. WTO objectives,
moreover, talk of the idea of ‘sustainable
development’ in relation to the optimal
use of the world’s resources so as to
ensure protection and preservation of the
environment. Keeping in view the above
discussion, we can state more explicitly
the following as the major objectives of
• To ensure reduction of tariffs and
other trade barriers imposed by
different countries;
• To engage in such activities which
improve the standards of living,
create employment, increase
income and effective demand and
facilitate higher production and
trade;
• To facilitate the optimal use of the
world’s resources for sustainable
development; and
• To promote an integrated, more
viable and durable trading system.
Functions of WTO
The major functions of WTO include:
• Promoting an environment that is
encouraging to its member
countries to come forward to WTO
in mitigating their grievances;
• Laying down a commonly
accepted code of conduct with a
view to reducing trade barriers
including tariffs and eliminating
discriminations in international
trade relations;
• Acting as a dispute settlement
body;
• Ensuring that all the rules
regulations prescribed in the Act
are duly followed by the member
countries for the settlement of their
disputes;
• Holding consultations with IMF
and IBRD and its affiliated
agencies so as to bring better
understanding and cooperation
in global economic policy making;
• Supervising on a regular basis the
operations of the revised Agree-
ments and Ministerial declarations
relating to goods, services and
Trade Related Intellectual
Property Rights (TRIPS).
Benefits of WTO
Since its inception in 1995, WTO has
come a long way in constituting the
legal and institutional foundation of the
present day multilateral trading
system. It has been instrumental not
only in facilitating trade, but also in
improving living standards and
cooperation
among
member
countries. Some of the major benefits
of WTO are as follows:
• WTO helps promote international
peace and facilitates international
business.
• All disputes between member
nations are settled with mutual
consultations.
• Rules make international trade
and relations very smooth and
predictable.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
• Free trade improves the living
standard of the people by
increasing the income level.
• Free trade provides ample scope
of getting varieties of qualitative
products.
• Economic growth has been
fastened because of free trade.
• The system encourages good
government.
• WTO helps fostering growth of
developing countries by providing
them with special and preferential
treatment in trade related
matters.
WTO Agreements
As against GATT which covered only
rules relating to trade in goods, the
WTO agreements cover trade in goods,
services as well as intellectual property.
The agreements contain the procedure
for settling disputes and also have
provisions for special treatment to
developing countries. The agreements
require the governments to make their
trade policies transparent by notifying
to the WTO office about the laws and
measures adopted towards trade
liberalisation. Major WTO agreements
are discussed below:
Agreements Forming Part of GATT:
The erstwhile General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT) after its
substantial modification in 1994
(effected as part of the Uruguay Round
of negotiations) is very much part of the
WTO agreements. Besides the general
principles of trade liberalisation,
GATT also includes certain special
agreements evolved to deal with specific
non-tariff barriers. Some of the specific
agreements contained in the GATT
are listed in the bank on GATT 1994
major agreements.
Agreement on Textile and Clothing
(ATC): This agreement was evolved
under WTO to phase out the quota
restrictions as imposed by the
developed countries on exports of
textiles and clothing from the
developing countries. The developed
countries were imposing various kinds
of quota restrictions under the Multi-
Fibre Arrangement (MFA) that itself was
a major departure from the GATT’s
basic principle of free trade in goods.
Under the ATC, the developed countries
agreed to remove quota restrictions in
a phased manner during a period of
ten years starting from 1995. ATC is
considered as a landmark achievement
of the WTO. It is due to the ATC that
the world trade in textile and clothing
has become virtually quota free since
1st January 2005, thus, benefiting
immensely the developing countries
to expand their textiles and
clothing exports.
Agreement on Agriculture (AoA): It
is an agreement to ensure free and fair
trade in agriculture. Though original
GATT rules were applicable to trade in
agriculture, these suffered from certain
loopholes such as exemption to
member countries to use some non-
tariff measures such as customs tariffs,
import quotas and subsidies to protect
interests of the farmers in the home
country. Trade in agriculture became
highly distorted especially due to use
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - II
of subsidies by some of the developed
countries. AoA is a significant step
towards an orderly and fair trade in
agricultural products. The developed
countries have agreed to lower down
the customs duties on their imports
and subsidies to the exports of
agricultural products. Due to their
higher dependence on agriculture, the
developing countries have been
exempted from making similar
reciprocal offers.
General Agreement on Trade in
Services (GATS): Services means acts
or performances that are essentially
intangible and cannot be touched or
smelt as goods. GATS is regarded as a
landmark achievement of the Uruguay
Round as it extends the multilateral
rules and disciplines to services. It is
because of GATS that the basic rules
governing ‘trade in goods’ have become
applicable to ‘trade in services’.
Three major provisions of GATS
governing trade in services are as
follows:
• All member countries are required
to remove restrictions on trade in
services in a phased manner. The
developing countries, however,
have been given a greater freedom
to decide about the period by
which they would liberalise and
also the services they would like
to liberalise by that period
• GATS provides that trade in
services is governed by ‘Most
Favoured
Nations’
(MFN)
obligation that prevents countries
from discriminating among foreign
suppliers and services.
• Each member country shall
promptly publish all its relevant
laws and regulations pertaining to
services including international
agreements pertaining to trade
and services to which the member
is a signatory.
Agreement on Trade Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (TRIPS): The WTO’s agree-
ment on Trade Related Aspects of
GATT 1994: Major Agreements
Agreement on Customs Valuation i.e., Agreement on Implementation of
Article VII (Customs Valuation) of GATT 1994
Agreement on Pre-shipment Inspection
Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade
Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures
Agreement on Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
Agreement on Safeguards
Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures
Agreement on Anti-dumping Duties, i.e., Agreement on Implementation of
Article VI (Anti-dumping) of GATT 1994
Agreement on Rules of Origin
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
SUMMARY
Introduction: Exporting and importing are not such straight forward
activities as buying and selling in the domestic market. Since foreign trade
transactions involve movement of goods across frontiers and use of foreign
exchange, a number of formalities are needed to be performed before the
goods leave the boundaries of a country and enter into that of another.
Export Procedures: The starting point in an export transaction is the receipt
of an enquiry from the overseas buyer. In response, the exporter prepares
an export quotation — called proforma invoice, giving details about the export
goods and the terms and conditions of export. In case the importer finds
Proforma invoice
Order or intent
Export licence
IEC number
Registration cum
membership
certificate
Pre-shipment finance
Pre-shipment
inspection
Export inspection
agency
Excise clearance
Certificate of origin
Customs clearance
Letter of credit
Shipping bill
Mate receipt
Bill of lading
Airway bill
Invoice
Bill of exchange
Sight draft
Usance draft
Negotiation of bills
Marine insurance
policy
Cart ticket
Bank certificate of
payment
Certificate of
inspection
Trade enquiry
Shipment advice
Import general
manifest
Delivery order
Bill of entry
C&F agent
Port trust dues receipt
Duty drawback scheme
Export manufacturing
under bond scheme
Advance licence scheme
Export Promotion Capital
Goods Scheme (EPCG)
Export finance
Post-shipment finance
Export processing zone
(EPZ)
100% Export Oriented
Unit (100% EOU)
Department of Commerce
Export promotion council
Key Terms
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS)
was negotiated in 1986-1994. It was
the Uruguay Round of GATT
negotiations where for the first time
the rules relating to intellectual
property rights were discussed and
introduced as part of the multilateral
trading system. Intellectual property
means information with commercial
values such as ideas, inventions,
creative expression and others. The
agreement sets out the minimum
standards of protection to be adopted
by the parties in respect of seven
intellectual properties, viz., copy
rights and related rights, trade marks,
geographical indication, industrial
designs, patents, layout design of
integrated circuits, and undisclosed
information (trade secrets).
Commodity
boards
Indian
Institute of
Packaging
Export
Inspection
Council
State
trading
organisations
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - II
the quotation acceptable, he places an order or indent and gets a letter of
credit issued from his bank to the exporter. The exporter then proceeds
with the formalities related to obtaining an export licence from the Director
General of Foreign Trade and getting a registration-cum-membership
certificate from the export promotion council looking after the export of the
concerned product. In case the exporter requires funds, he/she can avail
of pre-shipment finance from a bank. The exporter then proceeds with the
production or procurement of the goods and gets them inspected from Export
Inspection Council. If required by the importer, the exporter approaches
the foreign consulate for obtaining the certificate of origin to enable the
importer to claim tariff or quota concessions at the time of clearance of
cargo at the import destination. The exporter then makes arrangement for
reserving space on the ship and insuring goods against transit perils. After
obtaining the excise clearance, goods are sent to the concerned port for
customs clearance. Since customs clearance is a tedious process, exporters
often employ C&F agents for availing their services in preparation of various
customs documents and getting the goods customs cleared.
After customs clearance and payment of dock charges to the port authorities
and freight charges to the shipping company, goods are loaded on the ship.
The captain of the ship issues a mate’s receipt. This mate’s receipt is
submitted to the shipping company’s office for payment of freight. After
receiving the freight charges, the shipping company issues a bill of lading
which is a document of contract relating to shipment of the goods by the
shipping company. Once the goods are despatched, the exporter prepares
an invoice and sends the necessary documents such as certified copy of
invoice, bill of lading, packing list, insurance policy, certificate of origin,
letter of credit and bill of exchange to the importer through his/her bank.
The bank presents these documents to the importer. On getting acceptance
of the bill of exchange by the importer, the documents are handed over to
the importer to enable him/her to claim the imported goods. Once the
payment is received, the exporter requests his/her bank to release a
certificate of payment. Certificate of payment is a document that certifies
that the export transaction is over and the payment has been received.
Import Procedure: The procedure to import is also beset with several
formalities. The process starts with a search for export firms and making a
trade enquiry about the product, its price and terms and conditions of
exports. Having selected an export firm, the importer asks the exporter to
send him/her a formal quotation — called proforma invoice. The importer
then proceeds to obtain the import licence, if required, from the office of the
Directorate General Foreign Trade (DGFT) or Regional Import Export
Licensing Authority. The importer also applies for the Import Export Code
(IEC) number. This number is required to be mentioned on most of the
import documents. Since payment for imports requires foreign currency,
the importer has to also make an application to a bank authorised for
sanction of the necessary foreign exchange.
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
After obtaining an import licence, the importer places an import order or
indent with the exporter for supply of the specified products. If required as
per the terms of contract, the importer arranges for the issuance of a letter
of credit to the exporter from the bank. Having shipped the goods under
shipment advice to the importer, the exporter sends a set of necessary
documents containing bill of exchange, commercial invoice, bill of lading/
airway bill, packing list, certificate of origin, marine insurance policy, etc.,
to enable the importer claim title to the goods on their arrival at the port of
destination.  The exporter sends these documents through his/her bank
to the importer. The bank presents these documents to the importer and
after obtaining his/her acceptance of the bill of exchange, delivers the
documents to the importer.
After the arrival of the goods in the importing country, the person in charge
of the carrier (ship or airway) prepares import general manifest to inform
the officer in charge at the dock or the airport that the goods have reached
the ports of the importing country. The importer or his/her C&F agent pays
the freight (if not already paid by exporter) to the shipping company and
obtains delivery order from it which entitles the importer to take the delivery
of the goods at the port. At this time, port dock dues are also paid and a
port trust dues receipt is obtained. The importer then fills in a form ‘bill of
entry’ for assessment of customs import duty. After payment of the import
duty, the bill of entry has to be presented to the dock superintendent for
physical examination of the goods. The examiner gives his report on the bill
of entry. The importer or his agent presents the bill of entry to the port
authority for issuance of the release order.
Foreign Trade Promotion: A number of schemes such as duty drawback,
export manufacturing under bond, exemption from payment of sales tax,
advance licence, Export Promotion Capital Goods (EPCG), 100 per cent Export
Oriented Units (100 per cent EOUs) and Export Processing Zones (EPZs)/
Special Economic Zones (SEZs) are in operation in the country to help the
export firms compete more effectively in world markets. The schemes permit
the exporters either to make outrightly duty free imports of raw materials
and machinery as needed for producing goods and services for exports or
to later claim refund of duties, if already paid, on such imports. The exporters
are, moreover, either outrightly exempted from payment of excise duties
and other taxes or else they can later claim refund of such duties on
submitting proof of export to the concerned authorities.
There also exist in the country the scheme of recognising certain firms as
export house, trading house and super star trading house, and bestowing
upon them certain advantages such as permission to maintain offices
abroad, liberal grant of foreign exchange to enable them to meet the expenses
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - II
of participating in international trade fairs and exhibitions and travel
abroad. As of today, even the firms engaged in exports of services are entitled
to such recognition subject to attaining a minimum of past average export
performance and fulfilling other conditions as laid down in the import-export
policy. Exporters are also entitled to pre-shipment and post-shipment
finance to meet their financial requirements relating to export transactions.
International Trade Institutions: The Government of India has
side-by- side setup various organisations to facilitate and promote the
country’s foreign trade. While the Department of Commerce in the Ministry
of Commerce is the apex body responsible for regulation and administration
of the country’s external trade, other organisations like export promotion
councils, commodity boards, Export Inspection Council (EIC), Indian
Institute of Foreign Trade (IIFT), India Trade Promotion Organisation (ITPO),
Indian Institute of Packaging (IIP) help exporters by way of promotion of
specific export products, quality inspection, participation in trade fairs and
exhibitions, conducting training programmes, carrying out overseas
researches, disseminating product and market information, and providing
packaging consultancy and testing. The government has also set up state
trading organisations such as STC, MMTC and HHEC for trading in different
commodities and promotion of country’s exports.
Trade Agreements: At the global level, there exist various international
organisations such as the World Bank, IMF and WTO for fostering economic
cooperation, trade and investments among the countries. While the World
Bank and its four affiliates, viz., IDA, MIGA, IFC and ICSID, are concerned
with providing long term finance and finance related assistance such as
protection from risks to the member countries, IMF is devoted to maintenance
of exchange rates and providing short term loans to the countries facing
short term foreign exchange problems. In matters relating to trade, it was
originally conceived at the Bretton Woods conference to establish
International Trade Organisation (ITO). But the idea somehow could not
materialise. Instead an arrangement called General Agreement for Tariffs
and Trade (GATT) was evolved to promote trade through reduction of tariff
and non-tariff barriers. GATT came into existence with effect from 1 st January
1948 and remained in force till December 1994.  Since 1st January 1995,
GATT has been transformed into World Trade Organisation (WTO). Unlike
GATT, WTO is a permanent body and has a global status similar to that of
IMF and World Bank. WTO agreements cover trade in not only goods but
also in services and intellectual property through various agreements such
as Agreement on Textiles on Clothing (ATC), General Agreement on Trade
in Services (GATS), Agreement Relating to Trade in Intellectual Property
(TRIP) and Agreement on Agriculture (AoA).
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
EXERCISES
Multiple Choice Questions
Which of the following documents are not required for obtaining an
export license?
IEC number
Letter of credit
Registration cum
Bank account number
membership certificate
Which of the following documents is not required in connection with an
import transaction?
Bill of lading
Shipping bill
Certificate of origin
Shipment advice
Which of the following do not form part of duty drawback scheme?
Refund of excise duties
Refund of customs duties
Refund of export duties
Refund of income dock
charges at the port of
shipment
Which one of the following is not a document related to fulfill the customs
formalities
Shipping bill
Export licence
Letter of insurance
Proforma invoice
Which one of the following is not a part of export documents?
Commercial invoice
Certificate of origin
Bill of entry
Mate’s receipt
A receipt issued by the commanding officer of the ship when the cargo
is loaded on the ship is known as
Shipping receipt
Mate receipt
Cargo receipt
Charter receipt
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS - II
Which of the following document is prepared by the exporter and
includes details of the cargo in terms of the shippers name, the number
of packages, the shipping bill,  port of destination, name of the vehicle
carrying the cargo?
Shipping bill
Packaging list
Mate’s receipt
Bill of exchange
The document containing the guarantee of a bank to honour drafts
drawn on it by an exporter is
Letter of hypothetication
Letter of credit
Bill of lading
Bill of exchange
Which of the following does not belong to the World Bank group?
10. TRIP is one of the WTO agreements that deal with
Trade in agriculture
Trade in services
Trade related
None of these
investment measures
Short Answer Questions
1. Discuss the formalities involved in getting an export licence.
2. Why is it necessary to get registered with an export promotion council?
3. What is IEC number?
4. What is pre-shipment finance?
5. Why is it necessary for an export firm to go in for pre-shipment
inspection?
6. Discuss the procedure related to excise clearance of goods.
7. Explain briefly the process of customs clearance of export goods.
8. What is bill of lading? How does it differ from bill of entry?
9. What is shipping bill?
© NCERT
not to be republished
BUSINESS STUDIES
10. Explain the meaning of mate’s receipt.
11. What is a letter of credit? Why does an exporter need this document?
12. Discuss the process involved in securing payment for exports.
13. Differentiate between the following
Sight and usance drafts
Bill of lading and airway bill
(iii)
Pre-shipment and post-shipment finance
14. Explain the meaning of the following documents used in connection
with import transactions
trade enquiry
Import licence
(iii)
Shipment of advice
Import general manifest
Bill of entry
15. List out major affiliated bodies of the World Bank.
16. Write short notes on the following
UNCTAD
(iii)
World Bank
Long Answer Questions
Rekha Garments has received an order to export 2000 men’s trousers
to Swift Imports Ltd. located in Australia. Discuss the procedure that
Rekha Garments would need to go through for executing the export
order.
Your firm is planning to import textile machinery from Canada. Describe
the procedure involved in importing.
Discuss the principal documents used in exporting.
List and explain various incentives and schemes that the government
has evolved for promoting the country’s export.
Identify various organisations that have been set up in the country by
the government for promoting country’s foreign trade.
What is World Bank? Discuss its various objectives and role of its
affiliated agencies.
What is IMF? Discuss its various objectives and functions.
Write a detailed note on features, structure, objectives and functioning
of WTO.
© NCERT
not to be republished
