Chemistry
Part I
Textbook for Class XI
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
ISBN    81-7450-494-X (Part I)
81-7450-535-0 (Part II)
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,  re-
sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any form
of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page. Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
and should be unacceptable.
Publication Team
Head, Publication
: M. Siraj Anwar
Division
Chief Editor
: Shveta Uppal
Chief Business
: Gautam Ganguly
Manager
Chief Production
: Arun Chitkara
Officer (Incharge)
Editor
: Binoy Banerjee
Production Assistant
: Mukesh Gaur
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O. Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021
Phone :  0361-2674869
Cover
Shweta Rao
Illustrations
Nidhi Wadhwa
Anil Nayal
First Edition
March 2006  Phalguna 1927
Reprinted
October 2006  Kartika 1928
November 2007  Kartika 1929
January 2009  Magha 1930
December 2009  Pausa 1931
November 2010 Kartika 1932
January 2012  Pausha 1933
November 2012 Kartika 1934
November 2013 Kartika 1935
December 2014  Pausa 1936
May 2016 Vaishakha 1938
January 2018 Magha 1939
PD 500T RPS
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006
` 155.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training, Sri
Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and printed
at Sriram Printing Press, 61, 4th Cross Street,
G.K. Industrial Estate, Ganesh Nagar,
Alapakkam, Chennai-600 116
2018-19
ANSWERS
FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005 recommends that children’s life at
school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a departure
from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system and causes a
gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on
the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt to
discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between different
subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantly further in the direction of
a child-centred system of education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and teachers
will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue
imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space, time and
freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the information passed
on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination
is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as
participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning.
Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual
calender so that the required number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching.
The methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this
textbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a
source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of
curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages
with greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching.
The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space
to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and
activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates
the hard work done by the textbook development committee responsible for this book.
We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in science and mathematics,
Professor J.V. Narlikar and the Chief Advisor for this book, Professor B. L. Khandelwal
for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers contributed to the development
of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for making this possible. We are
indebted to the institutions and organisations which have generously permitted us to
draw upon their resources, material and personnel. As an organisation committed to
systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT
welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further
revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi
National Council of Educational
20 December 2005
Research and Training
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
2018-19
ANSWERS
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SCIENCE AND MATHEMATICS
J.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor, Chairman,  Advisory Committee, Inter
University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics (IUCCA), Ganeshbhind,
Pune University, Pune
CHIEF ADVISOR
B.L. Khandelwal, Professor (Retd.), Emeritus Scientist, CSIR; Emeritus Fellow, AICTE
and formerly Chairman, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology,
New Delhi
MEMBERS
A. S. Brar, Professor, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi
Anjni Koul, Lecturer, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
H.O. Gupta, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
I.P. Aggarwal, Professor, Regional Institute of Education, Bhopal
Jaishree Sharma, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
M. Chandra, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Poonam Sawhney, PGT (Chemistry), Kendriya Vidyalaya, Vikas Puri, New Delhi
R.K. Parashar, Lecturer, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
S.K. Dogra, Professor, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Centre for Biomedical Research, University of
Delhi, Delhi
S.K. Gupta, Reader, School of Studies in Chemistry, Jiwaji University, Gwalior
Sadhna Bhargava, PGT (Chemistry), Sardar Patel Vidyalaya, Lodhi Estate, New Delhi
Shubha Keshwan, Headmistress, Demonstration School, Regional Institute of Education,
Mysuru
Sukhvir Singh, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Sunita Malhotra, Professor, School of Sciences, IGNOU, Maidan Garhi, New Delhi
V.K. Verma, Professor (Retd.), Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi
V.P. Gupta, Reader, Regional Institute of Education, Bhopal
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Alka Mehrotra, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges the valuable
contributions of the individuals and organisations involved in the development of
Chemistry textbook for Class XI. It also acknowledges that some useful material from
the reprint editions (2005) of Chemistry textbooks has been utilised in the development
of the present textbook.
The following academics contributed effectively in editing, reviewing, refining and
finalisation of the manuscript of this book: G.T. Bhandage, Professor,  RIE, Mysuru;
N. Ram, Professor, IIT, New Delhi; Sanjeev Kumar, Associate Professor, School of
Science, IGNOU, Maidan Garhi, New Delhi; Shampa Bhattacharya, Associate
Professor, Hans Raj College, Delhi; Vijay Sarda, Associate Professor (Retd.), Zakir
Husain College, New Delhi; K.K. Arora, Associate Professor, Zakir Husain College,
New Delhi; Shashi Saxena, Associate Professor, Hans Raj College, Delhi; Anuradha
Sen, Apeejay School, Sheikh Sarai, New Delhi; C. Shrinivas, PGT, Kendriya Vidyalaya,
Pushp Vihar, New Delhi; D.L. Bharti, PGT, Ramjas School, Sector IV, R.K. Puram, New
Delhi; Ila Sharma, PGT, Delhi Public School, Dwarka, Sector-B, New Delhi; Raj Lakshmi
Karthikeyan, Head (Science), Mother’s International School, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New
Delhi; Sushma Kiran Setia, Principal, Sarvodaya Kanya Vidyalaya, Hari Nagar (CT),
New Delhi; Nidhi Chaudray, PGT, CRPF Public School, Rohini, Delhi; and Veena Suri,
PGT, Bluebells School, Kailash Colony, New Delhi. We are thankful to them.
We express our gratitude to R.S. Sindhu, Professor (Retd.), DESM, NCERT, New
Delhi, for editing and refining the content of the textbook right from the initial stage.
We are also grateful to Ruchi Verma, Associate Professor, DESM, NCERT, New
Delhi; Pramila Tanwar, Assistant Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi; R.B. Pareek,
Associate Professor, RIE, Ajmer; and A.K. Arya, Associate Professor, RIE, Ajmer, for
refining the content of the textbook.
Special thanks are due to M. Chandra, Professor and Head (Retd.), DESM, NCERT
for her support.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contributions of Surendra Kumar,
Narender Verma and Ramesh Kumar, DTP Operators; Subhash Saluja, Ramendra
Kumar Sharma and Abhimanyu Mohanty, Proofreaders; Bhavna Saxena, Copy
Editor; and Deepak Kapoor, In-charge, Computer Station, in shaping this book. The
contributions of the Publication Department, NCERT, New Delhi,  in bringing out this
book are also duly acknowledged.
2018-19
ANSWERS
CONTENTS
Foreword
Unit 1
Some Basic Concepts of Chemistry
Importance of Chemistry
Nature of Matter
Properties of Matter and their Measurement
Uncertainty in Measurement
Laws of Chemical Combinations
Dalton’s Atomic Theory
Atomic and Molecular Masses
Mole Concept and Molar Masses
Percentage Composition
1.10 Stoichiometry and Stoichiometric Calculations
Unit 2
Structure of Atom
Discovery of Sub-atomic Particles
Atomic Models
Developments Leading to the Bohr’s Model of Atom
Bohr’s Model for Hydrogen Atom
Towards Quantum Mechanical Model of the Atom
Quantum Mechanical Model of Atom
Unit 3
Classification of Elements and Periodicity in Properties
Why do we Need to Classify Elements ?
Genesis of Periodic Classification
Modern Periodic Law and the present form of the Periodic Table
Nomenclature of Elements with Atomic Numbers > 100
Electronic Configurations of Elements and the Periodic Table
Electronic Configurations and Types of Elements:
s-, p-, d-, f- Blocks
Periodic Trends in Properties of Elements
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Unit 4
Chemical Bonding and Molecular Structure
Kössel-Lewis Approach to Chemical Bonding
Ionic or Electrovalent Bond
Bond Parameters
The Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion (VSEPR) Theory
Valence Bond Theory
Hybridisation
Molecular Orbital Theory
Bonding in Some Homonuclear Diatomic Molecules
Hydrogen Bonding
Unit 5
States of Matter
Intermolecular Forces
Thermal Energy
Intermolecular Forces vs Thermal Interactions
The Gaseous State
The Gas Laws
Ideal Gas Equation
Kinetic Energy and Molecular Speeds
Kinetic Molecular Theory of Gases
Behaviour of Real Gases: Deviation from Ideal Gas Behaviour
5.10 Liquefaction of Gases
5.11 Liquid State
Unit 6
Thermodynamics
Thermodynamic Terms
Applications
Measurement of ∆U and ∆H: Calorimetry
Enthalpy Change, ∆rH of a Reaction – Reaction Enthalpy
Enthalpies for Different Types of Reactions
Spontaneity
Gibbs Energy Change and Equilibrium
(viii)
2018-19
ANSWERS
Unit 7
Equilibrium
Equilibrium in Physical Processes
Equilibrium in Chemical Processes – Dynamic Equilibrium
Law of Chemical Equilibrium and Equilibrium Constant
Homogeneous Equilibria
Heterogeneous Equilibria
Applications of Equilibrium Constants
Relationship between Equilibrium Constant K,
Reaction Quotient Q and Gibbs Energy G
Factors Affecting Equilibria
Ionic Equilibrium in Solution
7.10 Acids, Bases and Salts
7.11 Ionization of Acids and Bases
7.12 Buffer Solutions
7.13 Solubility Equilibria of Sparingly Soluble Salts
Appendices
Answer to some Selected Questions
Index
(i x)
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
2018-19
UNIT 1
SOME BASIC CONCEPTS OF CHEMISTRY
Chemistry is the science of molecules and their
transformations. It is the science not so much of the one
hundred elements but of the infinite variety of molecules that
may be built from them.
Roald Hoffmann
Science can be viewed as a continuing human effort to
systematise knowledge for describing and understanding
nature. You have learnt in your previous classes that we come
across diverse substances present in nature and changes in
them in daily life. Curd formation from milk, formation of
vinegar from sugarcane juice on keeping for prolonged time
and rusting of iron are some of the examples of changes which
we come across many times. For the sake of convenience,
science is sub-divided into various disciplines: chemistry,
physics, biology, geology, etc. The branch of science that
studies the preparation, properties, structure and reactions
of material substances is called chemistry.
DEVELOPMENT OF CHEMISTRY
Chemistry, as we understand it today, is not a very old
discipline. Chemistry was not studied for its own sake, rather
it came up as a result of search for two interesting things:
i. Philosopher’s stone (Paras) which would convert
all baser metals e.g., iron and copper into gold.
ii.‘Elexir of life’ which would grant immortality.
People in ancient India, already had the knowledge of many
scientific phenomenon much before the advent of modern
science. They applied that knowledge in various walks of
life. Chemistry developed mainly in the form of Alchemy
and Iatrochemistry during 1300-1600 CE. Modern
chemistry took shape in the 18th century Europe, after a
few centuries of alchemical traditions which were
introduced in Europe by the Arabs.
After studying this unit, you will be
able to
appreciate the contribution of
India in the development of
chemistry understand the role of
chemistry in different spheres of
life;
explain the characteristics of
three states of matter;
classify different substances into
elements,
compounds
mixtures;
use scientific notations and
determine significant figures;
differentiate between precision and
accuracy;
define SI base units and convert
physical quantities from one
system of units to another;
explain various laws of chemical
combination;
appreciate significance of atomic
mass, average atomic mass,
molecular mass and formula
mass;
describe the terms – mole and
molar mass;
calculate the mass per cent of
component elements constituting
a compound;
determine empirical formula and
molecular formula for a compound
from the given experimental data;
perform the stoichiometric
calculations.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Other cultures – especially the Chinese and
the Indian – had their own alchemical traditions.
These included much knowledge of chemical
processes and techniques.
In ancient India, chemistry was called
Rasayan Shastra, Rastantra, Ras Kriya or
Rasvidya. It included metallurgy, medicine,
manufacture of cosmetics, glass, dyes, etc.
Systematic excavations at Mohenjodaro in
Sindh and Harappa in Punjab prove that the
story of development of chemistry in India is
very old. Archaeological findings show that
baked bricks were used in construction work.
It shows the mass production of pottery, which
can be regarded as the earliest chemical process,
in which materials were mixed, moulded and
subjected to heat by using fire to achieve
desirable qualities. Remains of glazed pottery
have been found in  Mohenjodaro. Gypsum
cement has been used in the construction work.
It contains lime, sand and traces of CaCO3.
Harappans made faience, a sort of glass which
was used in ornaments. They melted and forged
a variety of objects from metals, such as lead,
silver, gold and copper. They improved the
hardness of copper for making artefacts by
using tin and arsenic. A number of glass objects
were found in Maski in South India (1000–900
BCE), and  Hastinapur and Taxila in North
India (1000–200 BCE). Glass and glazes were
coloured by addition of colouring agents like
metal oxides.
Copper metallurgy in India dates back to
the beginning of chalcolithic cultures in the
subcontinent. There are much archeological
evidences to support the view that technologies
for extraction of copper and iron were developed
indigenously.
According to Rigveda, tanning of leather
and dying of cotton were practised during
1000–400 BCE. The golden gloss of the black
polished ware of northen India could not  be
replicated and is still a chemical mystery. These
wares indicate the mastery with which kiln
temperatures could be controlled. Kautilya’s
Arthashastra describes the production of salt
from sea.
A vast number of statements and material
described in the ancient Vedic literature can
be shown to agree with modern scientific
findings. Copper utensils, iron, gold, silver
ornaments and terracotta discs and painted
grey pottery have been found in many
archaeological sites in north India. Sushruta
Samhita explains the importance of Alkalies.
The Charaka Samhita mentions ancient
indians who knew how to prepare sulphuric
acid, nitric acid and oxides of copper, tin and
zinc; the sulphates of copper, zinc and iron and
the carbonates of lead and iron.
Rasopanishada describes the preparation
of gunpowder mixture. Tamil texts also
describe the preparation of fireworks using
sulphur, charcoal, saltpetre (i.e., potassium
nitrate), mercury, camphor, etc.
Nagarjuna was a great Indian scientist. He
was a reputed chemist, an alchemist and a
metallurgist. His work Rasratnakar deals with
the formulation of mercury compounds. He has
also discussed methods for the extraction of
metals, like gold, silver, tin and copper. A book,
Rsarnavam, appeared around 800 CE. It
discusses the uses of various furnaces, ovens
and crucibles for different purposes. It
describes methods by which metals could be
identified by flame colour.
Chakrapani discovered mercury sulphide.
The credit for inventing soap also goes to him.
He used mustard oil and some alkalies as
ingredients for making soap. Indians began
making soaps in the 18th century CE. Oil of
Eranda and seeds of Mahua plant and calcium
carbonate were used for making soap.
The paintings found on the walls of Ajanta
and Ellora, which look fresh even after ages,
testify to a high level of science achieved in
ancient India. Varähmihir’s Brihat Samhita is
a sort of encyclopaedia, which was composed
in the sixth century CE. It informs about the
preparation of glutinous material to be applied
on walls and roofs of houses and temples. It
was prepared entirely from extracts of various
plants, fruits, seeds and barks, which were
concentrated by boiling, and then, treated with
various resins. It will be interesting to test such
materials scientifically and assess them for use.
2018-19
SOME BASIC CONCEPTS OF CHEMISTRY
A number of classical texts, like
Atharvaveda (1000 BCE) mention some dye
stuff, the material used were turmeric, madder,
sunflower, orpiment, cochineal and lac. Some
other substances having tinting property were
kamplcica, pattanga and jatuka.
Varähmihir’s Brihat Samhita gives
references to perfumes and cosmetics. Recipes
for hair dying were made from plants, like
indigo and minerals like iron power, black iron
or steel and acidic extracts of sour rice gruel.
Gandhayukli describes recipes for making
scents, mouth perfumes, bath powders,
incense and talcum power.
Paper was known to India in the
17th century as account of Chinese traveller
I-tsing describes. Excavations at Taxila indicate
that ink was used in India from the fourth
century. Colours of ink were made from chalk,
red lead and minimum.
It seems that the process of fermentation
was well-known to Indians. Vedas and
Kautilya’s  Arthashastra mention about many
types of liquors. Charaka Samhita also
mentions ingredients, such as barks of plants,
stem, flowers, leaves, woods, cereals, fruits and
sugarcane for making Asavas.
The concept that matter is ultimately made
of indivisible building blocks, appeared in
India a few centuries BCE as a part of
philosophical speculations. Acharya Kanda,
born in 600 BCE, originally known by the
name Kashyap, was the first proponent of the
‘atomic theory’. He formulated the theory of
very small indivisible particles, which he
named ‘Paramãnu’ (comparable to atoms). He
authored the text Vaiseshika Sutras.
According to him, all substances are
aggregated form of smaller units called atoms
(Paramãnu), which are eternal, indestructible,
spherical, suprasensible and in motion in the
original state. He explained that this individual
entity cannot be sensed through any human
organ. Kanda added that there are varieties of
atoms that are as different as the different
classes of substances. He said these
(Paramãnu) could form pairs or triplets, among
other combinations and unseen forces cause
interaction between them. He conceptualised
this theory around 2500 years before John
Dalton (1766-1844).
Charaka Samhita is the oldest Ayurvedic
epic of India. It describes the treatment of
diseases. The concept of reduction of particle
size of metals is clearly discussed in Charaka
Samhita. Extreme reduction of particle size is
termed as nanotechnology. Charaka Samhita
describes the use of bhasma of metals in the
treatment of ailments. Now-a-days, it has been
proved that bhasmas have nanoparticles of
metals.
After the decline of alchemy, Iatrochemistry
reached a steady state, but it too declined due
to the introduction and practise of western
medicinal system in the 20th century. During
this period of stagnation, pharmaceutical
industry based on Ayurveda continued to
exist, but it too declined gradually. It took
about 100-150 years for Indians to learn and
adopt new techniques. During this time, foreign
products poured in. As a result, indigenous
traditional techniques gradually declined.
Modern science appeared in Indian scene in
the later part of the nineteenth century. By the
mid-nineteenth century, European scientists
started coming to India and modern chemistry
started growing.
From the above discussion, you have learnt
that chemistry deals with the composition,
structure, properties and interection of matter
and is of much use to human beings in daily
life. These aspects can be best described and
understood in terms of basic constituents of
matter that are atoms and molecules.  That
is why, chemistry is also called the science of
atoms and molecules.  Can we see, weigh and
perceive these entities (atoms and molecules)?
Is it possible to count the number of atoms
and molecules in a given mass of matter and
have a quantitative relationship between the
mass and the number of these particles? We
will get the answer of some of these questions
in this Unit. We will further describe how
physical properties of matter can be
quantitatively described using numerical
values with suitable units.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
IMPORTANCE OF CHEMISTRY
Chemistry plays a central role in science and
is often intertwined with other branches of
science.
Principles of chemistry are applicable in
diverse areas, such as weather patterns,
functioning of brain and operation of a
computer, production in chemical industries,
manufacturing fertilisers, alkalis, acids, salts,
dyes, polymers, drugs, soaps, detergents,
metals, alloys, etc., including new material.
Chemistry contributes in a big way to the
national economy. It also plays an important
role in meeting human needs for food,
healthcare products and other material
aimed at improving the quality of life.  This
is exemplified by the large-scale production
of a variety of fertilisers, improved variety of
pesticides and insecticides. Chemistry
provides methods for the isolation of life-
saving drugs from natural sources and
makes possible synthesis of such drugs.
Some of these drugs are cisplatin and taxol,
which are effective in cancer therapy. The
drug AZT (Azidothymidine) is used for
helping AIDS patients.
Chemistry contributes to a large extent
in the development and growth of a nation.
With a better understanding of chemical
principles it has now become possible to
design and synthesise new material having
specific magnetic, electric and optical
properties.  This has lead to the production
of superconducting ceramics, conducting
polymers, optical fibres, etc. Chemistry has
helped in establishing industries which
manufacture utility goods, like acids,
alkalies, dyes, polymesr metals, etc. These
industries contribute in a big way to the
economy of a nation and generate
employment.
In recent years, chemistry has helped
in dealing with some of the pressing aspects
of environmental degradation with a fair
degree of success. Safer alternatives to
environmentally hazardous refrigerants, like
CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons), responsible for
ozone depletion in the stratosphere, have
been successfully synthesised. However,
many big environmental problems continue
to be matters of grave concern to the
chemists. One such problem is the
management of the Green House gases, like
methane, carbon dioxide, etc.  Understanding
of biochemical processes, use of enzymes for
large-scale production of chemicals and
synthesis of new exotic material are some of
the intellectual challenges for the future
generation of chemists. A developing country,
like India, needs talented and creative
chemists for accepting such challenges. To
be a good chemist and to accept such
challanges, one needs to understand the
basic concepts of chemistry, which begin with
the concept of matter. Let us start with the
nature of matter.
NATURE OF MATTER
You are already familiar with the term matter
from your earlier classes. Anything which has
mass and occupies space is called matter.
Everything around us, for example, book, pen,
pencil, water, air, all living beings, etc., are
composed of matter. You know that they have
mass and they occupy space. Let us recall the
characteristics of the states of matter, which
you learnt in your previous classes.
1.2.1 States of Matter
You are aware that matter can exist in three
physical states viz. solid, liquid and gas. The
constituent particles of matter in these three
states can be represented as shown in Fig. 1.1.
Particles are held very close to each other
in solids in an orderly fashion and there is not
much freedom of movement. In liquids, the
particles are close to each other but they can
move around. However, in gases, the particles
are far apart as compared to those present in
solid or liquid states and their movement is
easy and fast. Because of such arrangement
of particles, different states of matter exhibit
the following characteristics:
Solids have definite volume and definite
shape.
(ii) Liquids have definite volume but do not
have definite shape. They take the shape
of the container in which they are placed.
2018-19
SOME BASIC CONCEPTS OF CHEMISTRY
(iii) Gases have neither definite volume nor
definite shape. They completely occupy the
space in the container in which they are placed.
These three states of matter are
interconvertible by changing the conditions of
temperature and pressure.
Solid
liquid
On heating, a solid usually changes to a
liquid, and the liquid on further heating changes
to gas (or vapour). In the reverse process, a gas
on cooling liquifies to the liquid and the liquid
on further cooling freezes to the solid.
1.2.2. Classification of Matter
In class IX (Chapter 2), you have learnt that
at the macroscopic or bulk level, matter can be
classified as mixture or pure substance. These
can be further sub-divided as shown in Fig. 1.2.
When all constituent particles of a
substance are same in chemical nature, it is
said to be a pure substance. A mixture
contains many types of particles.
A mixture contains particles of two or more
pure substances which may be present in it in
any ratio. Hence, their composition is variable.
Pure sustances forming mixture are called its
components. Many of the substances present
around you are mixtures. For example, sugar
solution in water, air, tea, etc., are all mixtures.
A mixture may be homogeneous or
heterogeneous. In a homogeneous mixture,
the components completely mix with each other.
This means particles of components of the
mixture are uniformly distributed throughout
Fig. 1.2  Classification of matter
Fig. 1.1
Arrangement of particles in solid, liquid
and gaseous state
the bulk of the mixture and its composition is
uniform throughout. Sugar solution and air
are the examples of homogeneous mixtures.
In contrast to this, in a heterogeneous
mixture, the composition is not uniform
throughout and sometimes different
components are visible. For example, mixtures
of salt and sugar, grains and pulses along with
some dirt (often stone pieces), are
heterogeneous mixtures. You can think of
many more examples of mixtures which you
come across in the daily life. It is worthwhile to
mention here that the components of a
mixture can be separated by using physical
methods,
simple
hand-picking, filtration, crystallisation,
distillation, etc.
Pure substances have characteristics
different from mixtures. Constituent particles
of pure substances have fixed composition.
Copper, silver, gold, water and glucose are
some examples of pure substances. Glucose
contains carbon, hydrogen and oxygen in a
fixed ratio and its particles are of same
composition. Hence, like all other pure
substances, glucose has a fixed composition.
Also, its constituents—carbon, hydrogen and
oxygen—cannot be separated by simple
physical methods.
Pure substances can further be
classified into elements and compounds.
Particles of an element consist of only one
type of atoms. These particles may exist as
atoms or molecules. You may be familiar
with atoms and molecules from the
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
previous classes; however, you will be
studying about them in detail in Unit 2.
Sodium, copper, silver, hydrogen, oxygen,
etc., are some examples of elements. Their
all atoms are of one type. However, the
atoms of different elements are different in
nature. Some elements, such as sodium or
copper, contain atoms as their constituent
particles, whereas, in some others, the
constituent particles are molecules which
are formed by two or more atoms. For
example, hydrogen, nitrogen and oxygen
gases consist of molecules, in which two
atoms combine to give their respective
molecules. This is illustrated in Fig. 1.3.
carbon atom. Thus, the atoms of different
elements are present in a compound in a fixed
and definite ratio and this ratio is characteristic
of a particular compound. Also, the properties
of a compound are different from those of its
constituent elements. For example, hydrogen
and oxygen are gases, whereas, the compound
formed by their combination i.e., water is a
liquid. It is interesting to note that hydrogen
burns with a pop sound and oxygen is a
supporter of combustion, but water is used
as a fire extinguisher.
PROPERTIES OF MATTER AND
THEIR MEASUREMENT
1.3.1 Physical and chemical properties
Every substance has unique or characteristic
properties. These properties can be classified
into two categories — physical properties,
such as colour, odour, melting point, boiling
point, density, etc., and chemical properties,
like composition, combustibility, ractivity with
acids and bases, etc.
Physical properties can be measured or
observed without changing the identity or the
composition of the substance. The measurement
or observation of chemical properties requires
a chemical change to occur. Measurement of
physical properties does not require occurance
of a chemical change. The examples of chemical
properties are characteristic reactions of different
substances; these include acidity or basicity,
combustibility, etc. Chemists describe, interpret
and predict the behaviour of substances on the
basis of knowledge of their physical and chemical
properties, which are determined by careful
measurement and experimentation. In the
When two or more atoms of  different
elements combine together in a definite ratio,
the molecule of a compound is obtained.
Moreover, the constituents of a compound
cannot be separated into simpler
substances by physical methods. They can
be separated by chemical methods.
Examples of some compounds are water,
ammonia, carbon dioxide, sugar, etc. The
molecules of water and carbon dioxide are
represented in Fig. 1.4.
Note that a water molecule comprises two
hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom.
Similarly, a molecule of carbon dioxide
contains two oxygen atoms combined with one
Fig. 1.4
A depiction of molecules of water and
carbon dioxide
Water molecule
(H2O)
Carbon dioxide
molecule (CO2)
Fig. 1.3  A representation of atoms and molecules
2018-19
SOME BASIC CONCEPTS OF CHEMISTRY
following section, we will learn about the
measurement of physical properties.
1.3.2 Measurement of physical properties
Quantitative measurement of properties is
reaquired for scientific investigation. Many
properties of matter, such as length, area,
volume, etc., are quantitative in nature. Any
quantitative observation or measurement is
represented by a number followed by units
in which it is measured. For example, length
of a room can be represented as  6 m; here, 6
is the number and m denotes metre, the unit
in which the length is measured.
Earlier, two different systems of
measurement, i.e., the English System and
the Metric System were being used in
different parts of the world. The metric system,
which originated in France in late eighteenth
century, was more convenient as it was based
on the decimal system. Late, need of a common
standard system was felt by the scientific
community. Such a system was established
in 1960 and is discussed in detail below.
1.3.3
The International System of Units (SI)
The International System of Units (in French
Le Systeme International d’Unités —
abbreviated as SI) was established by the
11th General Conference on Weights and
Measures
(CGPM
Conference
Generale des Poids et Measures). The CGPM
is an inter-governmental treaty organisation
created by a diplomatic treaty known as
Metre Convention, which was signed in Paris
in 1875.
The SI system has seven base units and
they are listed in Table 1.1. These units pertain
to the seven fundamental scientific quantities.
The other physical quantities, such as speed,
volume, density, etc., can be derived from these
quantities.
Table 1.1  Base Physical Quantities and their Units
Base Physical
Symbol
Name of
Symbol
Quantity
SI Unit
for SI
Quantity
Length
metre
kilogram
second
Electric current
ampere
Thermodynamic
kelvin
temperature
Amount of substance
Luminous intensity
candela
Maintaining the National
Standards of Measurement
The system of units, including unit
definitions, keeps on changing with time.
Whenever the accuracy of measurement
of a particular unit was enhanced
substantially by adopting new principles,
member nations of metre treaty (signed in
1875), agreed to change the formal
definition of that unit. Each modern
industrialised country, including India, has
a National Metrology Institute (NMI), which
maintains standards of measurements.
This responsibility has been given to the
National Physical Laboratory (NPL),
New Delhi. This laboratory establishes
experiments to realise the base units and
derived units of measurement and
maintains
National
Standards
Measurement. These standards are
periodically
inter -compared
standards maintained at other National
Metrology Institutes in the world, as well
as those, established at the International
Bureau of Standards in Paris.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
These prefixes are listed in Table 1.3.
Let us now quickly go through some of the
quantities which you will be often using in this
book.
The definitions of the SI base units are given
in Table 1.2.
The SI system allows the use of prefixes to
indicate the multiples or submultiples of a unit.
* Triple point of water is 0.01 °C or 279.16K (32.01°F)
Table 1.2  Definitions of SI Base Units
Unit of length
metre
The metre is the length of the path travelled
by light in vacuum during a time interval of
1/299 792 458 of a second.
Unit of mass
kilogram
The kilogram is the unit of mass; it is equal
to the mass of the international prototype
of the kilogram.
Unit of time
second
The second is the duration of 9 192 631 770
periods of the radiation corresponding to the
transition between the two hyperfine levels
of the ground state of the caesium-133 atom.
Unit of electric
ampere
The ampere is that constant current, which
current
if maintained in two straight parallel
conductors of infinite length of negligible
circular cross-section and placed 1 metre
apart in vacuum, would produce between
these conductors a force equal to 2 × 10–7
newton per metre of length.
Unit of thermodynamic
kelvin
The kelvin, unit of thermodynamic
temperature
temperature, is the fraction 1/273.16 of the
thermodynamic temperature of the triple*
point of water.
Unit of amount of substance
1. The mole is the amount of substance of a
system,
which
contains
elementary entities as there are atoms in
0.012 kilogram of carbon-12; its symbol is
‘mol’.
2. When the mole is used, the elementary
entities must be specified and these may
be atoms, molecules, ions, electrons, other
particles, or specified groups of such
particles.
Unit of luminous intensity
candela
The candela is the luminous intensity, in a
given direction, of a source that emits
monochromatic radiation of frequency
540 × 1012 hertz and that has a radiant
intensity in that direction of 1/683 watt per
steradian.
2018-19
SOME BASIC CONCEPTS OF CHEMISTRY
Fig. 1.5   Analytical balance
1.3.4 Mass and Weight
Mass of a substance is the amount of matter
present in it, while weight is the force exerted
by gravity on an object. The mass of a
substance is constant, whereas, its weight
may vary from one place to another due to
change in gravity. You should be careful in
using these terms.
The mass of a substance can be determined
accurately in the laboratory by using an
analytical balance (Fig. 1.5).
The SI unit of mass as given in Table 1.1 is
kilogram. However, its fraction named as gram
(1 kg = 1000 g), is used in laboratories due to
the smaller amounts of chemicals used in
chemical reactions.
1.3.5 Volume
Volume is the amont of space occupied by a
substance. It has the units of (length)3. So in
SI system, volume has units of m3. But again,
in chemistry laboratories, smaller volumes are
used. Hence, volume is often denoted in cm3
or dm3 units.
A common unit, litre (L) which is not an SI
unit, is used for measurement of volume of
liquids.
1 L = 1000 mL ,  1000 cm3 = 1 dm3
Fig. 1.6 helps to visualise these relations.
Table 1.3  Prefixes used in the SI System
Multiple
Prefix
Symbol
10–24
yocto
10–21
zepto
10–18
10–15
femto
10–12
micro
milli
centi
hecto
yotta
Fig. 1.6  Different units used to express
volume
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
In the laboratory, the volume of liquids or
solutions can be measured by graduated
cylinder, burette, pipette, etc. A volumetric
flask  is used to prepare a known volume of a
solution. These measuring devices are shown
in Fig. 1.7.
Fig. 1.7   Some volume measuring devices
UNCERTAINTY IN MEASUREMENT
Many a time in the study of chemistry, one
has to deal with experimental data as well as
theoretical calculations. There are meaningful
ways to handle the numbers conveniently and
fahrenheit) and K (kelvin). Here, K is the SI
unit. The thermometers based on these scales
are shown in Fig. 1.8. Generally, the
thermometer with celsius scale are calibrated
from 0° to 100°, where these two
temperatures are the freezing point and the
boiling point of water, respectively. The
fahrenheit scale is represented between 32°
to 212°.
The temperatures on two scales are related
to each other by the following relationship:
The kelvin scale is related to celsius scale
as follows:
K = °C + 273.15
It is interesting to note that temperature
below 0 °C (i.e., negative values) are possible
in Celsius scale but in Kelvin scale, negative
temperature is not possible.
Fig. 1.8
Thermometers
using
different
temperature scales
1.3.6 Density
The two properties — mass and volume
discussed above are related as follows:
Density
Volume
Density of a substance is its amount of mass
per unit volume. So, SI units of density can be
obtained as follows:
SI unit of density = SI unit of mass
SI unit of volume
m3  or kg m–3
This unit is quite large and a chemist often
expresses density in g cm–3, where mass is
expressed in gram and volume is expressed in
cm3. Density of a substance tells us about how
closely its particles are packed. If density is
more, it means particles are more closely
packed.
1.3.7  Temperature
There are three common scales to measure
temperature — °C (degree  celsius), °F (degree
2018-19
SOME BASIC CONCEPTS OF CHEMISTRY
present the data realistically with certainty to
the extent possible. These ideas are discussed
below in detail.
1.4.1 Scientific Notation
As chemistry is the study of atoms and
molecules, which have extremely low masses
and are present in extremely large numbers,
a chemist has to deal with numbers as large
as 602, 200,000,000,000,000,000,000 for
the molecules of 2 g of hydrogen gas or as
small as 0.00000000000000000000000166
g mass of a H atom. Similarly, other constants
such as Planck’s constant, speed of light,
charges on particles, etc., involve numbers of
the above magnitude.
It may look funny for a moment to write
or count numbers involving so many zeros
but it offers a real challenge to do simple
mathematical operations of addition,
subtraction, multiplication or division with
such numbers. You can write any two
numbers of the above type and try any one of
the operations you like to accept as a
challenge, and then, you will really appreciate
the difficulty in handling such numbers.
This problem is solved by using scientific
notation for such numbers, i.e., exponential
notation in which any number can be
represented in the form N × 10n, where n is an
exponent having positive or negative values
and N is a number (called digit term) which
varies between 1.000... and 9.999....
Thus, we can write 232.508 as
2.32508 ×102 in scientific notation. Note that
while writing it, the decimal had to be moved
to the left by two places and same is the
exponent (2) of 10 in the scientific notation.
Similarly, 0.00016 can be written as
1.6 × 10–4. Here, the decimal has to be moved
four places to the right and (–4) is the exponent
in the scientific notation.
While performing mathematical operations
on numbers expressed in scientific notations,
the following points are to be kept in mind.
Reference Standard
After defining a unit of measurement such
as the kilogram or the metre, scientists
agreed on reference standards that make
it possible to calibrate all measuring
devices. For getting reliable measurements,
all devices such as metre sticks and
analytical balances have been calibrated by
their manufacturers to give correct
readings. However, each of these devices
is standardised or calibrated against some
reference. The mass standard is the
kilogram since 1889. It has been defined
as the mass of platinum-iridium (Pt-Ir)
cylinder that is stored in an airtight jar at
International Bureau of Weights and
Measures in Sevres, France. Pt-Ir was
chosen for this standard because it is
highly resistant to chemical attack and its
mass will not change for an extremely long
time.
Scientists are in search of a new
standard for mass. This is being attempted
through accurate determination of
Avogadro constant. Work on this new
standard focuses on ways to measure
accurately the number of atoms in a well-
defined mass of sample. One such method,
which uses X-rays to determine the atomic
density of a crystal of ultrapure silicon, has
an accuracy of about 1 part in 106  but has
not yet been adopted to serve as a
standard.  There are other methods but
none of them are presently adequate to
replace the Pt-Ir cylinder. No doubt,
changes are expected within this decade.
The metre was originally defined as the
length between two marks on a Pt-Ir bar
kept at a temperature of 0°C (273.15 K).  In
1960 the length of the metre was defined
as 1.65076373 × 106 times the wavelength
of light emitted by a krypton laser.
Although this was a cumbersome number,
it preserved the length of the metre at its
agreed value. The metre was redefined in
1983 by CGPM as the length of path
travelled by light in vacuum during a time
interval of 1/299 792 458 of a second.
Similar to the length and the mass, there
are reference standards for other physical
quantities.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Multiplication and Division
These two operations follow the same rules
which are there for exponential numbers, i.e.
by an analytical balance is slightly higher
than the mass obtained by using a platform
balance. Therefore, digit 4 placed after
decimal in the measurement by platform
balance is uncertain.
The uncertainty in the experimental or the
calculated values is indicated by mentioning
the number of significant figures. Significant
figures are meaningful digits which are
known with certainty plus one which is
estimated or uncertain. The uncertainty is
indicated by writing the certain digits and the
last uncertain digit. Thus, if we write a result
as 11.2 mL, we say the 11 is certain and 2 is
uncertain and the uncertainty would be +1
in the last digit. Unless otherwise stated, an
uncertainty of +1 in the last digit is always
understood.
There are certain rules for determining the
number of significant figures. These are
stated below:
(1) All non-zero digits are significant. For
example in 285 cm, there are three
significant figures and in 0.25 mL, there
are two significant figures.
(2) Zeros preceding to first non-zero digit are
not significant. Such zero indicates the
position of decimal point. Thus, 0.03 has
one significant figure and 0.0052 has two
significant figures.
(3) Zeros between two non-zero digits are
significant. Thus, 2.005 has four
significant figures.
(4) Zeros at the end or right of a number are
significant, provided they are on the right
side of the decimal point. For example,
0.200 g has three significant figures. But,
if otherwise, the terminal zeros are not
significant if there is no decimal point. For
example, 100 has only one significant
figure, but 100. has three significant
figures and 100.0 has four significant
figures. Such numbers are better
represented in scientific notation. We can
express the number 100 as 1×102 for one
significant figure, 1.0×10 2 for two
significant figures and 1.00×102 for three
significant figures.
Addition and Subtraction
For these two operations, first the numbers are
written in such a way that they have the same
exponent. After that, the coefficients (digit
terms) are added or subtracted as the case
may be.
Thus, for  adding  6.65 × 104  and  8.95 × 103,
exponent is made same for both the numbers.
Thus, we get (6.65 × 104) + (0.895 × 104)
Then, these numbers can be added as follows
(6.65 + 0.895) × 104 = 7.545 × 104
Similarly, the subtraction of two numbers can
be done as shown below:
(2.5 ×  10–2 ) – (4.8 × 10–3)
= (2.5 × 10–2) – (0.48 × 10–2)
= (2.5 – 0.48) × 10–2 = 2.02 × 10–2
1.4.2 Significant Figures
Every experimental measurement has some
amount of uncertainty associated with it
because of limitation of measuring instrument
and the skill of the person making the
measurement. For example, mass of an object
is obtained using a platform balance and it
comes out to be 9.4g. On measuring the mass
of this object on an analytical balance, the
mass obtained is 9.4213g. The mass obtained
6 9 10
= 38.64
= 3.864
2 5 10
2 5 10
= 24.50
= 2.450
5 5 10
=0.4909
=4.909
2018-19
SOME BASIC CONCEPTS OF CHEMISTRY
(5) Counting the numbers of object,
for example, 2 balls or 20 eggs, have
infinite significant figures as these
are exact numbers and can be
represented by writing infinite number of
zeros after placing a decimal i.e.,
2 = 2.000000 or 20 = 20.000000.
In numbers written in scientific notation,
all digits are significant e.g., 4.01×102 has three
significant figures, and 8.256 × 10–3 has four
significant figures.
However, one would always like the results
to be precise and accurate. Precision and
accuracy are often referred to while we talk
about the measurement.
Precision refers to the closeness of various
measurements for the same quantity. However,
accuracy is the agreement of a particular value
to the true value of the result. For example, if
the true value for a result is 2.00 g and student
‘A’ takes two measurements and reports the
results as 1.95 g and 1.93 g. These values are
precise as they are close to each other but are
not accurate. Another student ‘B’ repeats the
experiment and obtains 1.94 g and 2.05 g as
the results for two measurements. These
observations are neither precise nor accurate.
When the third student ‘C’ repeats these
measurements and reports 2.01 g and 1.99 g
as the result, these values are both precise and
accurate. This can be more clearly understood
from the data given in Table 1.4.
Here, 18.0 has only one digit after the decimal
point and the result should be reported only
up to one digit after the decimal point, which
is 31.1.
Multiplication and Division of
Significant Figures
In these operations, the result must be
reported with no more significant figures as
in the measurement with the few significant
figures.
2.5×1.25 = 3.125
Since 2.5 has two significant figures, the
result should not have more than two
significant figures, thus, it is 3.1.
While limiting the result to the required
number of significant figures as done in the
above mathematical operation, one has to
keep in mind the following points for
rounding off the numbers
1. If the rightmost digit to be removed is more
than 5, the preceding number is increased
by one. For example, 1.386. If we have to
remove 6, we have to round it to 1.39.
2. If the rightmost digit to be removed is less
than 5, the preceding number is not
changed. For example, 4.334 if 4 is to be
removed, then the result is rounded upto
4.33.
3. If the rightmost digit to be removed is 5,
then the preceding number is not changed
if it is an even number but it is increased
by one if it is an odd number. For example,
if 6.35 is to be rounded by removing 5,
we have to increase 3 to 4 giving 6.4 as
the result. However, if 6.25 is to be
rounded off it is rounded off to 6.2.
1.4.3 Dimensional Analysis
Often while calculating, there is a need to
convert units from one system to the other. The
method used to accomplish this is called factor
label method or unit factor method or
dimensional analysis. This is illustrated
below.
Example
A piece of metal is 3 inch (represented by in)
long. What is its length in cm?
Addition and Subtraction of
Significant Figures
The result cannot have more digits to the right
of the decimal point than either of the original
numbers.
12.11
1.012
31.122
Average (g)
Student A
1.940
Student B
1.995
Student C
2.000
Measurements/g
Table 1.4 Data to Illustrate Precision
and Accuracy
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Solution
We know that 1 in = 2.54 cm
From this equivalence, we can write
Thus,
equals 1 and
also equals 1. Both of these are called unit
factors. If some number is multiplied by these
unit factors (i.e., 1), it will not be affected
otherwise.
Say, the 3 in given above is multiplied by
the unit factor. So,
3 in = 3 in ×
= 3 × 2.54 cm = 7.62 cm
Now, the unit factor by which multiplication
is to be done is that unit factor (
the above case) which gives the desired units
i.e., the numerator should have that part which
is required in the desired result.
It should also be noted in the above
example that units can be handled just like
other numerical part. It can be cancelled,
divided, multiplied, squared, etc. Let us study
one more example.
Example
A jug contains 2L of milk. Calculate the volume
of the milk in m3.
Solution
Since 1 L = 1000 cm3
and 1m = 100 cm, which gives
To get m3 from the above unit factors, the
first unit factor is taken and it is cubed.
= ( ) =
Now 2 L = 2×1000 cm3
The above is multiplied by the unit factor
Example
How many seconds are there in 2 days?
Solution
Here, we know 1 day = 24 hours (h)
then, 1h = 60 min
so, for converting 2 days to seconds,
i.e., 2 days – – – – – – = – – – seconds
The unit factors can be multiplied in
series in one step only as follows:
= 2 × 24 × 60 × 60 s
= 172800 s
1.5  LAWS OF CHEMICAL
COMBINATIONS
The combination of elements
to form compounds is
governed by the following five
basic laws.
1.5.1 Law of Conservation of Mass
This law was put forth by Antoine Lavoisier
in 1789. He performed careful experimental
studies for combustion reactions and reached
to the conclusion that in all physical and
chemical changes, there is no net change in
mass duting the process. Hence, he reached
to the conclusion that matter can neither be
created nor destroyed. This is called ‘Law of
Conservation of Mass’. This law formed the
basis for several later developments in
chemistry. Infact, this was the result of exact
measurement of masses of reactants and
products, and carefully planned experiments
performed by Lavoisier.
Antoine Lavoisier
(1743–1794)
2018-19
SOME BASIC CONCEPTS OF CHEMISTRY
1.5.2 Law of Definite Proportions
This law was given by, a
French chemist, Joseph
Proust. He stated that a given
compound always contains
exactly the same proportion
of elements by weight.
Proust worked with two
samples of cupric carbonate
— one of which was of natural
origin and the other was synthetic. He found
that the composition of elements present in it
was same for both the samples as shown below:
produced in a chemical
reaction they do so in a
simple ratio by volume,
provided all gases are at
the same temperature and
pressure.
Thus, 100 mL of hydrogen
combine with 50 mL of oxygen
to give 100 mL of water
vapour.
Hydrogen  + Oxygen →  Water
100 mL
50 mL
100 mL
Thus, the volumes of hydrogen and oxygen
which combine (i.e., 100 mL and
50 mL) bear a simple ratio of 2:1.
Gay Lussac’s discovery of integer ratio in
volume relationship is actually the law of
definite proportions by volume. The law of
definite proportions, stated earlier, was with
respect to mass. The Gay Lussac’s law was
explained properly by the work of Avogadro
in 1811.
1.5.5 Avogadro’s Law
In 1811, Avogadro proposed that equal
volumes of all gases at the same temperature
and pressure should contain equal number
of molecules. Avogadro made a distinction
between atoms  and molecules which is quite
understandable in present times. If we
consider again the reaction of hydrogen and
oxygen to produce water, we see that two
volumes of hydrogen combine with one volume
of oxygen to give two volumes of water without
leaving any unreacted oxygen.
Note that in the Fig. 1.9 (Page 16) each box
contains equal number of
molecules. In fact, Avogadro
could explain the above result
by considering the molecules
polyatomic.
hydrogen and oxygen were
considered as diatomic as
recognised now, then the
above results are easily
understandable. However,
Dalton and others believed at
that time that atoms of the
Joseph Proust
(1754–1826)
Joseph Louis
Gay Lussac
Lorenzo Romano
Amedeo Carlo
Avogadro di
Quareqa edi
Carreto
(1776–1856)
copper
carbon
oxygen
Natural Sample
51.35
38.91
Synthetic Sample
51.35
38.91
Thus, he concluded that irrespective of the
source, a given compound always contains
same elements combined together in the same
proportion by mass. The validity of this law
has been confirmed by various experiments.
It is sometimes also referred to as Law of
Definite Composition.
1.5.3 Law of Multiple Proportions
This law was proposed by Dalton in 1803.
According to this law, if two elements can
combine to form more than one compound, the
masses of one element that combine with a
fixed mass of the other element, are in the
ratio of small whole numbers.
For example, hydrogen combines with
oxygen to form two compounds, namely, water
and hydrogen peroxide.
Hydrogen + Oxygen → Water
Hydrogen + Oxygen → Hydrogen Peroxide
Here, the masses of oxygen (i.e., 16 g and 32 g),
which combine with a fixed mass of hydrogen
(2g) bear a simple ratio, i.e., 16:32 or 1: 2.
1.5.4 Gay Lussac’s Law of Gaseous
Volumes
This law was given by Gay Lussac in 1808. He
observed that when gases combine or are
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
same kind cannot combine and molecules of
oxygen or hydrogen containing two atoms did
not exist. Avogadro’s proposal was published
in the French Journal de Physique. In spite of
being correct, it did not gain much support.
After about 50 years, in 1860, the first
international conference on chemistry was held
in Karlsruhe, Germany, to resolve various
ideas. At the meeting, Stanislao Cannizaro
presented a sketch of a course of chemical
philosophy, which emphasised on the
importance of Avogadro’s work.
DALTON’S ATOMIC THEORY
Although the origin of the idea that matter is
composed of small indivisible particles called ‘a-
tomio’ (meaning, indivisible), dates back to the
time of Democritus, a Greek
Philosopher (460–370 BC), it
again started emerging as a
result of several experimental
studies which led to the laws
mentioned above.
1808,
Dalton
published ‘A New System of
Chemical Philosophy’, in
which he proposed the following :
1. Matter consists of indivisible atoms.
2. All atoms of a given element have identical
properties, including identical mass. Atoms
of different elements differ in mass.
3. Compounds are formed when atoms of
different elements combine in a fixed ratio.
4. Chemical reactions involve reorganisation
of atoms. These are neither created nor
destroyed in a chemical reaction.
Dalton’s theory could explain the laws of
chemical combination. However, it could not
explain the laws of gaseous volumes. It could
not provide the reason for combining of
atoms, which was answered later by other
scientists.
ATOMIC AND MOLECULAR MASSES
After having some idea about the terms atoms
and molecules, it is appropriate here to
understand what do we mean by atomic and
molecular masses.
1.7.1 Atomic Mass
The atomic mass or the mass of an atom is
actually very-very small because atoms are
extremely
small.
Today,
sophisticated techniques e.g., mass
spectrometry for determining the atomic
masses fairly accurately. But in the
nineteenth century, scientists could
determine the mass of one atom relative to
another by experimental means, as has been
mentioned earlier. Hydrogen, being the
lightest atom was arbitrarily assigned a mass
of 1 (without any units) and other  elements
were assigned masses relative to it. However,
the present system of atomic masses is based
on carbon-12 as the standard and has been
agreed upon in 1961. Here, Carbon-12 is one
of the isotopes of carbon and can be
represented as 12C. In this system, 12C is
assigned a mass of exactly 12 atomic mass
unit (amu) and masses of all other atoms are
given relative to this standard. One atomic
mass unit is defined as a mass exactly equal
John Dalton
(1776–1884)
Fig. 1.9  Two volumes of hydrogen react with one volume of oxygen to give two volumes of water vapour
2018-19
SOME BASIC CONCEPTS OF CHEMISTRY
to one-twelfth of the mass of one carbon - 12
atom.
And 1 amu = 1.66056×10–24 g
Mass of an atom of hydrogen
= 1.6736×10–24 g
Thus, in terms of amu, the mass
of hydrogen atom  =
= 1.0078 amu
= 1.0080 amu
Similarly, the mass of oxygen - 16 (16O)
atom would be 15.995 amu.
At present, ‘amu’ has been replaced by ‘u’,
which is known as unified mass.
When we use atomic masses of elements
in calculations, we actually use average
atomic masses of elements, which are
explained below.
1.7.2 Average Atomic Mass
Many naturally occurring elements exist as
more than one isotope. When we take into
account the existence of these isotopes and
their relative abundance (per cent occurrence),
the average atomic mass of that element can
be computed. For example,  carbon has the
following three isotopes with relative
abundances and masses as shown against
1.7.3 Molecular Mass
Molecular mass is the sum of atomic masses
of the elements present in a molecule. It is
obtained by multiplying the atomic mass of
each element by the number of its atoms and
adding them together. For example, molecular
mass of methane, which contains one carbon
atom and four hydrogen atoms, can be
obtained as follows:
Molecular mass of methane,
(CH4) = (12.011 u) + 4 (1.008 u)
= 16.043 u
Similarly, molecular mass of water (H2O)
= 2 × atomic mass of hydrogen + 1 × atomic
mass of oxygen
= 2 (1.008 u) + 16.00 u
= 18.02 u
1.7.4 Formula Mass
Some substances, such as sodium chloride,
do not contain discrete molecules as their
constituent units. In such compounds, positive
(sodium ion) and negative (chloride ion) entities
are arranged in a three-dimensional structure,
as shown in Fig. 1.10.
Isotope
Relative
Atomic
Abundance
Mass (amu)
98.892
1.108
13.00335
2 ×10–10
14.00317
each of them.
From the above data, the average atomic
mass of carbon will come out to be:
(0.98892) (12 u) + (0.01108) (13.00335 u) +
(2 × 10–12) (14.00317 u) = 12.011 u
Similarly, average atomic masses for other
elements can be calculated. In the periodic
table of elements, the atomic masses
mentioned for different elements actually
represent their average atomic masses.
It may be noted that in sodium chloride,
one Na+ ion is surrounded by six Cl– ion and
vice-versa.
The formula, such as NaCl, is used to
calculate the formula mass instead of molecular
mass as in the solid state sodium chloride does
not exist as a single entity.
Fig. 1.10 Packing of  Na+ and Cl– ions
in sodium chloride
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
MOLE CONCEPT AND MOLAR
MASSES
Atoms and molecules are extremely small in
size and their numbers in even a small amount
of any substance is really very large. To handle
such large numbers, a unit of convenient
magnitude is required.
Just as we denote one dozen for 12 items,
score for 20 items, gross for 144 items,  we
use the idea of mole to count entities at the
microscopic level (i.e., atoms, molecules,
particles, electrons, ions, etc).
In SI system, mole (symbol, mol) was
introduced as seventh base quantity for the
amount of a substance.
One mole is the amount of a substance
that contains as many particles or entities
as there are atoms in exactly 12 g (or 0.012
kg) of the 12C isotope. It may be emphasised
that the mole of a substance always
contains the same number of entities, no matter
what the substance may be. In order to
determine this number precisely, the mass of
a carbon–12 atom was determined by a mass
spectrometer and found to be equal to
1.992648 × 10–23 g. Knowing that one mole of
carbon weighs 12 g, the number of atoms in it
is equal to:
1 992648
Catom
6 0221367
atoms/mol
This number of entities in 1 mol is so
important that it is given a separate name and
symbol. It is known as ‘Avogadro constant’,
or Avogadro number denoted by NA in honour
of Amedeo Avogadro. To appreciate the
largeness of this number, let us write it with
all zeroes without using any powers of ten.
602213670000000000000000
Hence, so many entities (atoms, molecules or
any other particle) constitute one mole of a
particular substance.
We can, therefore, say that 1 mol of hydrogen
atoms = 6.022×1023 atoms
1 mol of water molecules = 6.022×1023 water
molecules
1 mol of sodium chloride = 6.022 × 1023
formula units of sodium chloride
Having defined the mole, it is easier to know
the mass of one mole of a substance or the
constituent entities. The mass of one mole
of a substance in grams is called its
molar mass. The molar mass in grams is
numerically equal to atomic/molecular/
formula mass in u.
Molar mass of water  = 18.02 g mol-1
Molar mass of sodium chloride = 58.5 g mol-1
PERCENTAGE COMPOSITION
So far,  we were dealing with the number of
entities present in a given sample. But many a
time, information regarding the percentage of
a particular element present in a compound is
required. Suppose, an unknown or new
compound is given to you, the first question
Thus, the formula mass of sodium chloride is
atomic mass of sodium + atomic mass of chlorine
= 23.0 u + 35.5 u = 58.5 u
Fig. 1.11  One mole of various substances
Problem 1.1
Calculate the molecular mass of glucose
(C6H12O6) molecule.
Solution
Molecular mass of glucose (C6H12O6)
= 6(12.011 u) + 12(1.008 u) +
6(16.00 u)
= (72.066 u) + (12.096 u) +
(96.00 u)
=  180.162 u
2018-19
SOME BASIC CONCEPTS OF CHEMISTRY
you would ask is:  what is its formula or what
are its constituents and in what ratio are they
present in the given compound? For known
compounds also, such information provides a
check  whether the given sample contains the
same percentage of elements as present in a
pure sample. In other words, one can check
the purity of a given sample by analysing this
data.
Let us understand it by taking the example
of water (H2O). Since water contains hydrogen
and oxygen, the percentage composition of
both these elements can be calculated as
follows:
Mass % of an element =
mass of that element in the compound
molar mass of th
e compound
Molar mass of water   = 18.02 g
Mass % of hydrogen   =
=  11.18
Mass % of oxygen       =  16.00
18.02
=   88.79
Let us take one more example. What is the
percentage of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen
in ethanol?
Molecular formula of ethanol is:  C2H5OH
Molar mass of ethanol is:
(2×12.01 + 6×1.008 + 16.00) g =  46.068 g
Mass per cent of carbon
24.02g
46.068g
= 52.14%
Mass per cent of hydrogen
6.048g
46.068g
= 13.13%
Mass per cent of oxygen
16.00 g
46.068g
= 34.73%
After understanding the calculation of
per cent of mass, let us now see what
information can be obtained from the
per cent composition  data.
1.9.1 Empirical Formula for Molecular
Formula
An empirical formula represents the simplest
whole number ratio of various atoms present in
a compound, whereas, the molecular formula
shows the exact number of different types of
atoms present in a molecule of a compound.
If the mass per cent of various elements
present in a compound   is known, its empirical
formula can be determined. Molecular formula
can  further be obtained if the molar mass is
known. The following example illustrates this
sequence.
Problem 1.2
A compound contains 4.07% hydrogen,
24.27% carbon and 71.65% chlorine. Its
molar mass is 98.96 g. What are its
empirical and molecular formulas?
Solution
Step 1. Conversion of mass per cent
to grams
Since we are having mass per cent, it is
convenient to use 100 g of the compound
as the starting material. Thus, in the
100 g sample of the above compound,
4.07g hydrogen, 24.27g carbon and
71.65g chlorine are present.
Step 2. Convert into number moles of
each element
Divide the masses obtained above by
respective atomic masses of various
elements. This gives the number of moles
of constituent elements in the compound
Moles of hydrogen =
4.07 g
1.008g  = 4.04
Moles of carbon  =
24.27 g
12 01
2 021
Moles of chlorine  =
71.65g
35 453
2 021
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Step 3. Divide each of the mole values
obtained above by the smallest number
amongst them
Since 2.021 is smallest value, division by
it gives a ratio of 2:1:1 for H:C:Cl .
In case the ratios are not whole numbers, then
they may be converted into whole number by
multiplying by the suitable coefficient.
Step 4. Write down the empirical formula
by mentioning the numbers after writing
the symbols of respective elements
CH2Cl  is, thus, the empirical formula of
the above compound.
Step 5. Writing molecular formula
(a) Determine empirical formula mass by
adding the atomic masses of various
atoms present in the empirical formula.
For CH2Cl, empirical formula mass is
12.01 + (2 × 1.008) + 35.453
= 49.48 g
(b) Divide Molar mass by empirical
formula mass
= 2 = (n)
(c) Multiply empirical formula by n
obtained above to get the molecular
formula
Empirical formula = CH2Cl, n = 2. Hence
molecular formula is C2H4Cl2.
available from the balanced chemical equation
of a given reaction. Let us consider the
combustion of methane. A balanced equation
for this reaction is as given below:
CH4 (g) + 2O2 (g) → CO2 (g) + 2 H2O (g)
Here, methane and dioxygen are called
reactants and carbon dioxide and water are
called products. Note  that all the reactants and
the products are gases in the above reaction
and this has been indicated by letter (g) in the
brackets next to its formula. Similarly, in case
of solids and liquids, (s) and (l) are written
respectively.
The coefficients 2 for O2 and H2O are called
stoichiometric coefficients. Similarly the
coefficient for CH4 and CO2 is one in each case.
They represent the number of molecules (and
moles as well) taking part in the reaction or
formed in the reaction.
Thus, according to the above chemical
reaction,
One mole of CH4(g) reacts with two moles
of O2(g) to give one mole of CO2(g) and
two moles of H2O(g)
One molecule of CH4(g) reacts with
2 molecules of O2(g) to give one molecule
of CO2(g) and 2 molecules of H2O(g)
22.7 L of CH4(g) reacts with 45.4 L of O2 (g)
to give 22.7 L of CO2 (g) and 45.4 L of H2O(g)
16 g of CH4 (g) reacts with 2×32 g of O2 (g) to
give 44 g of CO2 (g) and 2×18 g of  H2O (g).
From these relationships, the given data can
be interconverted as follows:
Volume
Density
1.10.1Limiting Reagent
Many a time, reactions are carried out with the
amounts of reactants that are different than
the amounts as required by a balanced
chemical reaction. In such situations, one
reactant is in more amount than the amount
required by balanced chemical reaction. The
reactant which is present in the least amount
1.10  STOICHIOMETRY AND
STOICHIOMETRIC CALCULATIONS
The word ‘stoichiometry’ is derived from two
Greek words — stoicheion (meaning, element)
metron
(meaning,
measure).
Stoichiometry,  thus, deals with the calculation
of masses (sometimes volumes also) of the
reactants and the products involved in a
chemical reaction. Before understanding how
to calculate the amounts of reactants required
or the products produced in a chemical
reaction, let us study what information is
2018-19
SOME BASIC CONCEPTS OF CHEMISTRY
gets consumed after sometime and after that
further reaction does not take place whatever
be the amount of the other reactant. Hence,
the reactant, which gets consumed first, limits
the amount of product formed and is, therefore,
called the limiting reagent.
In performing stoichiometric calculations,
this aspect is also to be kept in mind.
1.10.2
Reactions in Solutions
A majority of reactions in the laboratories are
carried out in solutions. Therefore, it is
important to understand as how the amount
of substance is expressed when it is present in
the solution. The concentration of a solution
or the amount of substance present in its
given volume can be expressed in any of the
following ways.
1. Mass per cent or weight per cent (w/w %)
2. Mole fraction
3. Molarity
4. Molality
Let us now study each one of them in detail.
Balancing a chemical equation
According to the law of conservation of mass, a balanced chemical equation has the same
number of atoms of each element on both sides of the equation. Many chemical equations can
be balanced by trial and error. Let us take the reactions of a few metals and non-metals with
oxygen to give oxides
4 Fe(s)  +  3O2(g)  → 2Fe2O3(s)
(a) balanced equation
2 Mg(s)  +  O2(g)  → 2MgO(s)
(b) balanced equation
P4(s)   +  O2 (g)  → P4O10(s)
(c) unbalanced equation
Equations (a) and (b) are balanced, since there are same number of metal and oxygen atoms on
each side of the equations. However equation (c) is not balanced. In this equation, phosphorus
atoms are balanced but not the oxygen atoms. To balance it, we must place the coefficient 5 on
the left of oxygen on the left side of the equation to balance the oxygen atoms appearing on the
right side of the equation.
P4(s)  +  5O2(g)  → P4O10(s)
balanced equation
Now, let us take combustion of propane, C3H8. This equation can be balanced in steps.
Step 1 Write down the correct formulas of reactants and products. Here, propane and oxygen
are reactants, and carbon dioxide and water are products.
C3H8(g)  +  O2(g) → CO2 (g) + H2O(l)   unbalanced equation
Step 2 Balance the number of C atoms:  Since 3 carbon atoms are in the reactant, therefore,
three CO2 molecules are required on the right side.
C3H8 (g)  +  O2 (g) → 3CO2 (g) + H2O (l)
Step 3 Balance the number of H atoms: on the left there are 8 hydrogen atoms in the reactants
however, each molecule of water has two hydrogen atoms, so four molecules of water will be
required for eight hydrogen atoms on the right side.
C3H8  (g) +O2 (g)  →  3CO2  (g)+4H2O (l)
Step 4 Balance the number of O atoms:  There are 10 oxygen atoms on the right side (3 × 2 = 6 in
CO2 and 4 × 1= 4 in water).  Therefore, five O2 molecules are needed to supply the required 10
CO2 and 4 × 1= 4 in water).  Therefore, five O2 molecules are needed to supply the required 10
oxygen atoms.
C3H8 (g) +5O2   (g)  →  3CO2 (g) + 4H2O (l)
Step 5 Verify that the number of atoms of each element is balanced in the final equation. The
equation shows three carbon atoms, eight hydrogen atoms, and 10 oxygen atoms on each side.
All equations that have correct formulas for all reactants and products can be balanced. Always
remember that subscripts in formulas of reactants and products cannot be changed to balance
an equation.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Problem 1.3
Calculate the amount of water (g)
produced by the combustion of 16 g
of methane.
Solution
The balanced equation for the combustion
of methane is :
CH4 (g) + 2O2 (g) → CO2 (g) + 2H2O (g)
(i)16 g of CH4   corresponds to one mole.
(ii) From the above equation, 1 mol of
CH4 (g) gives 2 mol of H2O (g).
2 mol of water (H2O) = 2 × (2+16)
= 2 × 18 = 36 g
1 mol H2O = 18 g H2O ⇒18 g H O
1mol H O
Hence, 2 mol H2O ×
18 g H O
1mol H O
= 2 × 18 g H2O = 36 g H2O
Problem 1.4
How many moles of methane are required
to produce 22g CO2 (g) after combustion?
Solution
According to the chemical equation,
CH4 (g) + 2O2 (g) → CO2 (g) + 2H2O (g)
44g CO2 (g) is obtained from 16 g CH4 (g).
[∴1 mol CO2(g) is obtained from 1 mol of
CH4(g)]
Number of moles of CO2 (g)
= 22 g CO2 (g) ×
molCO
= 0.5 mol CO2 (g)
Hence, 0.5 mol CO2 (g) would be
obtained from 0.5 mol CH4 (g) or 0.5
mol of CH4 (g) would be required to
produce 22 g  CO2 (g).
Problem 1.5
50.0 kg of N2 (g) and 10.0 kg of H2 (g) are
mixed to produce NH3 (g). Calculate the
amount of NH3 (g) formed. Identify the
limiting reagent in the production of NH3
in this situation.
Solution
A balanced equation for the above reaction
is written as follows :
Calculation of moles :
Number of moles of N2
= 50 0
mol N
= 17.86×102  mol
Number of moles of H2
= 10 00
2 016
mol H
= 4.96×103 mol
According to the above equation, 1 mol
N2 (g) requires 3 mol H2 (g), for the reaction.
Hence, for 17.86×102 mol of N2, the moles
of H2 (g) required would be
17 86 10
mol N
mol H
mol N
= 5.36 ×103 mol H2
But we have only 4.96×103 mol H2. Hence,
dihydrogen is the limiting reagent in this
case. So, NH3(g) would be formed only
from that amount of available dihydrogen
i.e., 4.96 × 103 mol
Since 3 mol H2(g) gives 2 mol NH3(g)
4.96×103 mol H2 (g) ×
mol NH
mol H
= 3.30×103 mol NH3 (g)
3.30×103 mol NH3 (g) is obtained.
If they are to be converted to grams, it is
done as follows :
1 mol NH3 (g) = 17.0 g NH3
3.30×103 mol NH3 (g) × 17 0
. g NH
mol NH
2018-19
SOME BASIC CONCEPTS OF CHEMISTRY
= 3.30×103×17 g NH3 (g)
= 56.1×103 g NH3
= 56.1 kg NH3
3.  Molarity
It is the most widely used unit and is denoted
by M. It is defined as the number of moles of
the solute in 1 litre of the solution. Thus,
Molarity (M) =
No. of moles of solute
of solution in litres
Volume
Suppose, we have 1 M solution of a
substance, say NaOH, and we want to prepare
a 0.2 M solution from it.
1 M NaOH means 1 mol of NaOH present
in 1 litre of the solution. For 0.2 M solution,
we require 0.2 moles of NaOH dissolved in
1 litre solution.
Hence, for making 0.2M solution from 1M
solution, we have to take that volume of 1M NaOH
solution, which contains 0.2 mol of NaOH and
dilute the solution with water to 1 litre.
Now, how much volume of concentrated
(1M) NaOH solution be taken, which contains
0.2 moles of NaOH can be calculated as follows:
If 1 mol is present in 1L or 1000 mL
solution
then, 0.2 mol is present in
mol solution
= 200 mL solution
Thus, 200 mL of 1M NaOH are taken and
enough water is added to dilute it to make it 1 litre.
In fact for such calculations, a general
formula, M1 × V1 =  M2 × V2 where M and V are
molarity and volume, respectively, can be used.
In this case, M1 is equal to 0.2M; V1 = 1000 mL
and, M2 = 1.0M; V2 is to be calculated.
Substituting the values in the formula:
0.2 M × 1000 mL = 1.0 M × V2
Note that the number of moles of solute
(NaOH) was 0.2 in 200 mL and it has remained
the same, i.e.,  0.2 even after dilution ( in 1000
mL) as we have changed just the amount of
solvent (i.e., water) and have not done anything
with respect to NaOH. But keep in mind the
concentration.
1. Mass per cent
It is obtained by using the following relation:
Problem 1.6
A solution is prepared by adding 2 g of a
substance A to 18 g of water. Calculate
the mass per cent of the solute.
Solution
2.  Mole Fraction
It is the ratio of number of moles of a particular
component to the total number of moles of the
solution. If a substance ‘A’ dissolves in
substance ‘B’ and their number of moles are
nA and nB, respectively, then the mole fractions
of A and B are given as:
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Problem 1.7
Calculate the molarity of NaOH in the
solution prepared by dissolving its 4 g in
enough water to form 250 mL of the solution.
Solution
Since molarity (M)
Note that molarity of a solution depends
upon temperature because volume of a
solution is temperature dependent.
SUMMARY
Chemistry, as we understand it today is not a very old discipline. People in ancient
India, already had the knowledge of many scientific phenomenon much before the
advent of modern science. They applied the knowledge in various walks of life.
The study of chemistry is very important as its domain encompasses every sphere
of life. Chemists study the properties and structure of substances and the changes
undergone by them. All substances contain matter, which can exist in three states
– solid, liquid or gas. The constituent particles are held in different ways in these
states of matter and they exhibit their characteristic properties. Matter can also be
classified into elements, compounds or mixtures. An element contains particles of
only one type, which may be atoms or molecules. The compounds are formed where
atoms of two or more elements combine in a fixed ratio to each other. Mixtures occur
widely and many of the substances present around us are mixtures.
When the properties of a substance are studied, measurement is inherent. The
quantification of properties requires a system of measurement and units in which
the quantities are to be expressed. Many systems of measurement exist, of which
Problem 1.8
The density of 3 M solution of NaCl is
1.25 g mL
–1. Calculate the molality of the
solution.
Solution
M = 3 mol L–1
Mass of NaCl
in 1 L solution  =   3 × 58.5  = 175.5 g
Mass of
1L solution =  1000 × 1.25 = 1250 g
(since density = 1.25 g mL
Mass of water  in solution  = 1250 –75.5
=   1074.5 g
Molality = No. of moles of solute
of solvent in kg
3 mol
1 0745
kg  =   2.79 m
Often in a chemistry laboratory, a solution
of a desired concentration is prepared by
diluting a solution of known higher
concentration. The solution of higher
concentration is also known as stock
solution. Note that the molality of a solution
does not change with temperature since
mass remains unaffected with temperature.
4. Molality
It is defined as the number of moles of solute
present in 1 kg of solvent. It is denoted by m.
Thus, Molality (m) = No. of moles of solute
Mass of solvent in kg
2018-19
SOME BASIC CONCEPTS OF CHEMISTRY
the English and the Metric Systems are widely used. The scientific community, however,
has agreed to have a uniform and common system throughout the world, which is
abbreviated as SI units (International System of Units).
Since measurements involve recording of data, which are always associated with a
certain amount of uncertainty, the proper handling of data obtained by measuring the
quantities is very important. The measurements of quantities in chemistry are spread
over a wide range of 10–31 to 10+23. Hence, a convenient system of expressing the numbers
in scientific notation is used. The uncertainty is taken care of by specifying the number
of significant figures, in which the observations are reported. The dimensional analysis
helps to express the measured quantities in different systems of units. Hence, it is possible
to interconvert the results from one system of units to another.
The combination of different atoms is governed by basic laws of chemical combination
— these being the Law of Conservation of Mass, Law of Definite Proportions, Law of
Multiple Proportions, Gay Lussac’s Law of Gaseous Volumes and Avogadro Law. All
these laws led to the Dalton’s atomic theory, which states that atoms are building
blocks of matter. The atomic mass of an element is expressed relative to 12C isotope of
carbon, which has an exact value of 12u. Usually, the atomic mass used for an element is
the average atomic mass obtained by taking into account the natural abundance of
different isotopes of that element. The molecular mass of a molecule is obtained by
taking sum of the atomic masses of different atoms present in a molecule. The molecular
formula can be calculated by determining the mass per cent of different elements present
in a compound and its molecular mass.
The number of atoms, molecules or any other particles present in a given system are
expressed in the terms of  Avogadro constant (6.022 × 1023). This is known as 1 mol of
the respective particles or entities.
Chemical reactions represent the chemical changes undergone by different elements
and compounds. A balanced chemical equation provides a lot of information. The
coefficients indicate the molar ratios and the respective number of particles taking part
in a particular reaction. The quantitative study of the reactants required or the products
formed is called stoichiometry. Using stoichiometric calculations, the amount of one or
more reactant(s) required to produce a particular amount of product can be determined
and vice-versa. The amount of substance present in a given volume of a solution is
expressed in number of ways, e.g., mass per cent, mole fraction, molarity and molality.
EXERCISES
Calculate the molar mass of the following:
(i) H2O  (ii)  CO2 (iii) CH4
Calculate the mass per cent of different elements present in sodium sulphate
(Na2SO4).
Determine the empirical formula of an oxide of iron, which has 69.9% iron and
30.1% dioxygen by mass.
Calculate the amount of carbon dioxide that could be produced when
1 mole of carbon is burnt in air.
1 mole of carbon is burnt in 16 g of dioxygen.
(iii)
2 moles of carbon are burnt in 16 g of dioxygen.
Calculate the mass of sodium acetate (CH3COONa) required to make 500 mL of
0.375 molar aqueous solution. Molar mass of sodium acetate is 82.0245 g mol–1.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Calculate the concentration of nitric acid in moles per litre in a sample which
has a density, 1.41 g mL–1 and the mass per cent of nitric acid in it being 69%.
How much copper can be obtained from 100 g of copper sulphate (CuSO4)?
Determine the molecular formula of an oxide of iron, in which the mass per cent
of iron and oxygen are 69.9 and 30.1, respectively.
Calculate the atomic mass (average) of chlorine using the following data:
% Natural Abundance
Molar Mass
75.77
34.9689
24.23
36.9659
In three moles of ethane (C2H6), calculate the following:
Number of moles of carbon atoms.
Number of moles of hydrogen atoms.
(iii)
Number of molecules of ethane.
What is the concentration of sugar (C12H22O11) in mol L–1 if its 20 g are dissolved in
enough water to make a final volume up to 2L?
If the density of methanol is 0.793 kg L–1, what is its volume needed for making
2.5 L of its 0.25 M solution?
Pressure is determined as force per unit area of the surface. The SI unit of
pressure, pascal is as shown below:
1Pa  =  1N m–2
If mass of air at sea level is 1034 g cm–2, calculate the pressure in pascal.
What is the SI unit of mass? How is it defined?
Match the following prefixes with their multiples:
Prefixes
Multiples
micro
(iii) mega
10–15
femto
What do you mean by significant figures?
A sample of drinking water was found to be severely contaminated with chloroform,
CHCl3, supposed to be carcinogenic in nature. The level of contamination was 15
ppm (by mass).
Express this in per cent by mass.
Determine the molality of chloroform in the water sample.
Express the following in the scientific notation:
0.0048
234,000
(iii)
500.0
6.0012
How many significant figures are present in the following?
0.0025
(iii)
2018-19
SOME BASIC CONCEPTS OF CHEMISTRY
126,000
500.0
2.0034
Round up the following upto three significant figures:
34.216
10.4107
(iii)
0.04597
The following data are obtained when dinitrogen and dioxygen react together to
form different compounds:
Mass of dinitrogen
Mass of dioxygen
(iii)
Which law of chemical combination is obeyed by the above experimental data?
Give its statement.
Fill in the blanks in the following conversions:
1 km = ...................... mm = ...................... pm
1 mg = ...................... kg = ...................... ng
(iii)
1 mL = ...................... L = ...................... dm3
If the speed of light is 3.0 × 108 m s–1, calculate the distance covered by light in
2.00 ns.
In a reaction
A + B2   d  AB2
Identify the limiting reagent, if any, in the following reaction mixtures.
300 atoms of A + 200 molecules of B
2 mol A + 3 mol B
(iii)
100 atoms of A + 100 molecules of B
5 mol A + 2.5 mol B
2.5 mol A + 5 mol B
Dinitrogen and dihydrogen react with each other to produce ammonia according
to the following chemical equation:
N2 (g) + H2 (g)  d  2NH3 (g)
Calculate the mass of ammonia produced if 2.00 × 103 g dinitrogen reacts
with 1.00 ×103 g of dihydrogen.
Will any of the two reactants remain unreacted?
(iii)
If yes, which one and what would be its mass?
How are 0.50 mol Na2CO3 and 0.50 M Na2CO3 different?
If 10 volumes of dihydrogen gas reacts with five volumes of dioxygen gas, how
many volumes of water vapour would be produced?
Convert the following into basic units:
28.7 pm
15.15 pm
(iii)
25365 mg
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Which one of the following will have the largest number of atoms?
1 g Au (s)
1 g Na (s)
(iii)
1 g Li (s)
1 g of Cl2(g)
Calculate the molarity of a solution of ethanol in water, in which the mole fraction of
ethanol is 0.040 (assume the density of water to be one).
What will be the mass of one 12C atom in g?
How many significant figures should be present in the answer of the following
calculations?
0.02856
298.15
0.112
0 5785
5 × 5.364
(iii)
0.0125 + 0.7864 + 0.0215
Use the data given in the following table to calculate the molar mass of naturally
occuring argon isotopes:
Isotope
Isotopic molar mass
Abundance
35.96755 g mol
0.337%
37.96272 g mol
0.063%
39.9624 g mol
99.600%
Calculate the number of atoms in each of the following (i) 52 moles of Ar (ii)
52 u of He (iii) 52 g of He.
A welding fuel gas contains carbon and hydrogen only.  Burning a small sample of it
in oxygen gives 3.38 g carbon dioxide, 0.690 g of water and no other products. A
volume of 10.0 L (measured at STP) of this welding gas is found to weigh 11.6 g.
Calculate (i) empirical formula, (ii) molar mass of the gas, and (iii) molecular
formula.
Calcium carbonate reacts with aqueous HCl to give CaCl2 and CO2 according to the
reaction, CaCO3 (s) + 2 HCl (aq) → CaCl2 (aq) + CO2(g) + H2O(l)
What mass of CaCO3 is required to react completely with 25 mL of 0.75 M HCl?
Chlorine is prepared in the laboratory by treating manganese dioxide (MnO2) with
aqueous hydrochloric acid according to the reaction
4 HCl (aq) +  MnO2(s) → 2H2O (l) + MnCl2(aq) + Cl2 (g)
How many grams of HCl react with 5.0 g of manganese dioxide?
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
The rich diversity of chemical behaviour of different elements
can be traced to the differences in the internal structure of
atoms of these elements.
UNIT 2
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
After studying this unit you will be
able to
know about the discovery of
electron, proton and neutron and
their characteristics;
describe Thomson, Rutherford
and Bohr atomic models;
understand
important
features
quantum
mechanical model of atom;
understand
nature
electromagnetic radiation and
Planck’s quantum theory;
explain the photoelectric effect
and describe features of atomic
spectra;
state the de Broglie relation and
Heisenberg uncertainty principle;
define an atomic orbital in terms
of quantum numbers;
state aufbau principle, Pauli
exclusion principle and Hund’s
rule of maximum multiplicity; and
write the electronic configurations
of atoms.
The existence of atoms has been proposed since the time
of early Indian and Greek philosophers (400 B.C.) who
were of the view that atoms are the fundamental building
blocks of matter. According to them, the continued
subdivisions of matter would ultimately yield atoms which
would not be further divisible. The word ‘atom’  has been
derived from the Greek word ‘a-tomio’ which means
‘uncut-able’ or ‘non-divisible’. These earlier ideas were
mere speculations and there was no way to test them
experimentally. These ideas remained dormant  for a very
long time and were revived again by scientists in the
nineteenth century.
The atomic theory of matter was first proposed on a
firm scientific basis by John Dalton, a British school
teacher in 1808. His theory, called Dalton’s atomic
theory, regarded the atom as the ultimate particle of
matter (Unit 1). Dalton’s atomic theory was able to explain
the law of conservation of mass, law of constant
composition and law of multiple proportion very
successfully. However, it failed to explain the results of
many experiments, for example, it was known that
substances like glass or ebonite when rubbed with silk
or fur get electrically charged.
In this unit we start with the experimental
observations made by scientists towards the end of
nineteenth and beginning of twentieth century. These
established that atoms are made of sub-atomic particles,
i.e., electrons,  protons and neutrons — a concept very
different from that of Dalton.
Objectives
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
2.1 DISCOVERY OF SUB-ATOMIC
PARTICLES
An insight into the structure of atom was
obtained from the experiments on electrical
discharge through gases. Before we discuss
these results we need to keep in mind a basic
rule regarding the behaviour of charged
particles : “Like charges repel each other and
unlike charges attract each other”.
2.1.1 Discovery of Electron
In 1830, Michael Faraday showed that if
electricity is passed through a solution of an
electrolyte, chemical reactions occurred at
the electrodes, which resulted in the
liberation and deposition of matter at the
electrodes. He formulated certain laws which
you will study in class XII. These results
suggested the particulate nature of
electricity.
In mid 1850s many scientists mainly
Faraday began to study electrical discharge
in partially evacuated tubes, known as
cathode ray discharge tubes. It is depicted
in Fig. 2.1. A cathode ray tube is made of
glass containing two thin pieces of metal,
called electrodes, sealed in it. The electrical
discharge through the gases could be
observed only at very low pressures and at
very high voltages. The pressure of different
gases could be adjusted by evacuation of the
glass tubes. When sufficiently high voltage
is applied across the electrodes, current
starts flowing through a stream of particles
moving in the tube from the negative electrode
(cathode) to the positive electrode (anode).
These were called cathode rays or cathode
ray particles. The flow of current from
cathode to anode was further checked by
making a hole in the anode and coating the
tube behind anode with phosphorescent
material zinc sulphide. When these rays, after
passing through anode, strike the zinc
sulphide coating, a bright spot is developed
on the coating [Fig. 2.1(b)].
Fig. 2.1(a)  A cathode ray discharge tube
Fig. 2.1(b)
A cathode ray discharge tube with
perforated anode
The results of these experiments are
summarised below.
The cathode rays start from cathode and
move towards the anode.
These rays themselves are not visible but
their behaviour can be observed with the
help of certain kind of materials
(fluorescent or phosphorescent) which
glow when hit by them. Television picture
tubes are cathode ray tubes and
television pictures result due to
fluorescence on the television screen
coated with certain fluorescent or
phosphorescent materials.
(iii)
In the absence of electrical or magnetic
field, these rays travel in straight lines
(Fig. 2.2).
In the presence of electrical or magnetic
field, the behaviour of cathode rays are
similar to that expected from negatively
charged particles, suggesting that the
cathode rays consist of negatively
charged particles, called electrons.
The characteristics of cathode rays
(electrons) do not depend upon the
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
material of electrodes and the nature of
the gas present in the cathode ray tube.
Thus, we can conclude that electrons are
basic constituent of all the atoms.
2.1.2 Charge to Mass Ratio of Electron
In 1897, British physicist J.J. Thomson
measured the ratio of electrical charge (e) to
the mass of electron (me ) by using cathode ray
tube and applying electrical and magnetic field
perpendicular to each other as well as to the
path of electrons (Fig. 2.2). When only electric
field is applied, the electrons deviate from their
path and hit the cathode ray tube at point A
(Fig. 2.2). Similarly when only magnetic field
is applied, electron strikes the cathode ray tube
at point C. By carefully balancing the electrical
and magnetic field strength, it is possible to
bring back the electron to the path which is
followed in the absence of electric or magnetic
field and they hit the screen at point B.
Thomson argued that the amount of deviation
of the particles from their path in the presence
of electrical or magnetic field depends upon:
the magnitude of the negative charge on
the particle, greater the magnitude of the
charge on the particle, greater is the
interaction with the electric or magnetic
field and thus greater is the deflection.
the mass of the particle — lighter the
particle, greater the deflection.
(iii)
the strength of the electrical or magnetic
field — the deflection of electrons from its
original path increases with the increase
in the voltage across the electrodes, or the
strength of the magnetic field.
By carrying out accurate measurements on
the amount of deflections observed by the
electrons on the electric field strength or
magnetic field strength, Thomson was able to
determine the value of e/me as:
= 1.758820 × 1011 C kg–1
(2.1)
Where me is the mass of the electron in kg and
e is the magnitude of the charge on the electron
in coulomb (C). Since electrons are negatively
charged, the charge on electron is –e.
2.1.3 Charge on the Electron
R.A. Millikan (1868-1953) devised a method
known as oil drop experiment (1906-14), to
determine the charge on the electrons. He found
the charge on the electron to be
– 1.6 × 10–19 C. The present accepted value of
electrical charge is – 1.602176 × 10–19 C. The
mass of the  electron (me) was determined by
combining these results with Thomson’s value
of e/me ratio.
= 9.1094×10–31 kg                             (2.2)
Fig. 2.2   The apparatus to determine the charge to the mass ratio of electron
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
2.1.4 Discovery of Protons and Neutrons
Electrical discharge carried out in the modified
cathode ray tube led to the discovery of canal
rays carrying positively charged particles. The
characteristics of these positively charged
particles are listed below.
Unlike cathode rays, mass of positively
charged particles depends upon the
nature of gas present in the cathode ray
tube. These are simply the positively
charged gaseous ions.
The charge to mass ratio of the particles
depends on the gas from which these
originate.
(iii)
Some of the positively charged particles
carry a multiple of the fundamental unit
of electrical charge.
The behaviour of these particles in the
magnetic or electrical field is opposite to
that observed for electron or cathode
rays.
The smallest and lightest positive ion was
obtained from hydrogen and was called
proton. This positively charged particle was
characterised in 1919. Later, a need was felt
for the presence of electrically neutral particle
as one of the constituent of atom. These
particles were discovered by Chadwick (1932)
by bombarding a thin sheet of beryllium by
α-particles. When electrically neutral particles
having a mass slightly greater than that of
protons were emitted. He named these
particles as neutrons. The important
properties of all these fundamental particles
are given in Table 2.1.
2.2 ATOMIC MODELS
Observations obtained from the experiments
mentioned in the previous sections have
suggested that Dalton’s indivisible atom is
composed of sub-atomic particles carrying
positive and negative charges. The major
problems before the scientists after the
discovery of sub-atomic particles were:
to account for the stability of atom,
to compare the behaviour of elements in
terms of both physical and chemical
properties,
Millikan’s Oil Drop Method
In this method, oil droplets in the form of
mist, produced by the atomiser, were allowed
to enter through a tiny hole in the upper plate
of electrical condenser. The downward motion
of these droplets was viewed through the
telescope, equipped with a micrometer eye
piece. By measuring the rate of fall of these
droplets, Millikan was able to measure the
mass of oil droplets. The air inside the
chamber was ionized by passing a beam of
X-rays through it. The electrical charge on
these oil droplets was acquired by collisions
with gaseous ions. The fall of these charged
oil droplets can be retarded, accelerated or
made stationary depending upon the charge
on the droplets and the polarity and strength
of the voltage applied to the plate. By carefully
measuring the effects of electrical field
strength on the motion of oil droplets,
Millikan concluded that the magnitude of
electrical charge, q, on the droplets is always
an integral multiple of the electrical charge,
e, that is, q = n e, where n = 1, 2, 3... .
Fig. 2.3 The Millikan oil drop apparatus for
measuring charge ‘e’. In chamber, the
forces acting on oil drop are:
gravitational, electrostatic due to
electrical field and a viscous drag force
when the oil drop is moving.
to explain the formation of different kinds
of molecules by the combination of different
atoms and,
to understand the origin and nature of the
characteristics of electromagnetic radiation
absorbed or emitted by atoms.
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
Table 2.1  Properties of Fundamental Particles
Different atomic models were proposed to
explain the distributions of these charged
particles in an atom. Although some of these
models were not able to explain the stability of
atoms, two of these models, one proposed by
J.J. Thomson and the other proposed by
Ernest Rutherford are discussed below.
2.2.1 Thomson Model of Atom
J. J. Thomson, in 1898, proposed that an atom
possesses a spherical shape (radius
approximately 10–10 m) in which the positive
charge is uniformly distributed. The electrons
are embedded into it in such a manner as to
give the most stable electrostatic arrangement
(Fig. 2.4). Many different names are given to
this model, for example, plum pudding, raisin
pudding or watermelon. This model can be
In the later half of the nineteenth century
different kinds of rays were discovered,
besides those mentioned earlier. Wilhalm
Röentgen (1845-1923) in 1895 showed
that when electrons strike a material in
the cathode ray tubes, produce rays
which can cause fluorescence in the
fluorescent materials placed outside the
cathode ray tubes. Since Röentgen did not
know the nature of the radiation, he
named them X-rays and the name is still
carried on. It was noticed that X-rays are
produced effectively when electrons strike
the dense metal anode, called targets.
These are not deflected by the electric and
magnetic fields and have a very high
penetrating power through the matter
and that is the reason that these rays are
used to study the interior of the objects.
These rays are of very short wavelengths
(∼0.1 nm) and possess electro-magnetic
character (Section 2.3.1).
Henri Becqueral (1852-1908)
observed that there are certain elements
which emit radiation on their own and
named
phenomenon
radioactivity and the elements known
as radioactive elements. This field was
developed by Marie Curie, Piere Curie,
Rutherford and Fredrick Soddy. It was
observed that three kinds of rays i.e., α,
β- and γ-rays are emitted. Rutherford
found that α-rays consists of high energy
particles carrying two units of positive
charge and four unit of atomic mass. He
concluded that α- particles are helium
Fig.2.4  Thomson model of atom
visualised as a pudding or watermelon of
positive charge with plums or seeds (electrons)
embedded into it. An important feature of this
model is that the mass of the atom is assumed
to be uniformly distributed over the atom.
Although this model was able to explain the
overall neutrality of the atom, but was not
consistent with the results of later experiments.
Thomson was awarded Nobel Prize for physics
in 1906, for his theoretical and experimental
investigations on the conduction of electricity
by gases.
Electron
–1.602176×10–19
9.109382×10–31
0.00054
Proton
+1.602176×10–19
1.6726216×10–27
1.00727
Neutron
n                   0
1.674927×10–27
1.00867
Symbol
Absolute
Relative
Mass/kg
Mass/u
Approx.
charge/C
charge
mass/u
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
nuclei as when α- particles combined with
two electrons yielded helium gas. β-rays
are negatively charged particles similar to
electrons. The γ-rays are high energy
radiations like X-rays, are neutral in
nature and do not consist of particles. As
regards penetrating power, α-particles are
the least, followed by β-rays (100 times
that of α–particles) and γ-rays (1000 times
of that α-particles).
2.2.2 Rutherford’s Nuclear Model of Atom
Rutherford and his students (Hans Geiger and
Ernest Marsden) bombarded very thin gold foil
with α–particles. Rutherford’s famous
α–particle scattering experiment is
represented in Fig. 2.5. A stream of high energy
α–particles from a radioactive source was
directed at a thin foil (thickness ∼ 100 nm) of
gold metal. The thin gold foil had a circular
fluorescent zinc sulphide screen around it.
Whenever α–particles struck the screen, a tiny
flash of light was produced at that point.
The results of scattering experiment were
quite unexpected. According to Thomson
model of atom, the mass of each gold atom in
the foil should have been spread evenly over
the entire atom, and α– particles had enough
energy to pass directly through such a uniform
distribution of mass. It was expected that the
particles would slow down and change
directions only by a small angles as they passed
through the foil. It was observed that:
most of the α–particles passed through
the gold foil undeflected.
a small fraction of the α–particles was
deflected by small angles.
(iii)
a very few α–particles (∼1 in 20,000)
bounced back, that is, were deflected by
nearly 180°.
On the basis of the observations,
Rutherford drew the following conclusions
regarding the structure of atom:
Most of the space in the atom is empty as
most of the α–particles passed through
the foil undeflected.
A few positively charged α–particles were
deflected. The deflection must be due to
enormous repulsive force showing that
the positive charge of the atom is not
spread throughout the atom as Thomson
had presumed. The positive charge has
to be concentrated in a very small volume
that repelled and deflected the positively
charged α–particles.
(iii)
Calculations by Rutherford showed that
the volume occupied by the nucleus is
negligibly small as compared to the total
volume of the atom. The radius of the
atom is about 10–10 m, while that of
nucleus is 10–15 m. One can appreciate
this difference in size by realising that if
Fig. 2.5 Schematic view of Rutherford’s
scattering experiment. When a beam
of alpha (α) particles is “shot” at a thin
gold foil, most of them pass through
without much effect. Some, however,
are deflected.
A. Rutherford’s scattering experiment
B. Schematic molecular view of the gold foil
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
a cricket ball represents a nucleus, then
the radius of atom would be about 5 km.
On the basis of above observations and
conclusions, Rutherford proposed the nuclear
model of atom. According to this model:
The positive charge and most of the mass
of the atom was densely concentrated in
extremely small region. This very small
portion of the atom was called nucleus
by Rutherford.
The nucleus is surrounded by electrons
that move around the nucleus with a very
high speed in circular paths called orbits.
Thus, Rutherford’s model of atom
resembles the solar system in which the
nucleus plays the role of sun and the
electrons that of revolving planets.
(iii) Electrons and the nucleus are held
together by electrostatic forces of
attraction.
2.2.3 Atomic Number and Mass Number
The presence of positive charge on the
nucleus is due to the protons in the nucleus.
As established earlier, the charge on the
proton is equal but opposite to that of
electron. The number of protons present in
the nucleus is equal to atomic number (Z ).
For example, the number of protons in the
hydrogen nucleus is 1, in sodium atom it is
11, therefore their atomic numbers are 1 and
11 respectively. In order to keep the electrical
neutrality,  the number of electrons in an
atom is equal to the number of protons
(atomic number, Z ). For example, number of
electrons in hydrogen atom and sodium atom
are 1 and 11 respectively.
Atomic number (Z) = number of protons in
the nucleus of an atom
= number of electrons
in a nuetral atom     (2.3)
While the positive charge of the nucleus
is due to protons, the mass of the nucleus,
due to protons and neutrons. As discussed
earlier protons and neutrons present in the
nucleus are collectively known as nucleons.
The total number of nucleons is termed as
mass number (A) of the atom.
mass number (A) = number of protons (Z )
+ number of
neutrons (n)
(2.4)
2.2.4 Isobars and Isotopes
The composition of any atom can be
represented by using the normal element
symbol (X) with super-script on the left hand
side as the atomic mass number (A) and
subscript (Z) on the left hand side as the atomic
number (i.e., A
Z X).
Isobars are the atoms with same mass
number but different atomic number for
example, 6
14C and 7
14N. On the other hand, atoms
with identical atomic number but different
atomic mass number are known as Isotopes.
In other words (according to equation 2.4), it
is evident that difference between the isotopes
is due to the presence of different number of
neutrons present in the nucleus. For example,
considering of hydrogen atom again, 99.985%
of hydrogen atoms contain only one proton.
This isotope is called protium (1
1H). Rest of the
percentage of hydrogen atom contains two other
isotopes, the one containing 1 proton and 1
neutron is called deuterium (1
2D, 0.015%)
and the other one possessing 1 proton and 2
neutrons is called tritium (1
3T ). The latter
isotope is found in trace amounts on the earth.
Other examples of commonly occuring
isotopes are: carbon atoms containing 6, 7 and
8 neutrons besides 6 protons ( 6
chlorine atoms containing 18 and 20 neutrons
besides 17 protons ( 17
Cl ).
Lastly an important point to mention
regarding isotopes is that chemical properties
of atoms are controlled by the number of
electrons, which are determined by the
number of protons in the nucleus. Number of
neutrons present in the nucleus have very little
effect on the chemical properties of an element.
Therefore, all the isotopes of a given element
show same chemical behaviour.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Problem 2.1
Calculate the number of protons,
neutrons and electrons in 35
80Br .
Solution
In this case, 35
80Br , Z = 35, A = 80, species
is neutral
Number of protons = number of electrons
= Z = 35
Number of neutrons = 80 – 35 = 45,
(equation 2.4)
Problem 2.2
The number of electrons, protons and
neutrons in a species are equal to 18, 16
and 16 respectively. Assign the proper
symbol to the species.
Solution
The atomic number is equal to
number of protons = 16. The element is
sulphur (S).
Atomic mass number = number of
protons + number of neutrons
= 16 + 16 = 32
Species is not neutral as the number of
protons is not equal to electrons. It is
anion (negatively charged) with charge
equal to excess electrons = 18 – 16 = 2.
Symbol is 32
Note : Before using the notation
Z X, find
out whether the species is a neutral atom,
a cation or an anion. If it is a neutral atom,
equation (2.3) is valid, i.e., number of
protons = number of electrons = atomic
number. If the species is an ion, determine
whether the number of protons are larger
(cation, positive ion) or smaller (anion,
negative ion) than the number of electrons.
Number of neutrons is always given by
A–Z, whether the species is neutral or ion.
2.2.5 Drawbacks of Rutherford Model
As you have learnt above, Rutherford nuclear
model of an atom is like a small scale solar
system with the nucleus playing the role of the
* Classical mechanics is a theoretical science based on Newton’s laws of motion. It specifies the laws of motion of
macroscopic objects.
massive sun and the electrons being similar
to the lighter planets. When classical
mechanics* is applied to the solar system, it
shows that the planets describe well-defined
orbits around the sun. The gravitational force
between the planets is given by the expression
 where m1 and m2 are the masses, r
is the distance of separation of the masses and
G is the gravitational constant. The theory can
also calculate precisely the planetary orbits and
these are in agreement with the experimental
measurements.
The similarity between the solar system
and nuclear model suggests that electrons
should move around the nucleus in well
defined orbits. Further, the coulomb force
(kq1q2/r2 where q1 and q2 are the charges, r is
the distance of separation of the charges and
k is the proportionality constant) between
electron and the nucleus is mathematically
similar to the gravitational force. However,
when a body is moving in an orbit, it
undergoes acceleration even if it is moving with
a constant speed in an orbit because of
changing direction. So an electron in the
nuclear model describing planet like orbits is
under acceleration. According to the
electromagnetic theory of Maxwell, charged
particles when accelerated should emit
electromagnetic radiation (This feature does
not exist for planets since they are uncharged).
Therefore, an electron in an orbit will emit
radiation, the energy carried by radiation
comes from electronic motion. The orbit will
thus continue to shrink. Calculations show
that it should take an electron only 10–8 s to
spiral into the nucleus. But this does not
happen. Thus, the Rutherford model
cannot explain the stability of an atom.
If the motion of an electron is described on the
basis of the classical mechanics and
electromagnetic theory, you may ask that
since the motion of electrons in orbits is
leading to the instability of the atom, then
why not consider electrons as stationary
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
around the nucleus. If the electrons were
stationary, electrostatic attraction between
the dense nucleus and the electrons would
pull the electrons toward the nucleus to form
a miniature version of Thomson’s model
of atom.
Another serious drawback of the
Rutherford model is that it says nothing about
distribution of the electrons around the
nucleus and the energies of these electrons.
2.3 DEVELOPMENTS LEADING TO THE
BOHR’S MODEL OF ATOM
Historically, results observed from the studies
of interactions of radiations with matter have
provided immense information regarding the
structure of atoms and molecules. Neils Bohr
utilised these results to improve upon the
model proposed by Rutherford. Two
developments played a major role in the
formulation of Bohr’s model of atom. These
were:
Dual character of the electromagnetic
radiation which means that radiations
possess both wave like and particle like
properties, and
Experimental results regarding atomic
spectra.
First, we will discuss about the duel nature
of electromagnetic radiations. Experimental
results regarding atomic spectra will be
discussed in Section 2.4.
2.3.1 Wave Nature of Electromagnetic
Radiation
In the mid-nineteenth century, physicists
actively studied absorption and emission of
radiation by heated objects. These are called
thermal radiations. They tried to find out of
what the thermal radiation is made. It is now
a well-known fact that thermal radiations
consist of electromagnetic waves of various
frequencies or wavelengths. It is based on a
number of modern concepts, which were
unknown in the mid-nineteenth century. First
active study of thermal radiation laws occured
in the 1850’s and the theory of electromagnetic
waves and the emission of such waves by
accelerating charged particles was developed
in the early 1870’s by James Clerk Maxwell,
which was experimentally confirmed later by
Heinrich Hertz. Here, we will learn some facts
about electromagnetic radiations.
James Maxwell (1870) was the first to give
a comprehensive explanation about the
interaction between the charged bodies and
the behaviour of electrical and magnetic fields
on macroscopic level. He suggested that when
electrically charged particle moves under
accelaration, alternating electrical and
magnetic fields are produced and transmitted.
These fields are transmitted in the forms of
waves called electromagnetic waves or
electromagnetic radiation.
Light is the form of radiation known from
early days and speculation about its nature
dates back to remote ancient times. In earlier
days (Newton) light was supposed to be made
of particles (corpuscules). It was only in the
19th century when wave nature of light was
established.
Maxwell was again the first to reveal that
light waves are associated with oscillating
electric and magnetic character (Fig. 2.6).
Although electromagnetic wave motion is
complex in nature, we will consider here only
a few simple properties.
The oscillating electric and magnetic fields
produced by oscillating charged particles
Fig.2.6 The electric and magnetic field
components of an electromagnetic wave.
These components have the same
wavelength, frequency, speed and
amplitude, but  they vibrate in two
mutually perpendicular planes.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
are perpendicular to each other and both
are perpendicular to the direction of
propagation of the wave. Simplified
picture of electromagnetic wave is shown
in Fig. 2.6.
Unlike sound waves or waves produced
in water, electromagnetic waves do not
require medium and can move in
vacuum.
(iii)
It is now well established that there are
many types of electromagnetic radiations,
which differ from one another in
wavelength (or frequency). These
constitute what is called electromagnetic
spectrum (Fig. 2.7). Different regions of
the spectrum are identified by different
names. Some examples are: radio
frequency region around 106 Hz, used for
broadcasting; microwave region around
1010 Hz used for radar; infrared region
around 1013 Hz used for heating;
ultraviolet region around 1016Hz a
component of sun’s radiation. The small
portion around 1015 Hz, is what is
ordinarily called visible light. It is only
this part which our eyes can see (or
detect). Special instruments are required
to detect non-visible radiation.
Fig. 2.7
(a) The spectrum of electromagnetic radiation. (b) Visible spectrum. The visible region is only
a small part of the entire spectrum.
Different kinds of units are used to
represent electromagnetic radiation.
These radiations are characterised by the
properties, namely, frequency (ν ) and
wavelength (λ).
The SI unit for frequency (ν) is hertz
(Hz, s–1), after Heinrich Hertz. It is defined as
the number of waves that pass a given point
in one second.
Wavelength should have the units of length
and as you know that the SI units of length is
meter (m). Since electromagnetic radiation
consists of different kinds of waves of much
smaller wavelengths, smaller units are used.
Fig.2.7 shows various types of electro-
magnetic radiations which differ from one
another in wavelengths and frequencies.
In vaccum all types of electromagnetic
radiations, regardless of wavelength, travel at
the same speed, i.e., 3.0 × 108 m s–1 (2.997925
× 108 m s–1, to be precise). This is called speed
of light and is given the symbol ‘c‘. The
frequency (ν ), wavelength (λ) and velocity of light
(c) are related by the equation (2.5).
c = ν  λ
(2.5)
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
The other commonly used quantity
specially in spectroscopy, is the wavenumber
( ). It is defined as the number of wavelengths
per unit length. Its units are reciprocal of
wavelength unit, i.e., m–1. However commonly
used unit is cm–1
(not SI unit).
Problem 2.3
The Vividh Bharati station of All India
Radio, Delhi, broadcasts on a frequency
of 1,368 kHz (kilo hertz). Calculate the
wavelength of the electromagnetic
radiation emitted by transmitter. Which
part of the electromagnetic spectrum
does it belong to?
Solution
The wavelength, λ, is equal to c/ν, where
c is the speed of electromagnetic radiation
in vacuum and ν is the frequency.
Substituting the given values, we have
λ = c
This is a characteristic radiowave
wavelength.
Problem 2.4
The wavelength range of the visible
spectrum extends from violet (400 nm) to
red (750 nm). Express these wavelengths
in frequencies (Hz). (1nm = 10–9 m)
Solution
Using equation 2.5, frequency of violet
light
= 7.50 × 1014 Hz
Diffraction is the bending of wave around an obstacle.
Interference is the combination of two waves of the same or different frequencies to give a wave whose distribution at
each point in space is the algebraic or vector sum of disturbances at that  point resulting from each interfering wave.
Frequency of red light
= 4.00 × 1014 Hz
The range of visible spectrum is from
4.0 × 1014 to 7.5 × 1014 Hz in terms of
frequency units.
Problem 2.5
Calculate (a) wavenumber and (b)
frequency of yellow radiation having
wavelength 5800 Å.
Solution
Calculation of wavenumber ( )
λ=5800Å = 5800 × 10–8 cm
= 5800 × 10–10 m
Calculation of the frequency (ν )
2.3.2 Particle Nature of Electromagnetic
Radiation: Planck’s Quantum
Theory
Some of the experimental phenomenon such
as diffraction* and interference** can be
explained by the wave nature of the
electromagnetic radiation. However, following
are some of the observations which could not
be explained with the help of even the
electromagentic theory of 19th century
physics (known as classical physics):
the nature of emission of radiation from
hot bodies (black -body radiation)
ejection of electrons from metal surface
when radiation strikes it (photoelectric
effect)
(iii)
variation of heat capacity of solids as a
function of temperature
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Line spectra of atoms with special
reference to hydrogen.
These phenomena indicate that the system
can take energy only in discrete amounts. All
possible energies cannot be taken up or
radiated.
It is noteworthy that the first concrete
explanation for the phenomenon of the black
body radiation mentioned above was given by
Max Planck in 1900. Let us first try to
understand this phenomenon, which is  given
below:
Hot objects emit electromagnetic radiations
over a wide range of wavelengths. At high
temperatures, an appreciable proportion of
radiation is in the visible region of the
spectrum. As the temperature is raised, a
higher proportion of short wavelength (blue
light) is generated. For example, when an iron
rod is heated in a furnace, it first turns to dull
red and then progressively becomes more and
more red as the temperature increases. As this
is heated further,  the radiation emitted becomes
white and then becomes blue as the
temperature becomes very high. This means
that red radiation is most intense at a particular
temperature and the blue radiation is more
intense at another temperature. This means
intensities of radiations of different wavelengths
emitted by hot body depend upon its
temperature. By late 1850’s it was known that
objects made of different material and kept at
different temperatures emit different amount of
radiation. Also, when the surface of an object is
irradiated with light (electromagnetic radiation),
a part of radiant energy is generally reflected
as such, a part is absorbed and a part of it is
transmitted. The reason for incomplete
absorption is that ordinary objects are as a rule
imperfect absorbers of radiation. An ideal body,
which emits and absorbs radiations of all
frequencies uniformly, is called a black body
and the radiation emitted by such a body is
called black body radiation. In practice, no
such body exists. Carbon black approximates
fairly closely to black body. A good physical
approximation to a black body is a cavity with
a tiny hole, which has no other opening. Any
ray entering the hole will be reflected by the
cavity walls and will be eventually absorbed by
the walls. A black body is also a perfect radiator
of radiant energy. Furthermore, a black body
is in thermal equilibrium with its surroundings.
It radiates same amount of energy per unit area
as it absorbs from its surrounding in any given
time. The amount of light emitted (intensity of
radiation) from a black body and its spectral
distribution depends only on its temperature.
At a given temperature, intensity of radiation
emitted increases with the increase of
wavelength, reaches a maximum value at a
given wavelength and then starts decreasing
with further increase of wavelength, as shown
in Fig. 2.8. Also, as the temperature increases,
maxima of the curve shifts to short wavelength.
Several attempts were made to predict the
intensity of radiation as a function of
wavelength.
But the results of the above experiment
could not be explained satisfactorily on the
basis of the wave theory of light. Max Planck
Fig. 2.8(a)  Black body
Fig. 2.8  Wavelength-intensity relationship
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
arrived at a satisfactory relationship by
making an assumption that absorption and
emmission of radiation arises from oscillator
i.e., atoms in the wall of black body. Their
frequency of oscillation is changed by
interaction with oscilators of electromagnetic
radiation. Planck assumed that radiation
could be sub-divided into discrete chunks of
energy. He suggested that atoms and
molecules could emit or absorb energy only
in discrete quantities and not in a continuous
manner. He gave the name quantum to the
smallest quantity of energy that can be
emitted or absorbed in the form of
electromagnetic radiation. The energy (E ) of a
quantum of radiation is proportional
to its frequency (ν ) and is expressed by
equation (2.6).
E = hυ
(2.6)
The proportionality constant, ‘h’ is known
as Planck’s constant and has the value
6.626×10–34 J s.
With this theory, Planck was able to explain
the distribution of intensity in the  radiation
from black body as a function of frequency or
wavelength at different temperatures.
Quantisation has been compared to
standing on a staircase. A person can stand
on any step of a staircase, but it is not possible
for him/her to stand in between the two steps.
The energy can take any one of the values from
the following set, but cannot take on any
values between them.
E = 0, hυ, 2hυ, 3hυ....nhυ.....
Photoelectric Effect
In 1887, H. Hertz performed a very interesting
experiment in which electrons (or electric
current) were ejected when certain metals (for
example potassium, rubidium, caesium etc.)
were exposed to a beam of light as shown
in Fig.2.9. The phenomenon is called
Photoelectric effect. The results observed in
this experiment were:
The electrons are ejected from the metal
surface as soon as the beam of light strikes
the surface, i.e., there is no time lag
between the striking of light beam and the
ejection of electrons from the metal surface.
The number of electrons ejected is
proportional to the intensity or brightness
of light.
(iii)
For each metal, there is a characteristic
minimum frequency,ν0 (also known as
threshold frequency) below which
photoelectric effect is not observed. At a
frequency ν >ν 0, the ejected electrons come
out with certain kinetic energy. The kinetic
energies of these electrons increase with
the increase of frequency of the light used.
All the above results could not be explained
on the basis of laws of classical physics.
According to latter, the energy content of the
beam of light depends upon the brightness of
the light. In other words, number of electrons
ejected and kinetic energy associated with
them should depend on the brightness of light.
It has been observed that though the number
of electrons ejected does depend upon the
brightness of light, the kinetic energy of the
Fig.2.9
Equipment for studying the photoelectric
effect. Light of a particular frequency strikes
a clean metal surface inside a vacuum
chamber. Electrons are ejected from the
metal and are counted by a detector that
measures their kinetic energy.
Max Planck
(1858 – 1947)
Max Planck, a German physicist,
received his Ph.D in theoretical
physics from the University of
Munich in 1879. In 1888, he was
appointed Director of the Institute
of Theoretical Physics at the
University of Berlin. Planck was awarded the Nobel
Prize in Physics in 1918 for his quantum theory.
Planck also made significant contributions in
thermodynamics and other areas of physics.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
ejected electrons does not. For example, red
light [ν = (4.3 to 4.6) × 1014 Hz] of any brightness
(intensity) may shine on a piece of potassium
metal for hours but no photoelectrons are
ejected. But, as soon as even a very weak yellow
light (ν = 5.1–5.2 × 1014 Hz) shines on the
potassium metal, the photoelectric effect is
observed. The threshold frequency (ν0) for
potassium metal is 5.0×1014 Hz.
Einstein (1905) was able to explain the
photoelectric effect using Planck’s quantum
theory of electromagnetic radiation as a
starting point.
minimum energy required to eject the electron
is hν0 (also called work function, W0; Table 2.2),
difference
energy
(hν – hν0 ) is transferred as the kinetic energy of
the photoelectron. Following the conservation
of energy principle, the kinetic energy of the
ejected electron is given by the equation 2.7.
(2.7)
where me is the mass of the electron and v is
the velocity associated with the ejected electron.
Lastly, a more intense beam of light consists
of larger number of photons, consequently the
number of electrons ejected is also larger as
compared to that in an experiment in which a
beam of weaker intensity of light is employed.
Dual Behaviour of Electromagnetic
Radiation
The particle nature of light posed a dilemma
for scientists. On the one hand, it could explain
the black body radiation and  photoelectric
effect satisfactorily but on the other hand, it
was not consistent with the known wave
behaviour of light which could account for the
phenomena of interference and diffraction. The
only way to resolve the dilemma was to accept
the idea that light possesses both particle and
wave-like properties, i.e., light has dual
behaviour. Depending on the experiment, we
find that light behaves either as a wave or as a
stream of particles. Whenever radiation
interacts with matter, it displays particle like
properties in contrast to the wavelike
properties (interference and diffraction), which
it exhibits when it propagates. This concept
was totally alien to the way the scientists
thought about matter and radiation and it took
them a long time to become convinced of its
validity. It turns out, as you shall see later,
that some microscopic particles like electrons
also exhibit this wave-particle duality.
C:\Chemistry XI\Unit-2\Unit-2(2)-Lay-3(reprint).pmd     27.7.6, 16.10.6  (Reprint)
Albert Einstein, a German
born American physicist, is
regarded by many as one of
the two great physicists the
world has known (the other
is Isaac Newton). His three
research papers (on special
relativity, Brownian motion
and the photoelectric effect)
which he published in 1905,
Albert Einstein
(1879-1955)
while he was employed as a technical
assistant in a Swiss patent office in Berne
have profoundly influenced the development
of physics. He received the Nobel Prize in
Physics in 1921 for his explanation of the
photoelectric effect.
Shining a beam of light on to a metal
surface can, therefore, be viewed as shooting
a beam of particles, the photons. When a
photon of sufficient energy strikes an electron
in the atom of the metal, it transfers its energy
instantaneously to the electron during the
collision and the electron is ejected without
any time lag or delay. Greater the energy
possessed by the photon, greater will be
transfer of energy to the electron and greater
the kinetic energy of the ejected electron. In
other words, kinetic energy of the ejected
electron is proportional to the frequency of the
electromagnetic radiation. Since the striking
photon has energy equal to hν  and the
Metal
W0 /eV
Table 2.2  Values of Work Function (W0) for a Few Metals
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
Problem 2.6
Calculate energy of one mole of photons
of radiation whose frequency is 5 ×10
Solution
Energy (E) of one photon is given by the
expression
E = hν
h = 6.626 ×10
–34 J s
ν = 5×10
–1 (given)
E = (6.626 ×10
–34 J s) × (5 ×10
= 3.313 ×10
–19 J
Energy of one mole of photons
= (3.313 ×10
–19 J) × (6.022 × 10
23 mol
= 199.51 kJ mol
Problem 2.7
A 100 watt bulb emits monochromatic
light of wavelength 400 nm. Calculate the
number of photons emitted per second
by the bulb.
Solution
Power of the bulb = 100 watt
= 100 J s
Energy of one photon E = hν = hc/λ
= 6.626
10  m s
10 9m
= 4.969 × 10
-19 J
Number of photons emitted
4 969
2 012
Problem 2.8
When electromagnetic radiation of
wavelength 300 nm falls on the surface
of sodium, electrons are emitted with a
kinetic energy of 1.68 ×10
5 J mol
–1. What
is the minimum energy needed to remove
an electron from sodium? What is the
maximum wavelength that will cause a
photoelectron to be emitted?
Solution
The energy (E) of a 300 nm photon is
given by
= 6.626 × 10
-19 J
The energy of one mole of photons
= 6.626 ×10–19 J × 6.022 ×10
23 mol
= 3.99 × 10
5 J mol
The minimum energy needed to remove
one mole of electrons from sodium
= (3.99 –1.68) 10
5 J mol
= 2.31 × 10
5 J mol
The minimum energy for one electron
This corresponds to the wavelength
= 6.626
10 m s
= 517 nm
(This corresponds to green light)
Problem 2.9
The threshold frequency ν0 for a metal is
7.0 ×10
–1. Calculate the kinetic energy
of an electron emitted when radiation of
frequency ν =1.0 ×10
–1 hits the metal.
Solution
According to Einstein’s equation
Kinetic energy = ½ mev
2=h(ν – ν0 )
= (6.626 ×10
–34 J s) (1.0 × 10
–1 – 7.0
= (6.626 ×10
–34 J s) (10.0 ×10
–1 – 7.0
= (6.626 ×10
–34 J s) × (3.0 ×10
= 1.988 ×10
–19 J
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
2.3.3 Evidence for the quantized*
Electronic Energy Levels: Atomic
spectra
The speed of light depends upon the nature of
the medium through which it passes. As a
result, the beam of light is deviated or refracted
from its original path as it passes from one
medium to another. It is observed that when a
ray of white light is passed through a prism,
the wave with shorter wavelength bends more
than the one with a longer wavelength. Since
ordinary white light consists of waves with all
the wavelengths in the visible range, a ray of
white light is spread out into a series of
coloured bands called spectrum. The light of
red colour which has longest wavelength is
deviated the least while the violet light, which
has shortest wavelength is deviated the most.
The spectrum of white light, that we can see,
ranges from violet at 7.50 × 1014 Hz to red at
4×1014 Hz. Such a spectrum is called
continuous spectrum. Continuous because
violet merges into blue, blue into green and so
on. A similar spectrum is produced when a
rainbow forms in the sky. Remember that
visible light is just a small portion of the
electromagnetic radiation (Fig.2.7). When
electromagnetic radiation interacts with matter,
atoms and molecules may absorb energy and
reach to a higher energy state. With higher
energy, these are in an unstable state. For
returning to their normal (more stable, lower
energy states) energy state, the atoms and
molecules emit radiations in various regions
of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Emission and Absorption Spectra
The spectrum of radiation emitted by a
substance that has absorbed energy is called
an emission spectrum. Atoms, molecules or
ions that have absorbed radiation are said to
be “excited”. To produce an emission
spectrum, energy is supplied to a sample by
heating it or irradiating it and the wavelength
(or frequency) of the radiation emitted, as the
sample gives up the absorbed energy, is
recorded.
An absorption spectrum is like the
photographic negative of an emission
spectrum. A continuum of radiation is passed
through a sample which absorbs radiation of
certain wavelengths. The missing wavelength
which corresponds to the radiation absorbed
by the matter, leave dark spaces in the bright
continuous spectrum.
The study of emission or absorption
spectra is referred to as spectroscopy. The
spectrum of the visible light, as discussed
above, was continuous as all wavelengths (red
to violet) of the visible light are represented in
the spectra. The emission spectra of atoms in
the gas phase, on the other hand, do not show
a continuous spread of wavelength from red
to violet, rather they emit light only at specific
wavelengths with dark spaces between them.
Such spectra are called line spectra or atomic
spectra because the emitted radiation is
identified by the appearance of bright lines in
the spectra (Fig. 2.10 page 45).
Line emission spectra are of great
interest in the study of electronic structure.
Each element has a unique line emission
spectrum. The characteristic lines in atomic
spectra can be used in chemical analysis to
identify unknown atoms in the same way as
fingerprints are used to identify people. The
exact matching of lines of the emission
spectrum of the atoms of a known element with
the lines from an unknown sample quickly
establishes the identity of the latter, German
chemist, Robert Bunsen (1811-1899) was one
of the first investigators to use line spectra to
identify elements.
Elements like rubidium (Rb), caesium (Cs)
thallium (Tl), indium (In), gallium (Ga) and
scandium (Sc) were discovered when their
minerals were analysed by spectroscopic
methods. The element helium (He) was
discovered in the sun by spectroscopic method.
Line Spectrum of Hydrogen
When an electric discharge is passed through
gaseous hydrogen, the H2 molecules dissociate
and the energetically excited hydrogen atoms
produced emit electromagnetic radiation of
discrete frequencies. The hydrogen spectrum
consists of several series of lines named after
their discoverers. Balmer showed in 1885 on
the basis of experimental observations that if
* The restriction of any property to discrete values is called quantization.
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
spectral lines are expressed in terms of
wavenumber ( ), then the visible lines of the
hydrogen spectrum obey the following formula:
(2.8)
where n is an integer equal to or greater than
3 (i.e., n = 3,4,5,....)
The series of lines described by this formula
are called the Balmer series. The Balmer series
of lines are the only lines in the hydrogen
spectrum which appear in the visible region
of the electromagnetic spectrum. The Swedish
spectroscopist, Johannes Rydberg, noted that
all series of lines in the hydrogen spectrum
could be described by the following
expression :
(2.9)
where n1=1,2........
n2 = n1 + 1, n1 + 2......
The value 109,677 cm–1 is called the
Rydberg constant for hydrogen. The first five
series of lines that correspond to n1 = 1, 2, 3,
4, 5 are known as Lyman, Balmer, Paschen,
Bracket and Pfund series, respectively,
Table 2.3 shows these series of transitions in
the hydrogen spectrum. Fig 2.11 (page, 46)
shows the Lyman, Balmer and Paschen series
of transitions for hydrogen atom.
Of all the elements, hydrogen atom has the
simplest line spectrum. Line spectrum becomes
Fig. 2.10 (a) Atomic emission. The light emitted by a sample of excited hydrogen atoms (or any other
element) can be passed through a prism and separated into certain discrete wavelengths. Thus an
emission spectrum, which is a photographic recording of the separated wavelengths is called as line
spectrum. Any sample of reasonable size contains an enormous number of atoms. Although a single
atom can be in only one excited state at a time, the collection of atoms contains all possible excited
states. The light emitted as these atoms fall to lower energy states is responsible for the spectrum. (b)
Atomic absorption. When white light is passed through unexcited atomic hydrogen and then through
a slit and prism, the transmitted light is lacking in intensity at the same wavelengths as are emitted in
(a) The recorded absorption spectrum is also a line spectrum and the photographic negative of the
emission spectrum.
Table 2.3 The Spectral Lines for Atomic
Hydrogen
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
more and more complex for heavier atom. There
are, however, certain features which are
common to all line spectra, i.e., (i) line spectrum
of element is unique and (ii) there is regularity
in the line spectrum of each element. The
questions which arise are: What are the
reasons for these similarities? Is it something
to do with the electronic structure of atoms?
These are the questions need to be answered.
We shall find later that the answers to these
questions provide the key in understanding
electronic structure of these elements.
2.4 BOHR’S MODEL FOR HYDROGEN
Neils Bohr (1913) was the first to explain
quantitatively the general features of the
structure of hydrogen atom and its spectrum.
He used Planck’s concept of quantisation of
energy. Though the theory is not the modern
quantum mechanics, it can still be used to
Fig. 2.11
Transitions of the electron in the
hydrogen atom (The diagram shows
the Lyman, Balmer and Paschen series
of transitions)
rationalize many points in the atomic structure
and spectra. Bohr’s model for hydrogen atom
is based on the following postulates:
The electron in the hydrogen atom can
move around the nucleus in a circular path
of fixed radius and energy. These paths are
called orbits, stationary states or allowed
energy states. These orbits are arranged
concentrically around the nucleus.
The energy of an electron in the orbit does
not change with time. However, the
electron will move from a lower stationary
state to a higher stationary state when
required amount of energy is absorbed
by the electron or energy is emitted when
electron moves from higher stationary
state to lower stationary state (equation
2.16). The energy change does not take
place in a continuous manner.
Angular Momentum
Just as linear momentum is the product
of mass (m) and linear velocity (v), angular
momentum is the product of moment of
inertia (I) and angular velocity (ω). For an
electron of mass me, moving in a circular
path of radius r around the nucleus,
angular momentum = I × ω
Since I = mer2, and  ω = v/r where v is the
linear velocity,
∴angular momentum =  mer2 × v/r = mevr
The frequency of radiation absorbed or
emitted when transition occurs between
two stationary states that differ in energy
by ∆E, is given by:
(2.10)
Where E1 and E2 are the energies of the
lower and higher allowed energy states
respectively. This expression is commonly
known as Bohr’s frequency rule.
The angular momentum of an electron is
quantised. In a given stationary state it
can be expressed as in equation (2.11)
e v = .2π   n = 1,2,3.....
(2.11)
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
Where me is the mass of electron, v is the
velocity and r is the radius of the orbit in which
electron is moving.
Thus an electron can move only in those
orbits for which its angular momentum is
integral multiple of h/2π.  That means angular
momentum is quantised. Radiation is emitted
or obsorbed only when transition of electron
takes place from one quantised value of angular
momentum to another. Therefore, Maxwell’s
electromagnetic theory does not apply here that
is why only certain fixed orbits are allowed.
The details regarding the derivation of
energies of the stationary states used by Bohr,
are quite complicated and will be discussed in
higher classes. However, according to Bohr’s
theory for hydrogen atom:
The stationary states for electron are
numbered n = 1,2,3.......... These integral
numbers (Section 2.6.2) are known as
Principal quantum numbers.
The radii of the stationary states are
expressed as:
rn  = n2 a0
(2.12)
where a0 = 52.9 pm. Thus the radius of
the first stationary state, called the Bohr
orbit, is 52.9 pm. Normally the electron
in the hydrogen atom is found in this orbit
(that is n=1). As n increases the value of r
will increase. In other words the electron
will be present away from the nucleus.
The most important property associated
with the electron, is the energy of its
stationary state. It is given by the
expression.
n = 1,2,3....          (2.13)
where RH is called Rydberg constant and its
value is 2.18×10–18 J. The energy of the lowest
state, also called as the ground state, is
E1 = –2.18×10–18 (
12 ) = –2.18×10–18 J. The
energy of the stationary state for n = 2, will
be : E2 = –2.18×10–18J (
22 )= –0.545×10–18 J.
Fig. 2.11 depicts the energies of different
stationary states or energy levels of hydrogen
atom. This representation is called an energy
level diagram.
When the electron is free from the influence
of nucleus, the energy is taken as zero. The
electron in this situation is associated with the
stationary state of Principal Quantum number
= n = ∞ and is called as ionized hydrogen atom.
When the electron is attracted by the nucleus
and is present in orbit n, the energy is emitted
What does the negative electronic
energy (En) for hydrogen atom mean?
The energy of the electron in a hydrogen
atom has a negative sign for all possible
orbits (eq. 2.13). What does this negative
sign convey? This negative sign means that
the energy of the electron in the atom is
lower than the energy of a free electron at
rest. A free electron at rest is an electron
that is infinitely far away from the nucleus
and is assigned the energy value of zero.
Mathematically, this corresponds to
setting n equal to infinity in the equation
(2.13) so that E∞=0. As the electron gets
closer to the nucleus (as n decreases), En
becomes larger in absolute value and more
and more negative. The most negative
energy value is given by n=1 which
corresponds to the most stable orbit. We
call this the ground state.
Niels Bohr
(1885–1962)
Niels Bohr, a Danish
physicist received his Ph.D.
from the University of
Copenhagen in 1911. He
then spent a year with J.J.
Thomson and Ernest Rutherford in England.
In 1913, he returned to Copenhagen where
he remained for the rest of his life. In 1920
he was named Director of the Institute of
theoretical Physics. After first World War,
Bohr worked energetically for peaceful uses
of atomic energy. He received the first Atoms
for Peace award in 1957. Bohr was awarded
the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1922.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
and its energy is lowered. That is the reason
for the presence of negative sign in equation
(2.13) and depicts its stability relative to the
reference state of zero energy and n = ∞.
Bohr’s theory can also be applied to the
ions containing only one electron, similar
to that present in hydrogen atom. For
example, He+ Li2+, Be3+ and so on. The
energies of the stationary states associated
with these kinds of ions (also known as
hydrogen like species) are given by the
expression.
10 18
(2.14)
and radii by the expression
n = 52 9
(2.15)
where Z is the atomic number and has values
2,3 for the helium and lithium atoms
respectively. From the above equations, it is
evident that the value of energy becomes more
negative and that of radius becomes smaller
with increase of Z . This means that electron
will be tightly bound to the nucleus.
It is also possible to calculate the velocities
of electrons moving in these orbits.
Although the precise equation is not given
here, qualitatively the magnitude of
velocity of electron increases with increase
of positive charge on the nucleus and
decreases with increase of principal
quantum number.
2.4.1 Explanation of Line Spectrum of
Hydrogen
Line spectrum observed in case of hydrogen
atom, as mentioned in section 2.3.3, can be
explained quantitatively using Bohr’s model.
According to assumption 2, radiation (energy)
is absorbed if the electron moves from the orbit
of smaller Principal quantum number to the
orbit of higher Principal quantum number,
whereas the radiation (energy) is emitted if the
electron moves from higher orbit to lower orbit.
The energy gap between the two orbits is given
by equation (2.16)
∆E = Ef – Ei
(2.16)
Combining equations (2.13) and (2.16)
(where ni and nf
stand for initial orbit and final orbits)
(2,17)
The frequency (ν ) associated with the
absorption and emission of the photon can be
evaluated by using equation
(2.18)
6 626
(2.18)
(2.19)
and in terms of wavenumbers ( )
(2.20)
= 3 29
m s s
= 1 09677
(2.21)
In case of absorption spectrum, nf > ni and
the term in the parenthesis is positive and energy
is absorbed. On the other hand in case of
emission spectrum ni > nf , ∆ E is negative and
energy is released.
The expression (2.17) is similar to that used
by Rydberg (2.9) derived empirically using the
experimental data available at that time. Further,
each spectral line, whether in absorption or
emission spectrum, can be associated to the
particular transition in hydrogen atom. In case
of large number of hydrogen atoms, different
possible transitions can be observed and thus
leading to large number of spectral lines. The
brightness or intensity of spectral lines depends
upon the number of photons of same wavelength
or frequency absorbed or emitted.
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
Problem 2.10
What are the frequency and wavelength
of a photon emitted during a transition
from n = 5 state to the n = 2 state in the
hydrogen atom?
Solution
Since ni = 5 and nf = 2, this transition gives
rise to a spectral line in the visible region
of the Balmer series. From equation (2.17)
It is an emission energy
The frequency of the photon (taking
energy in terms of magnitude)  is given by
ν = ∆E
= 6.91×1014 Hz
Problem 2.11
Calculate the energy associated with the
first orbit of He+. What is the radius of this
orbit?
Solution
10 18
atom–1
For He+, n = 1, Z = 2
The radius of the orbit is given by equation
(2.15)
= ( .
0 0529
Since n = 1, and Z = 2
0 0529
0 02645
2.4.2 Limitations of Bohr’s Model
Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom was no
doubt an improvement over Rutherford’s
nuclear model, as it could account for the
stability and line spectra of hydrogen atom and
hydrogen like ions (for example, He+, Li2+, Be3+,
and so on). However, Bohr’s model was too
simple to account for the following points.
It fails to account for the finer details
(doublet, that is two closely spaced lines)
of the hydrogen atom spectrum observed
by using sophisticated spectroscopic
techniques. This model is also unable to
explain the spectrum of atoms other than
hydrogen, for example, helium atom which
possesses only two electrons. Further,
Bohr’s theory was also unable to explain
the splitting of spectral lines in the presence
of magnetic field (Zeeman effect) or an
electric field (Stark effect).
It could not explain the ability of atoms to
form molecules by chemical bonds.
In other words, taking into account the
points mentioned above, one needs a better
theory which can explain the salient features
of the structure of complex atoms.
2.5 TOWARDS QUANTUM MECHANICAL
MODEL OF THE ATOM
In view of the shortcoming of the Bohr’s model,
attempts were made to develop a more suitable
and general model for atoms. Two important
developments which contributed significantly
in the formulation of such a model were :
1.  Dual behaviour of matter,
2.  Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
2.5.1 Dual Behaviour of Matter
The French physicist, de Broglie, in 1924
proposed that matter, like radiation, should
also exhibit dual behaviour i.e., both particle
and wavelike properties. This means that just
as the photon has momentum as well as
wavelength, electrons should also have
momentum as well as wavelength, de Broglie,
from this analogy, gave the following relation
between wavelength (λ) and momentum (p) of
a material particle.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Solution
According to de Brogile equation (2.22)
6 626
= 6.626 × 10–34 m (J = kg m2 s–2)
Problem 2.13
The mass of an electron is 9.1×10–31 kg. If
its K.E. is 3.0×10–25 J, calculate its
wavelength.
Solution
Since K. E. = ½ mv2
kg m s
= 812 m s–1
6 626
10 34
9 1 10 31
= 8967 × 10–10 m = 896.7 nm
Problem 2.14
Calculate the mass of a photon with
wavelength 3.6 Å.
Solution
λ = 3.6 Å = 3.6  × 10–10 m
Velocity of photon = velocity of light
= 6.135 × 10–29 kg
2.5.2 Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle
Werner Heisenberg a German physicist in
1927, stated uncertainty principle which is the
consequence of dual behaviour of matter and
radiation. It states that it is impossible to
determine simultaneously, the exact
position and exact momentum (or velocity)
of an electron.
Mathematically, it can be given as in
equation (2.23).
(2.22)
where m is the mass of the particle, v its
velocity and p its momentum. de Broglie’s
prediction was confirmed experimentally
when it was found that an electron beam
undergoes diffraction, a phenomenon
characteristic of waves. This fact has been put
to use in making an electron microscope,
which is based on the wavelike behaviour of
electrons just as an ordinary microscope
utilises the wave nature of light. An electron
microscope is a powerful tool in modern
scientific research because it achieves a
magnification of about 15 million times.
It needs to be noted that according to de
Broglie, every object in motion has a wave
character. The wavelengths associated with
ordinary objects are so short (because of their
large masses) that their wave properties cannot
be detected. The wavelengths associated with
electrons and other subatomic particles (with
very small mass) can however be detected
experimentally. Results obtained from the
following problems prove these points
qualitatively.
Problem 2.12
What will be the wavelength of a ball of
mass 0.1 kg moving with a velocity of 10
m s–1 ?
Louis de Broglie (1892 – 1987)
Louis de Broglie, a French
physicist, studied history as an
undergraduate in the early
1910’s. His interest turned to
science as a result of his
assignment
radio
communications in World War I.
He received his Dr. Sc. from the University of
Paris in 1924. He was professor of theoretical
physics at the University of Paris from 1932 untill
his retirement in 1962. He was awarded the
Nobel Prize in Physics in 1929.
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
(2.23)
where ∆x is the uncertainty in position and ∆px
(or ∆vx) is the uncertainty in momentum (or
velocity) of the particle. If the position of the
electron is known with high degree of accuracy
(∆x is small), then the velocity of the electron
will be uncertain [∆(vx) is large]. On the other
hand, if the velocity of the electron is known
precisely (∆(vx ) is small), then the position of
electron
uncertain
(∆x will be large). Thus, if we carry out some
physical measurements on the electron’s
position or velocity, the outcome will always
depict a fuzzy or blur picture.
The uncertainty principle can be best
understood with the help of an example.
Suppose you are asked to measure the
thickness of a sheet of paper with an
unmarked metrestick. Obviously, the results
obtained would be extremely inaccurate and
meaningless, In order to obtain any accuracy,
you should use an instrument graduated in
units smaller than the thickness of a sheet of
the paper. Analogously, in order to determine
the position of an electron, we must use a
meterstick calibrated in units of smaller than
the dimensions of electron (keep in mind that
an electron is considered as a point charge and
is therefore, dimensionless). To observe an
electron, we can illuminate it with “light” or
electromagnetic radiation. The “light” used
must have a wavelength smaller than the
dimensions of an electron. The high
momentum photons of such light
would change the energy of electrons by
collisions. In this process we, no doubt, would
be able to calculate the position of the electron,
but we would know very little about the
velocity of the electron after the collision.
Significance of Uncertainty Principle
One of the important implications of the
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle is that it
rules out existence of definite paths or
trajectories of electrons and other similar
particles. The trajectory of an object is
determined by its location and velocity at
various moments. If we know where a body is
at a particular instant and if we also know its
velocity and the forces acting on it at that
instant, we can tell where the body would be
sometime later. We, therefore, conclude that the
position of an object and its velocity fix its
trajectory. Since for a sub-atomic object such
as an electron, it is not possible simultaneously
to determine the position and velocity at any
given instant to an arbitrary degree of
precision, it is not possible to talk of the
trajectory of an electron.
The effect of Heisenberg Uncertainty
Principle is significant only for motion of
microscopic objects and is negligible for
that of macroscopic objects. This can be
seen from the following examples.
If uncertainty principle is applied to an
object of mass, say about a milligram (10–6 kg),
Werner Heisenberg (1901 – 1976) Werner Heisenberg (1901 – 1976) received his Ph.D. in
physics from the University of Munich in 1923. He then spent a year working with Max
Born at Gottingen and three years with Niels Bohr in Copenhagen. He was professor of
physics at the University of Leipzig from 1927 to 1941. During World War II, Heisenberg
was in charge of German research on the atomic bomb. After the war he was named
director of Max Planck Institute for physics in Gottingen. He was also accomplished
mountain climber. Heisenberg was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1932.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
The value of ∆v∆x obtained is extremely
small and is insignificant. Therefore, one may
say that in dealing with milligram-sized or
heavier
objects,
associated
uncertainties are hardly of any real
consequence.
In the case of a microscopic object like an
electron on the other hand. ∆v.∆x obtained is
much larger and such uncertainties are of real
consequence. For example, for an electron
whose mass is 9.11×10–31 kg., according to
Heisenberg uncertainty principle
It, therefore, means that if one tries to find
the exact location of the electron, say to an
uncertainty of only 10–8 m, then the uncertainty
∆v in velocity would be
which is so large that the classical picture of
electrons moving in Bohr’s orbits (fixed) cannot
hold good. It, therefore, means that the
precise statements of the position and
momentum of electrons have to be
replaced by the statements of probability,
that the electron has at a given position
and momentum. This is what happens in
the quantum mechanical model of atom.
= 0.579×107 m s–1 (1J = 1 kg m2 s–2)
= 5.79×106 m s–1
Problem 2.16
A golf ball has a mass of 40g, and a speed
of 45 m/s. If the speed can be measured
within accuracy of 2%, calculate the
uncertainty in the position.
Solution
The uncertainty in the speed is 2%, i.e.,
Using the equation (2.22)
= 1.46×10–33 m
This is nearly ~ 1018 times smaller than
the diameter of a typical atomic nucleus.
As mentioned earlier for large particles, the
uncertainty principle sets no meaningful
limit to the precision of measurements.
Reasons for the Failure of the Bohr Model
One can now understand the reasons for the
failure of the Bohr model. In  Bohr model, an
electron is regarded as a charged particle
moving  in well defined circular orbits about
the nucleus. The wave character of the electron
is not considered in  Bohr model. Further, an
orbit is a clearly defined path and this path
can completely be defined only if both the
position and the velocity of the electron are
known exactly at the same time. This is not
possible  according to the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle. Bohr model of the
hydrogen atom, therefore, not only ignores
dual behaviour of matter but also contradicts
Heisenberg uncertainty principle. In view of
Problem 2.15
A microscope using suitable photons is
employed to locate an electron in an atom
within a distance of 0.1 Å. What is the
uncertainty involved in the measurement
of its velocity?
Solution
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
these inherent weaknesses in the Bohr model,
there was no point in extending Bohr model
to other atoms. In fact an insight into the
structure of the atom was needed which could
account for wave-particle duality of matter and
be consistent with Heisenberg uncertainty
principle. This came with the advent of
quantum mechanics.
2.6 QUANTUM MECHANICAL MODEL OF
Classical mechanics, based on Newton’s laws
of motion, successfully describes the motion
of all macroscopic objects such as a falling
stone, orbiting planets etc., which have
essentially a particle-like behaviour as shown
in the previous section. However it fails when
applied to microscopic objects like electrons,
atoms, molecules etc. This is mainly because
of the fact that classical mechanics ignores the
concept of dual behaviour of matter especially
for sub-atomic particles and the uncertainty
principle. The branch of science that takes into
account  this dual behaviour of matter is called
quantum mechanics.
Quantum mechanics is a theoretical
science that deals with the study of the motions
of the microscopic objects that have both
observable wave like and particle like
properties. It specifies the laws of motion that
these objects obey. When quantum mechanics
is applied to macroscopic objects (for which
wave like properties are insignificant) the
results are the same as those from the classical
mechanics.
Quantum mechanics was developed
independently in 1926 by Werner Heisenberg
and Erwin Schrödinger. Here, however, we
shall be discussing the quantum mechanics
which is based on the ideas of wave motion.
The fundamental equation of quantum
mechanics was developed by Schrödinger  and
it won him the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1933.
This equation which incorporates wave-
particle duality of matter as proposed by de
Broglie is quite complex and knowledge of
higher mathematics  is needed to solve it. You
will learn its solutions for different systems in
higher classes.
For a system (such as an atom or a
molecule whose energy does not change with
time) the Schrödinger equation is written as
where  is a mathematical operator
called Hamiltonian. Schrödinger gave a recipe
of constructing this operator from the
expression for the total energy of the system.
The total energy of the system takes into
account the kinetic energies of all the sub-
atomic particles (electrons, nuclei), attractive
potential between the electrons and nuclei and
repulsive potential among the electrons and
nuclei individually. Solution of this equation
gives E and ψ.
Hydrogen Atom and the Schrödinger
Equation
When Schrödinger equation is solved for
hydrogen atom, the solution gives the possible
energy levels the electron can occupy and the
corresponding wave function(s) (ψ) of the
electron associated with each energy level.
These quantized energy states and
corresponding wave functions which are
characterized by a set of three quantum
numbers (principal quantum number n,
azimuthal quantum number l and
magnetic quantum number ml ) arise as a
natural consequence in the solution of the
Schrödinger equation. When an electron is in
Erwin Schrödinger
(1887-1961)
Erwin Schrödinger, an
Austrian
physicist
received his Ph.D. in
theoretical physics from
the University of Vienna
1910.
Schrödinger succeeded
Planck
University of Berlin at
Planck’s request. In 1933,
Schrödinger left Berlin
because of his opposition to Hitler and Nazi
policies and returned to Austria in 1936. After
the invasion of Austria by Germany,
Schrödinger was forcibly removed from his
professorship. He then moved to Dublin, Ireland
where he remained for seventeen years.
Schrödinger   shared the Nobel Prize for Physics
with P.A.M. Dirac in 1933.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
any energy state, the wave function
corresponding to that energy state contains all
information about the electron. The wave
function is a mathematical function whose
value depends upon the coordinates of the
electron in the atom and does not carry any
physical meaning. Such wave functions of
hydrogen or hydrogen like species with one
electron are called atomic orbitals. Such wave
functions pertaining  to  one-electron species
are called one-electron systems. The
probability of finding an electron at a point
within an atom is proportional to the |ψ|2 at
that point.  The quantum mechanical results
of the hydrogen atom successfully predict all
aspects of the hydrogen atom spectrum
including some phenomena that could not be
explained by the Bohr model.
Application of  Schrödinger equation to
multi-electron atoms presents a difficulty: the
Schrödinger equation cannot be solved exactly
for a multi-electron atom. This difficulty can
be overcome by using approximate methods.
Such calculations with the aid of modern
computers show that orbitals in atoms other
than hydrogen do not differ in any radical way
from the hydrogen orbitals discussed above.
The principal difference lies in the consequence
of increased nuclear charge. Because of this
all the orbitals are somewhat contracted.
Further, as you shall see later (in subsections
2.6.3 and 2.6.4), unlike orbitals of hydrogen
or hydrogen like species, whose energies
depend only on the quantum number n, the
energies of the orbitals in multi-electron atoms
depend on quantum numbers n and l.
Important Features of the Quantum
Mechanical Model of Atom
Quantum mechanical model of atom is the
picture of the structure of the atom, which
emerges from the application of the
Schrödinger equation to atoms. The
following are the important features of the
quantum-mechanical model of atom:
1. The energy of electrons in atoms is
quantized (i.e., can only have certain
specific values), for example when
electrons are bound to the nucleus in
atoms.
2. The existence of quantized electronic
energy levels is a direct result of the wave
like properties of electrons and are
allowed solutions of Schrödinger wave
equation.
3. Both the exact position and exact velocity
of an electron in an atom cannot be
determined simultaneously (Heisenberg
uncertainty principle). The path of an
electron in an atom  therefore, can never
be determined or known accurately.
That is why, as you shall see later on,
one talks of only probability of finding
the electron at different points in
an atom.
4. An atomic orbital is the wave function
ψ for an electron in an atom.
Whenever an electron is described by a
wave function, we say that the electron
occupies that orbital. Since many such
wave functions are possible for an
electron, there are many atomic orbitals
in an atom. These “one electron orbital
wave functions” or orbitals form the
basis of the electronic structure of atoms.
In each orbital, the electron has a
definite energy. An orbital cannot
contain more than two electrons. In a
multi-electron atom, the electrons are
filled in various orbitals in the order of
increasing energy. For each electron of
a multi-electron atom, there shall,
therefore, be an orbital wave function
characteristic of the orbital it occupies.
All the information about the electron
in an atom is stored in its orbital wave
function ψ and quantum mechanics
makes it possible to extract this
information out of ψ.
5. The probability of finding an electron at
a point within an atom is proportional
to the square of the orbital wave function
i.e., |ψ|2 at that point. |ψ|2 is known
as probability density and is always
positive. From the value of |ψ|2 at
different points within an atom, it is
possible to predict the region around
the nucleus where electron will most
probably be found.
2.6.1  Orbitals and Quantum Numbers
A large number of orbitals are possible in an
atom. Qualitatively these orbitals can be
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
distinguished by their size, shape and
orientation. An orbital of smaller size means
there is more chance of finding the electron near
the nucleus. Similarly shape and orientation
mean that there is more probability of finding
the electron along certain directions than
along others. Atomic orbitals are precisely
distinguished by what are known as quantum
numbers. Each orbital is designated by three
quantum numbers labelled as n, l and ml.
The principal quantum number ‘n’ is
a positive integer with value of n = 1,2,3.......
The principal quantum number determines the
size and to large extent the energy of the
orbital. For hydrogen atom and hydrogen like
species (He+, Li2+, .... etc.) energy and size of
the orbital depends only on ‘n’.
The principal quantum number also
identifies the shell. With the increase in the
value of ‘n’, the number of allowed orbital
increases and are given by ‘n2’ All the
orbitals of a given value of ‘n’ constitute a
single shell of atom and are represented by
the following letters
n =  1   2   3   4   ............
Shell =   K  L  M  N ............
Size of an orbital increases with increase of
principal quantum number ‘n’. In other words
the electron will be located away from the
nucleus. Since energy is required in shifting
away the negatively charged electron from the
positively charged nucleus, the energy of the
orbital will increase with increase of n.
Azimuthal quantum number. ‘l’ is also
known as orbital angular momentum or
subsidiary quantum number. It defines the
three-dimensional shape of the orbital. For a
given value of n, l  can have n values ranging
from 0 to n – 1, that is, for a given value of n,
the possible value of l are : l = 0, 1, 2, ..........
(n–1)
For example, when n = 1, value of l is only
0. For n = 2, the possible value of l can be 0
and 1. For n = 3, the possible l values are 0, 1
and 2.
Each shell consists of one or more sub-
shells or sub-levels. The number of sub-shells
in a principal shell is equal to the value of n.
For example in the first shell (n = 1), there is
only one sub-shell which corresponds to l = 0.
There are two sub-shells (l = 0, 1) in the second
shell (n = 2), three (l = 0, 1, 2) in third shell (n =
3) and so on. Each sub-shell is assigned an
azimuthal quantum number (l). Sub-shells
corresponding to different values of l are
represented by the following symbols.
Value for l :
............
notation for
............
sub-shell
Table 2.4 shows the permissible values of
‘l ’ for a given principal quantum number and
the corresponding sub-shell notation.
Table 2.4  Subshell Notations
Magnetic orbital quantum number. ‘ml’
gives information about the spatial
orientation of the orbital with respect to
standard set of co-ordinate axis. For any
sub-shell (defined by ‘l’ value) 2l+1 values
of ml are possible and these values are given
ml  = – l, – (l–1), – (l–2)... 0,1... (l–2), (l–1), l
Thus for l = 0, the only permitted value of
ml = 0, [2(0)+1 = 1, one s orbital]. For l = 1, ml
can be –1, 0 and +1 [2(1)+1 = 3, three p
orbitals]. For l = 2, ml = –2, –1, 0, +1 and +2,
[2(2)+1 = 5, five d orbitals]. It should be noted
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
that the values of ml are derived from l and that
the value of l are derived from n.
Each orbital in an atom, therefore, is
defined by a set of values for n, l and ml. An
orbital described by the quantum numbers
n = 2, l = 1, ml = 0 is an orbital in the p sub-shell
of the second shell. The following chart gives
the relation between the subshell and the
number of orbitals associated with it.
electron has, besides charge and mass,
intrinsic spin angular quantum number. Spin
angular momentum of the electron — a vector
quantity, can have two orientations relative to
the chosen axis. These two orientations are
distinguished by the spin quantum numbers
ms which can take the values of +½ or –½.
These are called the two spin states of the
electron and are normally represented by two
arrows, ↑ (spin up) and ↓ (spin down). Two
electrons that have different ms values (one +½
and the other –½) are said to have opposite
spins. An orbital cannot hold more than two
electrons and these two electrons should have
opposite spins.
To sum up, the four quantum numbers
provide the following information :
n defines the shell,  determines the size of
the orbital and also to a large extent the
energy of the orbital.
There are n subshells in the nth shell. l
identifies the subshell and determines the
shape of the orbital (see section 2.6.2).
There are (2l+1) orbitals of each type in a
subshell, that is, one s orbital (l = 0), three
p orbitals (l = 1) and five d orbitals (l = 2)
per subshell. To some extent l also
determines the energy of the orbital in a
multi-electron atom.
iii) ml designates the orientation of the orbital.
For a given value of l, ml has (2l+1) values,
Orbit, orbital and its importance
Orbit and orbital are not synonymous. An orbit, as proposed by Bohr, is a circular path
around the nucleus in which an electron moves. A precise description of this path of the
electron is impossible according to Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Bohr orbits, therefore,
have no real meaning and their existence can never be demonstrated experimentally. An
atomic orbital, on the other hand, is a quantum mechanical concept and refers to the one
electron wave function ψ in an atom. It is characterized by three quantum numbers (n, l and
ml) and its value depends upon the coordinates of the electron. ψ has, by itself, no physical
meaning. It is the square of the wave function i.e., |ψ|2 which has a physical meaning. |ψ|2
at any point in an atom gives the value of probability density at that point. Probability density
(|ψ|2) is the probability per unit volume and the product of |ψ|2 and a small volume (called a
volume element) yields the probability of finding the electron in that volume (the reason for
specifying a small volume element is that |ψ|2 varies from one region to another in space but
its value can be assumed to be constant within a small volume element). The total probability
of finding the electron in a given volume can then be calculated by the sum of all the products
of |ψ|2 and the corresponding volume elements. It is thus possible to get the probable
distribution of an electron in an orbital.
Value of l
Subshell notation
number of orbitals
Electron spin ‘s’ : The three quantum
numbers labelling an atomic orbital can be
used equally well to define its energy, shape
and orientation. But all these quantum
numbers are not enough to explain the line
spectra observed in the case of multi-electron
atoms, that is, some of the lines actually occur
in doublets (two lines closely spaced), triplets
(three lines, closely spaced) etc. This suggests
the presence of a few more energy levels than
predicted by the three quantum numbers.
In 1925, George Uhlenbeck and Samuel
Goudsmit proposed the presence of the fourth
quantum number known as the electron
spin quantum number (ms). An electron
spins around its own axis, much in a similar
way as earth spins around its own axis while
revolving around the sun. In other words, an
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
the same as the number of orbitals per
subshell. It means that the number of
orbitals is equal to the number of ways in
which they are oriented.
iv) ms refers to orientation of the spin of the
electron.
Problem 2.17
What is the total number of orbitals
associated  with the principal quantum
number n = 3 ?
Solution
For n = 3, the possible values of l are 0, 1
and 2. Thus there is one 3s orbital
(n = 3, l = 0 and ml = 0); there are three 3p
orbitals (n = 3, l = 1 and ml = –1, 0, +1);
there are five 3d orbitals (n = 3, l = 2 and
ml = –2, –1, 0, +1+, +2).
Therefore, the total number of orbitals is
1+3+5 = 9
The same value can also be obtained by
using the relation; number of orbitals
= n2, i.e.  32 = 9.
Problem 2.18
Using s, p, d, f notations, describe the
orbital with the following quantum
numbers
(a) n = 2, l = 1, (b) n = 4, l = 0, (c) n = 5,
l = 3, (d) n = 3, l = 2
Solution
orbital
2.6.2 Shapes of Atomic Orbitals
The orbital wave function or ψ for an electron
in an atom has no physical meaning. It is
simply a mathematical function of the
coordinates of the electron. However, for
different orbitals the plots of corresponding
wave functions as a function of r (the distance
from the nucleus) are different. Fig. 2.12(a),
gives such plots for 1s (n = 1, l = 0) and 2s (n =
2, l = 0) orbitals.
According to the German physicist, Max
Born, the square of the wave function
(i.e.,ψ 2) at a point gives the probability density
of the electron at that point. The variation of
ψ 2 as a function of r for 1s and 2s orbitals is
given in Fig. 2.12(b). Here again, you may note
that the curves for 1s and 2s orbitals are
different.
It may be noted that for 1s orbital the
probability density is maximum at the nucleus
and it decreases sharply as we move away from
it. On the other hand, for 2s orbital the
probability density first decreases sharply to
zero and again starts increasing. After reaching
a small maxima it decreases again and
approaches zero as the value of r increases
further. The region where this probability
density function reduces to zero is called
nodal surfaces or simply nodes. In general,
it has been found that ns-orbital has (n – 1)
nodes, that is, number of nodes increases with
increase of principal quantum number n. In
other words, number of nodes for 2s orbital is
one, two for 3s and so on.
These probability density variation can be
visualised in terms of charge cloud diagrams
[Fig. 2.13(a)]. In these diagrams, the density
Fig. 2.12 The plots of (a) the orbital wave
function ψ(r ); (b) the variation of
probability density ψ2(r) as a function
of distance r of the electron from the
nucleus for 1s and 2s orbitals.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
of the dots in a region represents electron
probability density in that region.
Boundary surface diagrams of constant
probability density for different orbitals give a
fairly good representation of the shapes of the
orbitals. In this representation, a boundary
surface or contour surface is drawn in space
for an orbital on which the value of probability
density |ψ|2 is constant. In principle many
such boundary surfaces may be possible.
However, for a given orbital, only that
boundary surface diagram of constant
probability density* is taken to be good
representation of the shape of the orbital which
encloses a region or volume in which the
probability of finding the electron is very high,
say, 90%. The boundary surface diagram for
1s and 2s orbitals are given in Fig. 2.13(b).
One may ask a question : Why do we not draw
a boundary surface diagram, which bounds a
region in which the probability of finding the
electron is, 100 %? The answer to this question
is that the probability density |ψ|2 has always
some value, howsoever small it may be, at any
finite distance from the nucleus. It is therefore,
not possible to draw a boundary surface
diagram of a rigid size in which the probability
of finding the electron is 100%. Boundary
surface diagram for a s orbital is actually a
sphere centred on the nucleus. In two
dimensions, this sphere looks like a circle. It
encloses a region in which probability of
finding the electron is about 90%.
Thus, we see that 1s and 2s orbitals are
spherical in shape. In reality all the s-orbitals
are spherically symmetric, that is, the probability
of finding the electron at a given distance is equal
in all the directions. It is also observed that the
size of the s orbital increases with increase in n,
that is, 4s > 3s > 2s > 1s and the electron is
located further away from the nucleus as the
principal quantum number increases.
Boundary surface diagrams for three 2p
orbitals (l = 1) are shown in Fig. 2.14. In these
diagrams, the nucleus is at the origin. Here,
unlike s-orbitals, the boundary surface
diagrams are not spherical. Instead each
p orbital consists of two sections called lobes
that are on either side of the plane that passes
through the nucleus. The probability density
function is zero on the plane where the two
lobes touch each other. The size, shape and
If probability density |ψ|2 is constant on a given surface, |ψ| is also constant over the surface. The boundary
surface for |ψ|2 and |ψ| are identical.
Fig. 2.14 Boundary surface diagrams of the
three 2p orbitals.
Fig. 2.13 (a) Probability density plots of 1s and
2s atomic orbitals. The density of the
dots represents the probability
density of finding the electron in that
region. (b) Boundary surface diagram
for 1s and 2s orbitals.
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
energy of the three orbitals are identical. They
differ however, in the way the lobes are
oriented. Since the lobes may be considered
to lie along the x, y or z axis, they are given the
designations 2px, 2py, and 2pz. It should be
understood, however, that there is no simple
relation between the values of ml (–1, 0 and
+1) and the x, y and z directions. For our
purpose, it is sufficient to remember that,
because there are three possible values of ml,
there are, therefore, three p orbitals whose axes
are mutually perpendicular. Like s orbitals, p
orbitals increase in size and energy with
increase in the principal quantum number and
hence the order of the energy and size of
various p orbitals is 4p > 3p > 2p. Further, like
s orbitals, the probability density functions for
p-orbital also pass through value zero, besides
at zero and infinite distance, as the distance
from the nucleus increases. The  number of
nodes are given by the n –2, that is number of
radial node is 1 for 3p orbital, two for 4p orbital
and so on.
For l = 2, the orbital is known as d-orbital
and the minimum value of principal quantum
number (n) has to be 3. as the value of l cannot
be greater than n–1. There are five ml values (–
2, –1, 0, +1 and +2) for l = 2 and thus there are
five d orbitals. The boundary surface diagram
of d orbitals are shown in Fig. 2.15.
The five d-orbitals are designated as dxy, dyz,
dxz, dx2–y2 and dz2. The shapes of the first four d-
orbitals are similar to each other, where as that
of the fifth one, dz2, is different from others, but
all five 3d orbitals are equivalent in energy. The
d orbitals for which n is greater than 3 (4d,
5d...) also have shapes similar to 3d orbital,
but differ in energy and size.
Besides the radial nodes (i.e., probability
density function is zero), the probability
density functions for the np and nd orbitals
are zero at the plane (s), passing through the
nucleus (origin). For example, in case of pz
orbital, xy-plane is a nodal plane, in case of dxy
orbital, there are two nodal planes passing
through the origin and bisecting the xy plane
containing z-axis. These are called angular
nodes and number of angular nodes are given
by ‘l’, i.e., one angular node for p orbitals, two
angular nodes for ‘d’ orbitals and so on. The
total number of nodes are given by (n–1),
i.e., sum of l angular nodes and (n – l – 1)
radial nodes.
2.6.3 Energies of Orbitals
The energy of an electron in a hydrogen atom
is determined solely by the principal quantum
Fig. 2.15 Boundary surface diagrams of the five
3d orbitals.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
number. Thus the energy of the orbitals in
hydrogen atom  increases as follows :
1s < 2s = 2p < 3s = 3p = 3d <4s = 4p = 4d
= 4f <
(2.23)
and is depicted in Fig. 2.16. Although the
shapes of 2s and 2p orbitals are different, an
electron has the same energy when it is in the
2s orbital as when it is present in 2p orbital.
The orbitals having the same energy are called
degenerate. The 1s orbital in a hydrogen
atom, as said earlier, corresponds to the most
stable condition and is called the ground state
and an electron residing in this orbital is most
strongly held by the nucleus. An electron in
the 2s, 2p or higher orbitals in a hydrogen atom
is in excited state.
The energy of an electron in a multi-
electron atom, unlike that of the hydrogen
atom, depends not only on its principal
quantum number (shell), but also on its
azimuthal quantum number (subshell). That
is, for a given principal quantum number, s,
p, d, f ... all have different energies. Within a
given principal quantum number, the energy
of orbitals increases in the order s<p<d<f. For
higher energy levels, these differences are
sufficiently pronounced and straggering of
orbital energy may result, e.g., 4s<3d and
6s<5d ;     4f<6p. The main reason for having
different energies of the subshells is the mutual
repulsion among the electrons in multi-
electron atoms. The only electrical interaction
present in hydrogen atom is the attraction
between the negatively charged electron and
the positively charged nucleus. In multi-
electron atoms, besides the presence of
attraction between the electron and nucleus,
there are repulsion terms between every
electron and other electrons present in the
atom. Thus the stability of an electron in a
multi-electron atom is because total attractive
interactions are more than the repulsive
interactions. In general, the repulsive
interaction of the electrons in the outer shell
with the electrons in the inner shell are more
important. On the other hand, the attractive
interactions of an electron increases with
increase of positive charge (Ze) on the nucleus.
Due to the presence of electrons in the inner
shells, the electron in the outer shell will not
experience the full positive charge of the
nucleus (Ze). The effect will be lowered due to
the partial screening of positive charge on the
nucleus by the inner shell electrons. This is
known as the shielding of the outer shell
electrons from the nucleus  by the inner
shell electrons, and the net positive charge
experienced by the outer electrons is known
as effective nuclear charge (Zeff e). Despite
the shielding of the outer electrons from the
nucleus by the inner shell electrons, the
attractive force experienced by the outer shell
electrons increases with increase of nuclear
charge. In other words, the energy of
interaction between, the nucleus and electron
Fig. 2.16 Energy level diagrams for the few
electronic shells of (a) hydrogen atom
and (b) multi-electronic atoms. Note that
orbitals for the same value of principal
quantum number, have the same
energies even for different azimuthal
quantum number for hydrogen atom.
In case of multi-electron atoms, orbitals
with same principal quantum number
possess different energies for different
azimuthal quantum numbers.
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
(that is orbital energy) decreases (that is
more negative) with the increase of atomic
number (Z ).
Both the attractive and repulsive
interactions depend upon the shell and shape
of the orbital in which the electron is present.
For example electrons present in spherical
shaped, s orbital shields the outer electrons
from the nucleus more effectively as compared
to electrons present in p orbital. Similarly
electrons present in p orbitals shield the outer
electrons from the nucleus more than the
electrons present in d orbitals, even though all
these orbitals are present in the same shell.
Further within a shell, due to spherical shape
of s orbital, the s orbital electron spends more
time close to the nucleus in comparison to p
orbital electron which spends more time in the
vicinity of nucleus in comparison to d orbital
electron. In other words, for a given shell
(principal quantum number), the Z eff
experienced by the electron decreases with
increase of azimuthal quantum number (l),
that is, the s orbital electron will be more tightly
bound to the nucleus than p orbital electron
which in turn will be better tightly bound than
the d orbital electron. The energy of electrons
in s orbital will be lower (more negative) than
that of p orbital electron which will have less
energy than that of d orbital electron and so
on. Since the extent of shielding from the
nucleus is different for electrons in different
orbitals, it leads to the splitting of energy levels
within the same shell (or same principal
quantum number), that is, energy of electron
in an orbital, as mentioned earlier, depends
upon the values of n and l. Mathematically,
the dependence of energies of the orbitals on n
and l are quite complicated but one simple rule
is that, the lower the value of (n + l) for an
orbital, the lower is its energy. If two
orbitals have the same value of (n + l), the
orbital with lower value of n will have the
lower energy. The Table 2.5 illustrates the (n
+ l ) rule and Fig. 2.16 depicts the energy levels
of multi-electrons atoms. It may be noted that
different subshells of a particular shell have
different energies in case of multi–electrons
atoms. However, in hydrogen atom, these have
the same energy. Lastly it may be mentioned
here that energies of the orbitals in the
same subshell decrease with increase in
the atomic number (Zeff). For example, energy
of 2s orbital of hydrogen atom is greater than
that of 2s orbital of lithium and that of lithium
is greater than that of sodium and so on, that
is, E2s(H) > E2s(Li) > E2s(Na) > E2s(K).
2.6.4 Filling of Orbitals in Atom
The filling of electrons into the orbitals of
different atoms takes place according to the
aufbau principle which is based on the Pauli’s
exclusion principle, the Hund’s rule of
maximum multiplicity and the relative
energies of the orbitals.
Aufbau Principle
The word ‘aufbau’ in German means ‘building
up’. The building up of orbitals means the
Table 2.5 Arrangement of Orbitals with
Increasing Energy on the Basis of
(n+l) Rule
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
filling up of orbitals with electrons. The
principle states : In the ground state of the
atoms, the orbitals are filled in order of
their increasing energies. In other words,
electrons first occupy the lowest energy orbital
available to them and enter into higher energy
orbitals only after the lower energy orbitals are
filled. As you have learnt above, energy of a
given orbital depends upon effective nuclear
charge and different type of orbitals are affected
to different extent. Thus, there is no single
ordering of energies of orbitals which will be
universally correct for all atoms.
However, following order of  energies of the
orbitals is extremely useful:
1s, 2s, 2p, 3s, 3p, 4s, 3d, 4p, 5s, 4d, 5p, 4f,
5d, 6p, 7s...
The order may be remembered by using
the method given in Fig. 2.17. Starting from
the top, the direction of the arrows gives the
order of filling of orbitals, that is starting from
right top to bottom left. With respect to
placement of outermost valence electrons, it is
remarkably accurate for all atoms. For
example, valence electron in potassium must
choose between 3d and 4s orbitals and as
predicted by this sequence, it is found in 4s
orbital. The above order should be assumed
to be a rough guide to the filling of energy
levels. In many cases, the orbitals are similar
in energy and small changes in atomic
structure may bring about a change in the
order of filling. Even then, the above series is a
useful guide to the building of the electronic
structure of an atom provided that it is
remembered that exceptions may occur.
Pauli Exclusion Principle
The number of electrons to be filled in various
orbitals is restricted by the exclusion principle,
given by the Austrian scientist Wolfgang Pauli
(1926). According to this principle : No two
electrons in an atom can have the same
set of four quantum numbers. Pauli
exclusion principle can also be stated as : “Only
two electrons may exist in the same orbital
and these electrons must have opposite
spin.” This means that the two electrons can
have the same value of three quantum numbers
n, l and ml, but must have the opposite spin
quantum number. The restriction imposed by
Pauli’s exclusion principle on the number of
electrons in an orbital helps in calculating the
capacity of electrons to be present in any
subshell. For example, subshell 1s comprises
one orbital and thus the maximum number of
electrons present in 1s subshell can be two, in
p and d subshells, the maximum number of
electrons can be 6 and 10 and so on. This can
be summed up as : the maximum number
of electrons in the shell with principal
quantum number n is equal to 2n2.
Hund’s Rule of Maximum Multiplicity
This rule deals with the filling of electrons into
the orbitals belonging to the same subshell
(that is, orbitals of equal energy, called
Fig.2.17  Order of filling of orbitals
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
degenerate orbitals). It states : pairing of
electrons in the orbitals belonging to the
same subshell (p, d or f) does not take place
until each orbital belonging to that
subshell has got one electron each i.e., it
is singly occupied.
Since there are three p, five d and seven f
orbitals, therefore, the pairing of electrons will
start in the p, d and f orbitals with the entry of
4th, 6th and 8th electron, respectively. It has
been observed that half filled and fully filled
degenerate set of orbitals acquire extra stability
due to their symmetry (see Section, 2.6.7).
2.6.5 Electronic Configuration of Atoms
The distribution of electrons into orbitals of an
atom is called its electronic configuration.
If one keeps in mind the basic rules which
govern the filling of different atomic orbitals,
the electronic configurations of different atoms
can be written very easily.
The electronic configuration of different
atoms can be represented in two ways. For
example :
pbdc ...... notation
Orbital diagram
In the first notation, the subshell is
represented by the respective letter symbol and
the number of electrons present in the subshell
is depicted, as the super script, like a, b, c, ...
etc. The similar subshell represented for
different shells is differentiated by writing the
principal quantum number before the
respective subshell. In the second notation
each orbital of the subshell is represented by
a box and the electron is represented by an
arrow (↑) a positive spin or an arrow (↓)  a
negative spin. The advantage of second notation
over the first is that it represents all the four
quantum numbers.
The hydrogen atom has only one electron
which goes in the orbital with the lowest
energy, namely 1s. The electronic
configuration of the hydrogen atom is 1s1
meaning that it has one electron in the 1s
orbital. The second electron in helium (He) can
also occupy the 1s orbital. Its configuration
is, therefore, 1s2. As mentioned above, the two
electrons differ from each other with opposite
spin, as can be seen from the orbital diagram.
The third electron of lithium (Li) is not
allowed in the 1s orbital because of Pauli
exclusion principle. It, therefore, takes the next
available choice, namely the 2s orbital. The
electronic configuration of Li is 1s22s1. The 2s
orbital can accommodate one more electron.
The configuration of beryllium (Be) atom is,
therefore, 1s2 2s2 (see Table 2.6, page 66 for
the electronic configurations of elements).
In the next six elements—boron
(B, 1s22s22p1), carbon (C, 1s22s22p2), nitrogen
(N, 1s22s22p3), oxygen (O, 1s22s22p4), fluorine
(F, 1s22s22p5) and neon (Ne, 1s22s22p6), the 2p
orbitals get progressively filled. This process
is completed with the neon atom. The orbital
picture of these elements can be represented
as follows :
The electronic configuration of the elements
sodium
(Na, 1s22s22p63s1)
argon
(Ar,1s22s22p63s23p6), follow exactly the same
pattern as the elements from lithium to neon
with the difference that the 3s and 3p orbitals
are getting filled now. This process can be
simplified if we represent the total number of
electrons in the first two shells by the name of
element neon (Ne). The electronic configuration
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
of the elements from sodium to argon can be
written as (Na, [Ne]3s1) to (Ar, [Ne] 3s23p6). The
electrons in the completely filled shells are
known as core electrons and the electrons that
are added to the electronic shell with the
highest principal quantum number are called
valence electrons. For example, the electrons
in Ne are the core electrons and the electrons
from Na to Ar are the valence electrons. In
potassium (K) and calcium (Ca), the 4s orbital,
being lower in energy than the 3d orbitals, is
occupied by one and two electrons respectively.
A new pattern is followed beginning with
scandium (Sc). The 3d orbital, being lower in
energy than the 4p orbital, is filled first.
Consequently, in the next ten elements,
scandium (Sc), titanium (Ti), vanadium (V),
chromium (Cr), manganese (Mn), iron (Fe),
cobalt (Co), nickel (Ni), copper (Cu) and zinc
(Zn), the five 3d orbitals are progressively
occupied. We may be puzzled by the fact that
chromium and copper have five and ten
electrons in 3d orbitals rather than four and
nine as their position would have indicated with
two-electrons in the 4s orbital. The reason is
that fully filled orbitals and half-filled orbitals
have extra stability (that is, lower energy). Thus
p3, p6, d5, d10,f 7, f14 etc. configurations, which
are either half-filled or fully filled, are more
stable. Chromium and copper therefore adopt
the d5 and d10 configuration (Section
2.6.7)[caution: exceptions do exist]
With the saturation of the 3d orbitals, the
filling of the 4p orbital starts at gallium (Ga)
and is complete at krypton (Kr). In the next
eighteen elements from rubidium (Rb) to xenon
(Xe), the pattern of filling the 5s, 4d and 5p
orbitals are similar to that of 4s, 3d and 4p
orbitals as discussed above. Then comes the
turn of the 6s orbital. In caesium (Cs) and the
barium (Ba), this orbital contains one and two
electrons, respectively. Then from lanthanum
(La) to mercury (Hg), the filling up of electrons
takes place in 4f and 5d orbitals. After this,
filling of 6p, then 7s and finally 5f and 6d
orbitals takes place. The elements after
uranium (U) are all short-lived and all of them
are produced artificially. The electronic
configurations of the known elements (as
determined by spectroscopic methods) are
tabulated in Table 2.6 (page 66).
One may ask what is the utility of knowing
the electron configuration? The modern
approach to the chemistry, infact, depends
almost entirely on electronic distribution to
understand and explain chemical behaviour.
For example, questions like why two or more
atoms combine to form molecules, why some
elements are metals while others are non-
metals, why elements like helium and argon
are not reactive but elements like the halogens
are reactive, find simple explanation from the
electronic configuration. These questions have
no answer in the Daltonian model of atom. A
detailed understanding of the electronic
structure of atom is, therefore, very essential
for getting an insight into the various aspects
of modern chemical knowledge.
2.6.6 Stability of Completely Filled and
Half Filled Subshells
The ground state electronic configuration of the
atom of an element always corresponds to the
state of the lowest total electronic energy. The
electronic configurations of most of the atoms
follow the basic rules given in Section 2.6.5.
However, in certain elements such as Cu, or
Cr, where the two subshells (4s and 3d) differ
slightly in their energies, an electron shifts from
a subshell of lower energy (4s) to a subshell of
higher energy (3d), provided such a shift
results in all orbitals of the subshell of higher
energy getting either completely filled or half
filled. The valence electronic configurations of
Cr and Cu, therefore, are 3d5 4s1 and 3d10 4s1
respectively and not 3d4 4s2 and 3d9 4s2. It has
been found that there is extra stability
associated with these electronic configurations.
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
The completely filled and completely
half-filled subshells are stable due to
the following reasons:
1.Symmetrical distribution of
electrons: It is well known that symmetry
leads to stability. The completely filled or
half filled subshells have symmetrical
distribution of electrons in them and are
therefore more stable. Electrons in the
same subshell (here 3d) have equal energy
but different spatial distribution.
Consequently, their shielding of one-
another is relatively small and the
electrons are more strongly attracted by
the nucleus.
2. Exchange Energy : The stabilizing
effect arises whenever two or more
electrons with the same spin are present
in the degenerate orbitals of a subshell.
These electrons tend to exchange their
positions and the energy released due to
this exchange is called exchange energy.
The number of exchanges that can take
place is maximum when the subshell is
either half filled or completely filled (Fig.
2.18). As a result the exchange energy is
maximum and so is the stability.
You may note that the exchange
energy is at the basis of Hund’s rule that
electrons which enter orbitals of equal
energy have parallel spins as far as
possible. In other words, the extra
stability of half-filled and completely filled
subshell is  due to: (i) relatively small
shielding, (ii) smaller coulombic repulsion
energy, and (iii) larger exchange energy.
Details about the exchange energy will be
dealt with in higher classes.
Fig. 2.18
Possible exchange for a d5
configuration
Causes of Stability of Completely Filled and Half-filled Subshells
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Table 2.6  Electronic Configurations of the Elements
* Elements with exceptional electronic configurations
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
** Elements with atomic number 112 and above have been reported but not yet fully authenticated and named.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
SUMMARY
Atoms are the building blocks of elements. They are the smallest parts of an element
that chemically react. The first atomic theory, proposed by John Dalton in 1808, regarded
atom as the ultimate indivisible particle of matter. Towards the end of the nineteenth
century, it was proved experimentally that atoms are divisible and consist of three
fundamental particles: electrons, protons and neutrons. The discovery of sub-atomic
particles led to the proposal of various atomic models to explain the structure of atom.
Thomson in 1898 proposed that an atom consists of uniform sphere of positive electricity
with electrons embedded into it. This model in which mass of the atom is considered to be
evenly spread over the atom was proved wrong by Rutherford’s famous alpha-particle
scattering experiment in 1909. Rutherford concluded that atom is made of a tiny positively
charged nucleus, at its centre with electrons revolving around it in circular orbits.
Rutherford model, which resembles the solar system, was no doubt an improvement over
Thomson model but it could not account for the stability of the atom i.e., why the electron
does not fall into the nucleus. Further, it was also silent about the electronic structure of
atoms i.e., about the distribution and relative energies of electrons around the nucleus.
The difficulties of the Rutherford model were overcome by Niels Bohr in 1913 in his model
of the hydrogen atom. Bohr postulated that electron moves around the nucleus in circular
orbits. Only certain orbits can exist and each orbit corresponds to a specific energy. Bohr
calculated the energy of electron in various orbits and for each orbit predicted the distance
between the electron and nucleus. Bohr model, though offering a satisfactory model for
explaining the spectra of the hydrogen atom, could not explain the spectra of multi-electron
atoms. The reason for this was soon discovered. In Bohr model, an electron is regarded as
a charged particle moving  in a well defined circular orbit about the nucleus. The wave
character of the electron is ignored in Bohr’s theory. An orbit is a clearly defined path and
this path can completely be defined only if both the exact position and the exact velocity of
the electron at the same time are known. This is not possible according to the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle. Bohr model of the hydrogen atom, therefore, not only ignores the
dual behaviour of electron but also contradicts Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
Erwin Schrödinger, in 1926, proposed an equation called Schrödinger equation to describe
the electron distributions in space and the allowed energy levels in atoms. This equation
incorporates de Broglie’s concept of wave-particle duality and is consistent with Heisenberg
uncertainty principle. When Schrödinger equation is solved for the electron in a hydrogen
atom, the solution gives the possible energy states the electron can occupy [and the
corresponding wave function(s) (ψ) (which in fact are the mathematical functions) of the
electron associated with each energy state]. These quantized energy states and corresponding
wave functions which are characterized by a set of three quantum numbers (principal
quantum number n, azimuthal quantum number l and magnetic quantum number ml)
arise as a natural consequence in the solution of the Schrödinger equation. The restrictions
on the values of these three quantum numbers also come naturally from this solution. The
quantum mechanical model of the hydrogen atom successfully predicts all aspects of the
hydrogen atom spectrum including some phenomena that could not be explained by the
Bohr model.
According to the quantum mechanical model of the atom, the electron distribution of an
atom containing a number of electrons is divided into shells. The shells, in turn, are thought
to consist of one or more subshells and subshells are assumed to be composed of one or
more orbitals, which the electrons occupy. While for hydrogen and hydrogen like systems
(such as He
+, Li
2+ etc.) all the orbitals within a given shell have same energy, the energy of
the orbitals in a multi-electron atom depends upon the values of n and l: The lower the
value of (n + l ) for an orbital, the lower is its energy. If two orbitals have the same (n + l )
value, the orbital with lower value of n has the lower energy. In an atom many such orbitals
are possible and electrons are filled in those orbitals in order of increasing energy in
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
accordance with Pauli exclusion principle (no two electrons in an atom can have the
same set of four quantum numbers) and Hund’s rule of maximum multiplicity (pairing
of electrons in the orbitals belonging to the same subshell does not take place until
each orbital belonging to that subshell has got one electron each, i.e., is singly occupied).
This forms the basis of the electronic structure of atoms.
EXERCISES
Calculate the number of electrons which will together weigh one gram.
Calculate the mass and charge  of one mole of electrons.
Calculate the total number of electrons present in one mole of methane.
Find (a) the total number and (b) the total  mass of neutrons in 7 mg of
(Assume that mass of a neutron = 1.675 × 10
–27 kg).
(iii)
Find (a) the total number and (b) the total mass of protons in 34 mg of NH3 at
Will the answer change if  the temperature and pressure are changed ?
How many neutrons and protons are there in the following nuclei ?
Write the complete symbol for the atom with the given atomic number (Z) and
atomic mass (A)
Z = 17 ,  A = 35.
Z = 92 ,  A = 233.
(iii) Z =  4 ,   A =  9.
Yellow light emitted from a sodium lamp has a wavelength (λ) of 580 nm. Calculate
the frequency (ν) and wavenumber (ν ) of the yellow light.
Find energy of each of the photons which
correspond to light of frequency 3×10
15 Hz.
have wavelength of 0.50 Å.
Calculate the wavelength, frequency and wavenumber of a light wave whose period
is 2.0 × 10
–10 s.
What is the number of photons of light with a wavelength of 4000 pm that provide
1J of energy?
A photon of wavelength 4 × 10
–7 m strikes on metal surface, the work function of
the metal being 2.13 eV. Calculate (i) the energy of the photon (eV), (ii) the kinetic
energy of the emission, and (iii) the velocity of the photoelectron
(1 eV= 1.6020 × 10
–19 J).
Electromagnetic radiation of wavelength 242 nm is just sufficient to ionise the
sodium atom. Calculate the ionisation energy of sodium in kJ mol
A 25 watt bulb emits monochromatic yellow light of  wavelength of  0.57µm.
Calculate the rate of emission of quanta per second.
Electrons are emitted with zero velocity from a metal surface when it is exposed to
radiation of wavelength 6800 Å. Calculate threshold frequency (ν0 ) and work function
(W0 ) of the metal.
What is the wavelength of light emitted when the electron in a hydrogen atom
undergoes transition from an energy level with n = 4 to an energy level with n = 2?
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
How much energy is required to ionise a H atom if  the electron occupies n = 5
orbit? Compare your answer with the ionization enthalpy of H atom ( energy required
to remove  the electron from n =1 orbit).
What is the maximum number of emission lines when the excited electron of a
H atom in n = 6 drops to the ground state?
The energy associated with the first orbit in the hydrogen atom is
–2.18 × 10
–18 J atom
–1. What is the energy associated with the fifth orbit?
Calculate the radius of Bohr’s fifth orbit for hydrogen atom.
Calculate the wavenumber for the longest wavelength transition in the Balmer
series of atomic hydrogen.
What is the energy in joules, required to shift the electron of the hydrogen atom
from the first Bohr orbit to the fifth Bohr orbit and what is the wavelength of the
light emitted when the electron returns to the ground state? The ground state
electron energy is –2.18 × 10
–11 ergs.
The electron energy in hydrogen atom is given by En = (–2.18 × 10
–18 )/n
2 J. Calculate
the  energy required to remove an electron completely from the n = 2 orbit. What is
the longest wavelength of light in cm that can be used to cause this transition?
Calculate the wavelength of an electron moving with a velocity of 2.05 × 10
7 m s
The mass of an electron is 9.1 × 10
–31 kg. If its K.E. is 3.0 × 10
–25 J, calculate its
wavelength.
Which of the following are isoelectronic species  i.e., those having the same number
of electrons?
+, Mg
2+, Ca
2+, S
2–, Ar.
Write the electronic configurations of the following ions: (a) H
– (b) Na
+ (c) O
(d) F
What are the atomic numbers of elements whose outermost electrons are
represented by (a) 3s
1 (b) 2p
3 and (c) 3p
(iii) Which atoms are indicated by the following configurations ?
(a) [He] 2s
1  (b) [Ne] 3s
3  (c) [Ar] 4s
What is the lowest value of n that allows g orbitals to exist?
An electron is in one of the 3d orbitals. Give the possible values of n, l  and ml for
this electron.
An atom of an element contains 29 electrons and 35 neutrons. Deduce (i) the
number of protons and (ii) the electronic configuration of the element.
Give the number of electrons in the species
An atomic orbital has n = 3. What are the possible values of l and ml ?
List the quantum numbers (ml  and l ) of electrons for 3d orbital.
(iii) Which of the following orbitals are possible?
1p, 2s, 2p and 3f
Using s, p, d notations, describe the orbital with the following quantum numbers.
(a) n=1, l=0; (b) n = 3; l=1 (c) n = 4; l =2; (d) n=4; l=3.
Explain, giving reasons, which of the following sets of quantum numbers are not
possible.
n = 0,
l = 0,
ml  =   0,
ms = + ½
n = 1,
l = 0,
ml  =   0,
ms = – ½
n = 1,
l = 1,
ml  =   0,
ms = + ½
n = 2,
l = 1,
ml  =   0,
ms = – ½
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
n = 3,
l = 3,
ml  = –3,
ms = + ½
n = 3,
l = 1,
ml  =   0,
ms = + ½
How many electrons in an atom may have the following quantum numbers?
(a)  n = 4, ms = – ½
(b)  n = 3, l = 0
Show that the circumference of the Bohr orbit for the hydrogen atom is an integral
multiple of the de Broglie wavelength associated with the electron revolving around
the orbit.
What transition in the hydrogen spectrum would have the same wavelength as the
Balmer transition n = 4 to n = 2 of  He
+ spectrum ?
Calculate the energy required for the process
+ (g) g He
2+ (g) + e
The ionization energy for the H atom  in the ground state is  2.18 × 10
–18 J atom
If the diameter of a carbon atom is 0.15 nm, calculate the number of carbon atoms
which can be placed side by side in a straight line across length of scale of  length
20 cm long.
2 ×10
8 atoms of carbon are arranged side by side. Calculate the radius of carbon
atom if the length of this arrangement is 2.4 cm.
The diameter of zinc atom is 2.6 Å.Calculate (a) radius of zinc atom in pm and (b)
number of atoms present in a length of 1.6 cm if the zinc atoms are arranged side
by side lengthwise.
A certain particle carries 2.5 × 10
–16C of static electric charge. Calculate the number
of electrons present in it.
In Milikan’s experiment, static electric charge on the oil drops has been obtained
by shining X-rays. If the static electric charge on the oil drop is –1.282 × 10
–18C,
calculate the number of electrons present on it.
In Rutherford’s experiment, generally the thin foil of heavy atoms, like gold, platinum
etc. have been used to be bombarded by the α-particles. If the thin foil of light
atoms like aluminium etc. is used, what difference would be observed from the
above results ?
Symbols 35
79Br  and
79Br can be written, whereas symbols 79
35Br  and
35Br are not
acceptable. Answer briefly.
An element with mass number 81 contains 31.7% more neutrons as compared to
protons. Assign the atomic symbol.
An ion with mass number 37 possesses one unit of negative charge. If the ion
conatins 11.1% more neutrons than the electrons, find the symbol of the ion.
An ion with mass number 56 contains 3 units of positive charge and 30.4% more
neutrons than electrons. Assign the symbol to this ion.
Arrange the following type of radiations in increasing order of frequency: (a) radiation
from microwave oven (b) amber light from traffic signal (c) radiation from FM radio
(d) cosmic rays from outer space and (e) X-rays.
Nitrogen laser produces a radiation at a wavelength of 337.1 nm. If the number of
photons emitted is 5.6 × 10
24, calculate the power of this laser.
Neon gas is generally used in the sign boards. If it emits strongly at 616 nm,
calculate (a) the frequency of emission, (b) distance traveled by this radiation in
30 s  (c) energy of quantum and (d) number of quanta present if it produces 2 J of
energy.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
In astronomical observations, signals observed from the distant stars are
generally weak. If the photon detector receives a total of 3.15 × 10
–18 J from the
radiations of 600 nm, calculate the number of photons received by the detector.
Lifetimes of the molecules in the excited states are often measured by using
pulsed radiation source of duration nearly in the nano second range. If the
radiation source has the duration of 2 ns and the number of photons emitted
during the pulse source is 2.5 × 10
15, calculate the energy of the source.
The longest wavelength doublet absorption transition is observed at 589 and
589.6 nm. Calcualte the frequency of each transition and energy difference
between two excited states.
The work function for caesium atom is 1.9 eV. Calculate (a) the threshold
wavelength and (b) the threshold frequency of the radiation. If the caesium
element is irradiated with a wavelength 500 nm, calculate the kinetic energy
and the velocity of the ejected photoelectron.
Following results are observed when sodium metal is irradiated with different
wavelengths. Calculate (a) threshold wavelength and, (b) Planck’s constant.
λ (nm)
v × 10
–5 (cm s
The ejection of the photoelectron from the silver metal in the photoelectric effect
experiment can be stopped by applying the voltage of 0.35 V when the radiation
256.7 nm is used. Calculate the work function for silver metal.
If the photon of the wavelength 150 pm strikes an atom and one of tis inner bound
electrons is ejected out with a velocity of 1.5 × 10
7 m s
–1, calculate the energy with
which it is bound to the nucleus.
Emission transitions in the Paschen series end at orbit n = 3 and start from orbit n
and can be represeted as v = 3.29 × 10
15 (Hz) [ 1/3
2 – 1/n
Calculate the value of n if the transition is observed at 1285 nm. Find the region of
the spectrum.
Calculate the wavelength for the emission transition if it starts from the orbit having
radius 1.3225 nm and ends at 211.6 pm. Name the series to which this transition
belongs and the region of the spectrum.
Dual behaviour of matter proposed by de Broglie led to the discovery of electron
microscope often used for the highly magnified images of biological molecules and
other type of material. If the velocity of the electron in this microscope is 1.6 × 10
–1, calculate de Broglie wavelength associated with this electron.
Similar to electron diffraction, neutron diffraction microscope is also used for the
determination of the structure of molecules. If the wavelength used here is 800 pm,
calculate the characteristic velocity associated with the neutron.
If the velocity of the electron in Bohr’s first orbit is 2.19 × 10
–1, calculate the
de Broglie wavelength associated with it.
The velocity associated with a proton moving in a potential difference of 1000 V is
4.37 × 10
–1. If the hockey ball of mass 0.1 kg is moving with this velocity,
calcualte the wavelength associated with this velocity.
If the position of the electron is measured within an accuracy of + 0.002 nm, calculate
the uncertainty in the momentum of the electron. Suppose the momentum of the
electron is h/4πm × 0.05 nm, is there any problem in defining this value.
The quantum numbers of six electrons are given below. Arrange them in order of
increasing energies. If any of these combination(s) has/have the same energy lists:
n = 4, l = 2, ml = –2 , ms = –1/2
n = 3, l = 2, ml = 1 , ms = +1/2
2018-19
STRUCTURE OF ATOM
n = 4, l = 1, ml = 0 , ms = +1/2
n = 3, l = 2, ml = –2 , ms = –1/2
n = 3, l = 1, ml = –1 , ms = +1/2
n = 4, l = 1, ml = 0 , ms = +1/2
The bromine atom possesses 35 electrons. It contains 6 electrons in 2p orbital,
6 electrons in 3p orbital and 5 electron in 4p orbital. Which of these electron
experiences the lowest effective nuclear charge ?
Among the following pairs of orbitals which orbital will experience the larger effective
nuclear charge? (i) 2s and 3s, (ii) 4d and 4f, (iii) 3d and 3p.
The unpaired electrons in Al and Si are present in 3p orbital. Which electrons will
experience more effective nuclear charge from the nucleus ?
Indicate the number of unpaired electrons in : (a) P, (b) Si, (c) Cr, (d) Fe and (e) Kr.
(a) How many subshells are associated with n = 4 ? (b) How many electrons will
be present in the subshells having ms value of –1/2 for n = 4 ?
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
The Periodic Table is arguably the most important concept in
chemistry, both in principle and in practice. It is the everyday
support for students, it suggests new avenues of research to
professionals, and it provides a succinct organization of the
whole of chemistry. It is a remarkable demonstration of the
fact that the chemical elements are not a random cluster of
entities but instead display trends and lie together in families.
An awareness of the Periodic Table is essential to anyone who
wishes to disentangle the world and see how it is built up
from the fundamental building blocks of the chemistry, the
chemical elements.
Glenn T. Seaborg
In this Unit, we will study the historical development of the
Periodic Table as it stands today and the Modern Periodic
Law. We will also learn how the periodic classification
follows as a logical consequence of the electronic
configuration of atoms. Finally, we shall examine some of
the periodic trends in the physical and chemical properties
of the elements.
3.1 WHY DO WE NEED TO CLASSIFY ELEMENTS ?
We know by now that the elements are the basic units of all
types of matter. In 1800, only 31 elements were known. By
1865, the number of identified elements had more than
doubled to 63. At present 114 elements are known. Of
them, the recently discovered elements are man-made.
Efforts to synthesise new elements are continuing. With
such a large number of elements it is very difficult to study
individually the chemistry of all these elements and their
innumerable compounds individually. To ease out this
problem, scientists searched for a systematic way to
organise their knowledge by classifying the elements. Not
only that it would rationalize known chemical facts about
elements, but even predict new ones for undertaking further
study.
UNIT 3
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
appreciate how the concept of
grouping elements in accordance to
their properties led to the
development of Periodic Table.
understand  the Periodic Law;
understand the  significance of
atomic number and electronic
configuration as the basis for
periodic classification;
elements
Z >100 according to IUPAC
nomenclature;
classify elements into s, p, d, f
blocks and learn their main
characteristics;
recognise the periodic trends in
physical and chemical properties of
elements;
compare the reactivity of elements
and correlate it with their
occurrence in nature;
explain the relationship  between
ionization enthalpy and metallic
character;
use  scientific  vocabulary
appropriately to communicate ideas
related to certain important
properties  of atoms e.g., atomic/
ionic radii, ionization enthalpy,
electron
enthalpy,
electronegativity, valence of
elements.
CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS AND
PERIODICITY IN PROPERTIES
2018-19
CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS AND PERIODICITY IN PROPERTIES
3.2 GENESIS OF PERIODIC
CLASSIFICATION
Classification of elements into groups and
development of Periodic Law and Periodic
Table are the consequences of systematising
the knowledge gained by a number of scientists
through their observations and experiments.
The German chemist, Johann Dobereiner in
early 1800’s was the first to consider the idea
of trends among properties of elements. By
1829 he noted a similarity among the physical
and chemical properties of several groups  of
three elements (Triads). In each case, he
noticed that the middle  element  of each of the
Triads had an atomic weight about half way
between the atomic weights of the other two
(Table 3.1). Also the properties of the middle
element were in between those of the other
two members. Since Dobereiner’s relationship,
referred to as the Law of Triads, seemed to
work only for a few elements, it was  dismissed
as coincidence. The next reported attempt to
classify elements was made by a French
geologist, A.E.B. de Chancourtois in 1862. He
arranged the then known elements in order of
increasing atomic weights and made a
cylindrical table of elements to display the
periodic recurrence of properties. This also did
not attract much attention. The English
chemist, John Alexander Newlands in 1865
profounded the Law of Octaves. He arranged
the elements in increasing order of their atomic
weights and noted that every eighth element
had properties similar to the first element
(Table 3.2). The relationship was just like   every
eighth note that resembles the first in octaves
of music. Newlands’s Law of Octaves seemed
to be true only for elements up to calcium.
Although his idea was not widely accepted at
that time, he, for his work, was later awarded
Davy Medal in 1887 by the Royal Society,
London.
The Periodic Law, as we know it today owes
its development to the Russian chemist, Dmitri
Mendeleev (1834-1907) and the German
chemist, Lothar Meyer (1830-1895). Working
independently, both the chemists in 1869
proposed that on arranging elements in the
increasing order of their atomic weights,
similarities appear in physical and chemical
properties at regular intervals. Lothar Meyer
plotted the physical properties such as atomic
volume, melting point and boiling point
against atomic weight and obtained a
periodically repeated pattern. Unlike
Newlands, Lothar Meyer observed a change in
length of that repeating pattern. By 1868,
Lothar Meyer had developed a table of the
Element
Atomic
Element
Atomic
Element
Atomic
weight
weight
weight
Table 3.1  Dobereiner’s Triads
Table 3.2  Newlands’ Octaves
Element
At. wt.
Element
At. wt.
Element
At. wt.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
elements that closely resembles the Modern
Periodic Table. However, his work was not
published until after the work of Dmitri
Mendeleev, the scientist who is generally
credited with the development of the Modern
Periodic Table.
While Dobereiner initiated the study of
periodic relationship, it was Mendeleev who
was responsible for publishing the Periodic
Law for the first time. It states as follows :
The properties of the elements are a
periodic function of their atomic
weights.
Mendeleev arranged elements in horizontal
rows and vertical columns of a table in order
of their increasing atomic weights in such a
way that the elements with similar properties
occupied the same vertical column or group.
Mendeleev’s system of classifying elements was
more elaborate than that of Lothar Meyer’s.
He fully recognized the significance of
periodicity and used broader range of physical
and chemical properties to classify the
elements. In particular, Mendeleev relied on
the similarities in the empirical formulas and
properties of the compounds formed by the
elements. He realized that some of the elements
did not fit in with his scheme of classification
if the order of atomic weight was strictly
followed. He ignored the order of atomic
weights, thinking that the atomic
measurements might be incorrect, and placed
the elements with similar properties together.
For example, iodine with lower atomic weight
than that of tellurium (Group VI) was placed
in Group VII along with fluorine, chlorine,
bromine because of similarities in properties
(Fig. 3.1). At the same time, keeping his
primary aim of arranging the elements of
similar properties in the same group, he
proposed that some of the elements were still
undiscovered and, therefore, left several gaps
in the table. For example, both gallium and
germanium were unknown at the time
Mendeleev published his Periodic Table. He left
the gap under aluminium and a gap under
silicon, and called these elements Eka-
Aluminium and Eka-Silicon. Mendeleev
predicted not only the existence of gallium and
germanium, but also described some of their
general physical properties.  These elements
were discovered later. Some of the properties
predicted by Mendeleev for these elements and
those found experimentally are listed in
Table 3.3.
The boldness of Mendeleev’s quantitative
predictions and their eventual success made
him and his Periodic Table famous.
Mendeleev’s Periodic Table published in 1905
is shown in Fig. 3.1.
Property
Eka-aluminium
Gallium
Eka-silicon
Germanium
(predicted)
(found)
(predicted)
(found)
Atomic weight
Density / (g/cm3)
Melting point /K
302.93
Formula of oxide
Ga2O3
Formula of chloride
GaCl3
GeCl4
Table 3.3
Mendeleev’s Predictions for the Elements Eka-aluminium (Gallium) and
Eka-silicon (Germanium)
2018-19
CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS AND PERIODICITY IN PROPERTIES
PERIODIC SYSTEM OF THE ELEMENTS IN GROUPS AND SERIES
Fig. 3.1  Mendeleev’s Periodic Table published earlier
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Dmitri Mendeleev was born in Tobalsk, Siberia in Russia. After his
father’s  death,  the  family  moved  to  St.  Petersburg. He received his
Master’s degree in Chemistry in 1856  and  the doctoral  degree  in
1865.   He  taught  at the University of St.Petersburg where he was
appointed  Professor of General Chemistry in 1867.  Preliminary work
for his great textbook “Principles of  Chemistry”  led  Mendeleev  to
propose  the Periodic Law and  to construct his Periodic Table of
elements. At  that  time,  the  structure  of  atom  was  unknown  and
Mendeleev’s  idea  to  consider  that  the  properties  of  the elements
were in someway related to their atomic masses was a very
imaginative one.  To place certain elements into the correct group from
the point of view of their chemical properties, Mendeleev reversed the
order of some pairs of elements and asserted that their atomic masses
were incorrect.  Mendeleev also had the foresight to leave gaps in the Periodic Table for
elements unknown at that time and predict their properties from the trends that he observed
among the properties of related elements. Mendeleev’s predictions were proved to be
astonishingly correct when these elements were discovered later.
Mendeleev’s Periodic Law spurred several areas of research during the subsequent
decades.  The discovery of the first two noble gases helium and argon in 1890 suggested
the possibility that there must be other similar elements to fill an entire family.  This idea
led Ramsay to his successful search for krypton and xenon. Work on the radioactive decay
series for uranium and thorium in the early years of twentieth century  was also guided by
the Periodic Table.
Mendeleev was a versatile genius.  He worked on many problems connected with
Russia’s natural resources.  He invented an accurate barometer.  In 1890, he resigned from
the Professorship.  He was appointed as the Director of the Bureau of Weights  and Measures.
He continued to carry out important research work in many areas until his death in 1907.
You will notice from the modern Period Table (Fig. 3.2) that Mendeleev’s name has
been immortalized by naming the element with atomic number 101, as Mendelevium.  This
name was proposed by American scientist Glenn T. Seaborg, the discoverer of this element,
“in recognition of the pioneering role of the great Russian Chemist who was the first to use
the periodic system of elements to predict the chemical properties of undiscovered elements,
a principle which has been the key to the discovery of nearly all the transuranium elements”.
Dmitri  Ivanovich
Mendeleev
(1834-1907)
2018-19
CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS AND PERIODICITY IN PROPERTIES
3.3 MODERN PERIODIC LAW AND THE
PRESENT FORM OF THE PERIODIC
TABLE
We must bear in mind that when Mendeleev
developed his Periodic Table, chemists knew
nothing about the internal structure of atom.
However, the beginning of the 20th century
witnessed profound developments in theories
about sub-atomic particles. In 1913, the
English physicist, Henry Moseley observed
regularities in the characteristic X-ray spectra
of the elements. A plot of
ν  (whereν is
frequency of X-rays emitted) against atomic
number (Z ) gave a straight line and not the
plot of ν  vs atomic mass. He thereby  showed
that the atomic number is a more fundamental
property of an element than its atomic mass.
Mendeleev’s Periodic Law was, therefore,
accordingly modified. This is known as the
Modern Periodic Law and can be stated as :
The physical and chemical properties
of the elements are periodic functions
of their atomic numbers.
The Periodic Law revealed important
analogies among the 94 naturally occurring
elements (neptunium and plutonium like
actinium and protoactinium are also found in
pitch blende – an ore of uranium). It stimulated
renewed interest in Inorganic Chemistry and
has carried into the present with the creation
of artificially produced short-lived elements.
You may recall that the atomic number is
equal to the nuclear charge (i.e., number of
protons) or the number of electrons in a neutral
atom. It is then easy to visualize the significance
of quantum numbers and electronic
configurations in periodicity of elements. In
fact, it is now recognized that the Periodic Law
is essentially the consequence of the periodic
variation in electronic configurations, which
indeed determine the physical and chemical
properties of elements and their compounds.
Numerous forms of Periodic Table have
been devised from time to time. Some forms
emphasise chemical reactions and valence,
whereas others stress the electronic
configuration of elements. A modern version,
the so-called “long form” of the Periodic Table
of the elements (Fig. 3.2), is the most convenient
and widely used. The horizontal rows (which
Mendeleev called series) are called periods and
the vertical columns, groups. Elements having
similar outer electronic configurations in their
atoms are arranged in vertical columns,
referred to as groups or families. According
to the recommendation of International Union
of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), the
groups are numbered from 1 to 18 replacing
the older notation of groups IA …  VIIA, VIII, IB
…  VIIB and 0.
There are altogether seven periods. The
period number corresponds to the highest
principal quantum number (n) of the elements
in the period. The first period contains 2
elements. The subsequent periods consists of
8, 8, 18, 18 and 32 elements, respectively. The
seventh period is incomplete and like the sixth
period would have a theoretical maximum (on
the basis of quantum numbers) of 32 elements.
In this form of the Periodic Table, 14 elements
of both sixth and seventh periods (lanthanoids
and actinoids, respectively) are placed in
separate panels at the bottom*.
3.4 NOMENCLATURE OF ELEMENTS WITH
ATOMIC NUMBERS > 100
The naming of the new elements had been
traditionally the privilege of the discoverer (or
discoverers) and the suggested name was
ratified by the IUPAC. In recent years this has
led to some controversy. The new elements with
very high atomic numbers are so unstable that
only minute quantities, sometimes only a few
atoms of them are obtained. Their synthesis
and characterisation, therefore, require highly
* Glenn T. Seaborg’s work in the middle of the 20th century starting with the discovery of plutonium in 1940, followed by
those of all the transuranium elements from 94 to 102 led to reconfiguration of the periodic table placing the actinoids
below the lanthanoids. In 1951, Seaborg was awarded the Nobel Prize in chemistry for his work. Element 106 has been
named Seaborgium (Sg) in his honour.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Fig. 3.2  Long form of the Periodic Table of the Elements with their atomic numbers and ground state outer
electronic configurations. The groups are numbered 1-18 in accordance with the 1984 IUPAC
recommendations. This notation replaces the old numbering scheme of  IA–VIIA, VIII, IB–VIIB and 0 for
the elements.
2018-19
CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS AND PERIODICITY IN PROPERTIES
sophisticated costly equipment and laboratory.
Such work is carried out with competitive spirit
only in some laboratories in the world.
Scientists, before collecting the reliable data on
the new element, at times get tempted to claim
for its discovery. For example, both American
and Soviet scientists claimed credit for
discovering element 104. The Americans
named it Rutherfordium whereas Soviets
named it Kurchatovium. To avoid such
problems,
IUPAC
recommendation that until a new element’s
discovery is proved, and its name is officially
recognised, a systematic nomenclature be
derived directly from the atomic number of the
element using the numerical roots for 0 and
numbers 1-9. These are shown in Table 3.4.
The roots are put together in order of digits
Atomic
Name according to
Symbol
IUPAC
IUPAC
Number
IUPAC nomenclature
Official Name
Symbol
Unnilunium
Mendelevium
Unnilbium
Nobelium
Unniltrium
Lawrencium
Unnilquadium
Rutherfordium
Unnilpentium
Dubnium
Unnilhexium
Seaborgium
Unnilseptium
Bohrium
Unniloctium
Hassium
Unnilennium
Meitnerium
Ununnillium
Darmstadtium
Unununnium
Rontgenium
Ununbium
Copernicium
Ununtrium
Nihonium
Ununquadium
Flerovium
Ununpentium
Moscovium
Ununhexium
Livermorium
Ununseptium
Tennessine
Ununoctium
Oganesson
Table 3.5  Nomenclature of Elements with Atomic Number Above 100
Table 3.4
Notation for IUPAC Nomenclature
of Elements
which make up the atomic number and “ium”
is added at the end. The IUPAC names for
elements with Z above 100 are shown in
Table 3.5.
Digit
Abbreviation
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Thus, the new element first gets a
temporary name, with symbol consisting of
three letters. Later permanent name and
symbol are given by a vote of IUPAC
representatives from each country. The
permanent name might reflect the country (or
state of the country) in which the element was
discovered, or pay tribute to a notable
scientist. As of now, elements with atomic
numbers up to 118 have been discovered.
Official names of all elements have been
announced by IUPAC.
Problem 3.1
What would be the IUPAC name and
symbol for the element with atomic
number 120?
Solution
From Table 3.4, the roots for 1, 2 and 0
are un, bi and nil, respectively. Hence, the
symbol and the name respectively are Ubn
and unbinilium.
3.5 ELECTRONIC CONFIGURATIONS OF
ELEMENTS AND THE PERIODIC
TABLE
In the preceding unit we have learnt that an
electron in an atom is characterised by a set of
four quantum numbers, and the principal
quantum number (n ) defines the main energy
level known as shell. We have also studied
about the filling of electrons into different
subshells, also referred to as orbitals (s, p, d,
f ) in an atom. The distribution of electrons into
orbitals of an atom is called its electronic
configuration. An element’s location in the
Periodic Table reflects the quantum numbers
of the last orbital filled. In this section we will
observe a direct connection between the
electronic configurations of the elements and
the long form of the Periodic Table.
(a)  Electronic Configurations in Periods
The period indicates the value of n for the
outermost or valence shell. In other words,
successive period in the Periodic Table is
associated with the filling of the next higher
principal energy level (n = 1, n = 2, etc.). It can
be readily seen that the number of elements in
each period is twice the number of atomic
orbitals available in the energy level that is
being filled. The first period (n = 1) starts with
the filling of the lowest level (1s) and therefore
has two elements — hydrogen (ls1) and helium
(ls2) when the first shell (K) is completed. The
second period (n = 2) starts with lithium and
the third electron enters the 2s orbital. The next
element, beryllium has four electrons and has
the electronic configuration 1s
2. Starting
from the next element boron, the 2p orbitals
are filled with electrons when the L shell is
completed at neon (2s
22p6). Thus there are
8 elements in the second period. The third
period (n = 3) begins at sodium, and the added
electron enters a 3s orbital. Successive filling
of 3s and 3p orbitals gives rise to the third
period of 8 elements from sodium to argon. The
fourth period (n = 4) starts at potassium, and
the added electrons fill up the 4s orbital. Now
you may note that before the 4p orbital is filled,
filling up of 3d orbitals becomes energetically
favourable and we come across the so called
3d transition series of elements. This starts
from scandium (Z = 21) which has the electronic
configuration 3d
2. The 3d orbitals are filled
at zinc (Z=30) with electronic configuration
2 . The fourth period ends at krypton
with the filling up of the 4p orbitals. Altogether
we have 18 elements in this fourth period. The
fifth period (n = 5) beginning with rubidium is
similar to the fourth period and contains the
4d transition series starting at yttrium
(Z = 39). This period ends at xenon with the
filling up of the 5p orbitals. The sixth period
(n = 6) contains 32 elements and successive
electrons enter 6s, 4f, 5d and 6p orbitals, in
the order — filling up of the 4f orbitals begins
with cerium (Z = 58) and ends at lutetium
(Z = 71) to give the 4f-inner transition series
which is called the lanthanoid series. The
seventh period (n = 7) is similar to the sixth
period with the successive filling up of the 7s,
5f, 6d and 7p orbitals and includes most of
the man-made radioactive elements. This
period will end at the element with atomic
number 118 which would belong to the noble
gas family. Filling up of the 5f orbitals after
actinium (Z = 89) gives the 5f-inner transition
2018-19
CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS AND PERIODICITY IN PROPERTIES
series known as the actinoid series. The 4f-
and 5f-inner transition series of elements are
placed separately in the Periodic Table to
maintain its structure and to preserve the
principle of classification by keeping elements
with similar properties in a single column.
Problem 3.2
How would you justify the presence of 18
elements in the 5th period of the Periodic
Table?
Solution
When n = 5, l = 0, 1, 2, 3. The order in
which the energy of the available orbitals
4d, 5s and 5p increases is 5s < 4d < 5p.
The total number of orbitals available are
9. The maximum number of electrons that
can be accommodated is 18; and therefore
18 elements are there in the 5th period.
(b) Groupwise Electronic Configurations
Elements in the same vertical column or group
have similar valence shell electronic
configurations, the same number of electrons
in the outer orbitals, and similar properties.
For example, the Group 1 elements (alkali
metals) all have ns
1 valence shell electronic
configuration as shown below.
Atomic number
Symbol
Electronic configuration
1s22s1 (or) [He]2s1
1s22s22p63s1 (or) [Ne]3s1
1s22s22p63s23p64s1 (or) [Ar]4s1
1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p65s1 (or) [Kr]5s1
1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p64d105s25p66s1 (or) [Xe]6s1
[Rn]7s1
theoretical foundation for the periodic
classification. The elements in a vertical column
of the Periodic Table constitute a group or
family and exhibit similar chemical behaviour.
This similarity arises because these elements
have the same number and same distribution
of electrons in their outermost orbitals. We can
classify the elements into four blocks viz.,
s-block, p-block, d-block and f-block
depending on the type of atomic orbitals that
are being filled with electrons. This is illustrated
in Fig. 3.3. We notice two exceptions to this
categorisation. Strictly, helium belongs to the
s-block but its positioning in the p-block along
with other group 18 elements is justified
because it has a completely filled valence shell
(1s2) and as a result, exhibits properties
characteristic of other noble gases. The other
exception is hydrogen. It has only one
s-electron and hence can be placed in group 1
(alkali metals). It can also gain an electron to
achieve a noble gas arrangement and hence it
can behave similar to a group 17 (halogen
family) elements. Because it is a special case,
we shall place hydrogen separately at the top
of the Periodic Table as shown in Fig. 3.2 and
Fig. 3.3. We will briefly discuss the salient
features of the four types of elements marked in
Thus it can be seen that the properties of
an element have periodic dependence upon its
atomic number and not on relative atomic
mass.
ELECTRONIC CONFIGURATIONS
TYPES
ELEMENTS:
s-, p-, d-, f- BLOCKS
The aufbau (build up) principle and the
electronic configuration of atoms provide a
the Periodic Table. More about these elements
will be discussed later. During the description
of their features certain terminology has been
used which has been classified in section 3.7.
3.6.1 The s-Block Elements
The elements of Group 1 (alkali metals) and
Group 2 (alkaline earth metals) which have ns1
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Fig. 3.3  The types of elements in the Periodic Table based on the orbitals that
are being filled. Also shown is the broad division of elements into METALS
(                       ) , NON-METALS (             )  and METALLOIDS (        ).
2018-19
CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS AND PERIODICITY IN PROPERTIES
and ns2 outermost electronic configuration
belong to the s-Block Elements. They are all
reactive metals with low ionization enthalpies.
They lose the outermost electron(s) readily to
form 1+ ion (in the case of alkali metals) or 2+
ion (in the case of alkaline earth metals). The
metallic character and the reactivity increase
as we go down the group. Because of high
reactivity they are never found pure in nature.
The compounds of the s-block elements, with
the exception of those of lithium and beryllium
are predominantly ionic.
3.6.2 The p-Block Elements
The p-Block Elements comprise those
belonging to Group 13 to 18 and these
together with the s-Block Elements are called
the Representative Elements or Main Group
Elements. The outermost electronic
configuration varies from ns2np1 to ns2np6 in
each period. At the end of each period is a noble
gas element with a closed valence shell ns2np6
configuration. All the orbitals in the valence
shell of the noble gases are completely filled
by electrons and it is very difficult to alter this
stable arrangement by the addition or removal
of electrons. The noble gases thus exhibit very
low chemical reactivity. Preceding the noble gas
family are two chemically important groups of
non-metals. They are the halogens (Group 17)
and the chalcogens (Group 16). These two
groups of elements have highly negative
electron gain enthalpies and readily add one
or two electrons respectively to attain the stable
noble gas configuration. The non-metallic
character increases as we move from left to right
across a period and metallic character increases
as we go down the group.
3.6.3 The d-Block Elements (Transition
Elements)
These are the elements of Group 3 to 12 in the
centre of the Periodic Table. These are
characterised by the filling of inner d orbitals
by electrons and are therefore referred to as
d-Block Elements. These elements have the
general outer electronic configuration
(n-1)d1-10ns0-2 . They are all metals. They mostly
form coloured ions, exhibit variable valence
(oxidation states), paramagnetism and oftenly
used as catalysts. However, Zn, Cd and Hg
which have the electronic configuration,
(n-1) d10ns2 do not show most of the properties
of transition elements. In a way, transition
metals form a bridge between the chemically
active metals of s-block elements and the less
active elements of Groups 13 and 14 and thus
take their familiar name “Transition
Elements”.
3.6.4 The f-Block Elements
(Inner-Transition Elements)
The two rows of elements at the bottom of the
Periodic Table, called the Lanthanoids,
Ce(Z = 58) – Lu(Z = 71) and Actinoids,
Th(Z = 90) – Lr (Z = 103) are characterised by
the outer electronic configuration (n-2)f1-14
(n-1)d0–1ns2. The last electron added to each
element is filled in f- orbital. These two series
of elements are hence called the Inner-
Transition Elements (f-Block Elements).
They are all metals. Within each series, the
properties of the elements are quite similar. The
chemistry of the early actinoids is more
complicated than the corresponding
lanthanoids, due to the large number of
oxidation states possible for these actinoid
elements. Actinoid elements are radioactive.
Many of the actinoid elements have been made
only in nanogram quantities or even less by
nuclear reactions and their chemistry is not
fully studied. The elements after uranium are
called Transuranium Elements.
Problem 3.3
The elements  Z = 117 and 120 have not
yet been discovered. In which family /
group would you place these elements
and also give the electronic configuration
in each case.
Solution
We see from Fig. 3.2, that element with Z
= 117, would belong to the halogen family
(Group 17) and the electronic
configuration
would
5f146d107s27p5. The element with Z = 120,
will be placed in Group 2 (alkaline earth
metals), and will have the electronic
configuration [Uuo]8s2.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
3.6.5 Metals, Non-metals and Metalloids
In addition to displaying the classification of
elements into s-, p-, d-, and f-blocks, Fig. 3.3
shows another broad classification of elements
based on their properties. The elements can
be divided into Metals and Non-Metals. Metals
comprise more than 78% of all known elements
and appear on the left side of the Periodic
Table. Metals are usually solids at room
temperature [mercury is an exception; gallium
and caesium also have very low melting points
(303K and 302K, respectively)]. Metals usually
have high melting and boiling points. They are
good conductors of heat and electricity. They
are malleable (can be flattened into thin sheets
by hammering) and ductile (can be drawn into
wires). In contrast, non-metals are located at
the top right hand side of the Periodic Table.
In fact, in a horizontal row, the property of
elements change from metallic on the left to
non-metallic on the right. Non-metals are
usually solids or gases at room temperature
with low melting and boiling points (boron and
carbon are exceptions). They are poor
conductors of heat and electricity. Most non-
metallic solids are brittle and are neither
malleable nor ductile. The elements become
more metallic as we go down a group; the non-
metallic character increases as one goes from
left to right across the Periodic Table. The
change from metallic to non-metallic character
is not abrupt as shown by the thick zig-zag
line in Fig. 3.3. The elements (e.g., silicon,
germanium, arsenic, antimony and tellurium)
bordering this line and running diagonally
across the Periodic Table show properties that
are characteristic of both metals and non-
metals. These elements are called Semi-metals
or Metalloids.
Problem 3.4
Considering the atomic number and
position in the periodic table, arrange the
following elements in the increasing order
of metallic character : Si, Be, Mg, Na, P.
Solution
Metallic character increases down a group
and decreases along a period as we move
from left to right. Hence the order of
increasing metallic character is: P < Si <
Be < Mg < Na.
3.7 PERIODIC TRENDS IN PROPERTIES
OF ELEMENTS
There are many observable patterns in the
physical and chemical properties of elements
as we descend in a group or move across a
period in the Periodic Table. For example,
within a period, chemical reactivity tends to be
high in Group 1 metals, lower in elements
towards the middle of the table, and increases
to a maximum in the Group 17 non-metals.
Likewise within a group of representative
metals (say alkali metals) reactivity increases
on moving down the group, whereas within a
group of non-metals (say halogens), reactivity
decreases down the group. But why do the
properties of elements follow these trends? And
how can we explain periodicity? To answer
these questions, we must look into the theories
of atomic structure and properties of the atom.
In this section we shall discuss the periodic
trends in certain physical and chemical
properties and try to explain them in terms of
number of electrons and energy levels.
3.7.1 Trends in Physical Properties
There are numerous physical properties of
elements such as melting and boiling points,
heats of fusion and vaporization, energy of
atomization, etc. which show periodic
variations. However, we shall discuss the
periodic trends with respect to atomic and ionic
radii, ionization enthalpy, electron gain
enthalpy and electronegativity.
(a) Atomic Radius
You can very well imagine that finding the size
of an atom is a lot more complicated than
measuring the radius of a ball. Do you know
why? Firstly, because the size of an atom
(~ 1.2 Å i.e., 1.2 × 10–10 m in radius) is very
small. Secondly, since the electron cloud
surrounding the atom does not have a sharp
boundary, the determination of the atomic size
cannot be precise. In other words, there is no
2018-19
CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS AND PERIODICITY IN PROPERTIES
practical way by which the size of an individual
atom can be measured. However, an estimate
of the atomic size can be made by knowing the
distance between the atoms in the combined
state. One practical approach to estimate the
size of an atom of a non-metallic element is to
measure the distance between two atoms when
they are bound together by a single bond in a
covalent molecule and from this value, the
“Covalent Radius” of the element can be
calculated. For example, the bond distance in
the chlorine molecule (Cl2) is 198 pm and half
this distance (99 pm), is taken as the atomic
radius of chlorine. For metals, we define the
term “Metallic Radius” which is taken as half
the internuclear distance separating the metal
cores in the metallic crystal. For example, the
distance between two adjacent copper atoms
in solid copper is 256 pm; hence the metallic
radius of copper is assigned a value of 128 pm.
For simplicity, in this book, we use the term
Atomic Radius to refer to both covalent or
metallic radius depending on whether the
element is a non-metal or a metal.  Atomic radii
can be measured by X-ray or other
spectroscopic methods.
The atomic radii of a few elements are listed
in Table 3.6 . Two trends are obvious. We can
explain these trends in terms of nuclear charge
and energy level. The atomic size generally
decreases across a period as illustrated in
Fig. 3.4(a) for the elements of the second period.
It is because within the period the outer
electrons are in the same valence shell and the
effective nuclear charge increases as the atomic
number increases resulting in the increased
attraction of electrons to the nucleus. Within a
family or vertical column of the periodic table,
the atomic radius increases regularly with
atomic number as illustrated in Fig. 3.4(b). For
alkali metals and halogens, as we descend the
groups, the principal quantum number (n)
increases and the valence electrons are farther
from the nucleus. This happens because the
inner energy levels are filled with electrons,
which serve to shield the outer electrons from
the pull of the nucleus. Consequently the size
of the atom increases as reflected in the atomic
radii.
Note that the atomic radii of noble gases
are not considered here. Being monoatomic,
their (non-bonded radii) values are very large.
In fact radii of noble gases  should be compared
not with the covalent radii but with the van der
Waals radii of other elements.
Table 3.6(a)  Atomic Radii/pm Across the Periods
Table 3.6(b)  Atomic Radii/pm Down a Family
Atomic
Atomic
(Group I)
Radius
(Group 17)
Radius
Atom (Period II)
Atomic radius
Atom (Period III)
Atomic radius
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
(b) Ionic Radius
The removal of an electron from an atom results
in the formation of a cation, whereas gain of
an electron leads to an anion. The ionic radii
can be estimated by measuring the distances
between cations and anions in ionic crystals.
In general, the ionic radii of elements exhibit
the same trend as the atomic radii. A cation is
smaller than its parent atom because it has
fewer electrons while its nuclear charge remains
the same. The size of an anion will be larger
than that of the parent atom because the
addition of one or more electrons would result
in increased repulsion among the electrons
and a decrease in effective nuclear charge. For
example, the ionic radius of fluoride ion (F
– ) is
136 pm whereas the atomic radius of fluorine
is only 64 pm. On the other hand, the atomic
radius of sodium is 186 pm compared to the
ionic radius of 95 pm for Na
When we find some atoms and ions which
contain the same number of electrons, we call
them isoelectronic species*. For example,
2–, F
–, Na
+ and Mg
2+ have the same number of
electrons (10). Their radii would be different
because of their different nuclear charges. The
cation with the greater positive charge will have
a smaller radius because of the greater
Fig. 3.4 (a)
Variation of atomic radius with
atomic number across the second
period
Fig. 3.4 (b) Variation of atomic radius with
atomic number for alkali metals
and halogens
attraction of the electrons to the nucleus. Anion
with the greater negative charge will have the
larger radius. In this case, the net repulsion of
the electrons will outweigh the nuclear charge
and the ion will expand in size.
Problem 3.5
Which of the following species will have
the largest and the smallest size?
Mg, Mg2+, Al, Al3+.
Solution
Atomic radii decrease across a period.
Cations are smaller than their parent
atoms. Among isoelectronic species, the
one with the larger positive nuclear charge
will have a smaller radius.
Hence the largest species is Mg; the
smallest one is Al3+.
(c) Ionization Enthalpy
A quantitative measure of the tendency of an
element to lose electron is given by its
Ionization Enthalpy. It represents the energy
required to remove an electron from an isolated
gaseous atom (X) in its ground state. In other
words, the first ionization enthalpy for an
* Two or more species with same number of atoms, same number of valence electrons and same structure,
regardless of the nature of elements involved.
2018-19
CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS AND PERIODICITY IN PROPERTIES
element X is the enthalpy change (∆i H) for the
reaction depicted in equation 3.1.
X(g) → X+(g) + e–
(3.1)
The ionization enthalpy is expressed in
units of kJ mol–1. We can define the second
ionization enthalpy as the energy required to
remove the second most loosely bound
electron; it is the energy required to carry out
the reaction shown in equation 3.2.
+(g) → X
2+(g) + e
(3.2)
Energy is always required to remove
electrons from an atom and hence ionization
enthalpies are always positive. The second
ionization enthalpy will be higher than the first
ionization enthalpy because it is more difficult
to remove an electron from a positively charged
ion than from a neutral atom. In the same way
the third ionization enthalpy will be higher than
the second and so on. The term “ionization
enthalpy”, if not qualified, is taken as the first
ionization enthalpy.
The first ionization enthalpies of elements
having atomic numbers up to 60 are plotted
in Fig. 3.5. The periodicity of the graph is quite
striking. You will find maxima at the noble gases
which have closed electron shells and very
stable electron configurations. On the other
hand, minima occur at the alkali metals and
their low ionization enthalpies can be correlated
Fig. 3.5
Variation of first ionization enthalpies
(∆iH) with atomic number for elements
with Z = 1 to 60
with their high reactivity. In addition, you will
notice two trends  the first ionization enthalpy
generally increases as we go across a period
and decreases as we descend in a group. These
trends are illustrated in Figs. 3.6(a) and 3.6(b)
respectively for the elements of the second
period and the first group of the periodic table.
You will appreciate that the ionization enthalpy
and atomic radius are closely related
properties. To understand these trends, we
have to consider two factors : (i) the attraction
of electrons towards the nucleus, and (ii) the
repulsion of electrons from each other. The
effective nuclear charge experienced by a
valence electron in an atom will be less than
Fig. 3.6(a) First ionization enthalpies (∆iH) of elements of the second period as a
function of atomic number (Z) and Fig. 3.6(b) ∆iH of alkali metals as a function of Z.
3.6 (a)
3.6 (b)
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
the actual charge on the nucleus because of
“shielding” or “screening” of the valence
electron from the nucleus by the intervening
core electrons. For example, the 2s electron in
lithium is shielded from the nucleus by the
inner core of 1s electrons. As a result, the
valence electron experiences a net positive
charge which is  less than the actual charge of
+3. In general, shielding is effective when the
orbitals in the inner shells are completely filled.
This situation occurs in the case of alkali metals
which have single outermost ns-electron
preceded by a noble gas electronic
configuration.
When we move from lithium to fluorine
across the second period, successive electrons
are added to orbitals in the same principal
quantum level and the shielding of the nuclear
charge by the inner core of electrons does not
increase very much to compensate for the
increased attraction of the electron to the
nucleus. Thus, across a period, increasing
nuclear charge outweighs the shielding.
Consequently, the outermost electrons are held
more and more tightly and the ionization
enthalpy increases across a period. As we go
down a group, the outermost electron being
increasingly farther from the nucleus, there is
an increased shielding of the nuclear charge
by the electrons in the inner levels. In this case,
increase in shielding outweighs the increasing
nuclear charge and the removal of the
outermost electron requires less energy down
a group.
From Fig. 3.6(a), you will also notice that
the first ionization enthalpy of boron (Z = 5) is
slightly less than that of beryllium (Z = 4) even
though the former has a greater nuclear charge.
When we consider the same principal quantum
level, an s-electron is attracted to the nucleus
more than a p-electron. In beryllium, the
electron removed during the ionization is an
s-electron whereas the electron removed during
ionization of boron is a p-electron. The
penetration of a 2s-electron to the nucleus is
more than that of a 2p-electron; hence the 2p
electron of boron is more shielded from the
nucleus by the inner core of electrons than the
2s electrons of beryllium. Therefore, it is easier
to remove the 2p-electron from boron compared
to the removal of a 2s- electron from beryllium.
Thus, boron has a smaller first ionization
enthalpy than beryllium. Another “anomaly”
is the smaller first ionization enthalpy of oxygen
compared to nitrogen. This arises because in
the nitrogen atom, three 2p-electrons reside in
different atomic orbitals (Hund’s rule) whereas
in the oxygen atom, two of the four 2p-electrons
must occupy the same 2p-orbital resulting in
an increased electron-electron repulsion.
Consequently, it is easier to remove the fourth
2p-electron from oxygen than it is, to remove
one of the three 2p-electrons from nitrogen.
Problem 3.6
The first ionization enthalpy (∆i H ) values
of the third period elements, Na, Mg and
Si are respectively 496, 737 and 786 kJ
mol–1. Predict whether the first ∆i H value
for Al will be more close to 575 or 760 kJ
mol–1 ? Justify your answer.
Solution
It will be more close to 575 kJ mol
–1. The
value for Al should be lower than that of
Mg because of effective shielding of 3p
electrons from the nucleus by
3s-electrons.
(d) Electron Gain Enthalpy
When an electron is added to a neutral gaseous
atom (X) to convert it into a negative ion, the
enthalpy change accompanying the process is
defined as the Electron Gain Enthalpy (∆egH).
Electron gain enthalpy provides a measure of
the ease with which an atom adds an electron
to form anion as represented by equation 3.3.
X(g) + e–  →  X –(g)
(3.3)
Depending on the element, the process of
adding an electron to the atom can be either
endothermic or exothermic. For many elements
energy is released when an electron is added
to the atom and the electron gain enthalpy is
negative. For example, group 17 elements (the
halogens) have very high negative electron gain
enthalpies because they can attain stable noble
gas electronic configurations by picking up an
electron. On the other hand, noble gases have
2018-19
CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS AND PERIODICITY IN PROPERTIES
large positive electron gain enthalpies because
the electron has to enter the next higher
principal quantum level leading to a very
unstable electronic configuration. It may be
noted that electron gain enthalpies have large
negative values toward the upper right of the
periodic table preceding the noble gases.
The variation in electron gain enthalpies of
elements is less systematic than for ionization
enthalpies. As a general rule, electron gain
enthalpy becomes more negative with increase
in the atomic number across a period. The
effective nuclear charge increases from left to
right across a period and consequently it will
be easier to add an electron to a smaller atom
since the added electron on an average would
be closer to the positively charged nucleus. We
should also expect electron gain enthalpy to
become less negative as we go down a group
because the size of the atom increases and the
added electron would be farther from the
nucleus. This is generally the case (Table 3.7).
However, electron gain enthalpy of O or F is
less negative than that of the succeeding
element. This is because when an electron is
added to O or F, the added electron goes to the
smaller n = 2 quantum level and suffers
significant repulsion from the other electrons
present in this level. For the n = 3 quantum
level (S or Cl), the added electron occupies a
larger region of space and the electron-electron
repulsion is much less.
Problem 3.7
Which of the following will have the most
negative electron gain enthalpy and which
the least negative?
P, S, Cl, F.
Explain your answer.
Solution
Electron gain enthalpy generally becomes
more negative across a period as we move
from left to right. Within a group, electron
gain enthalpy becomes less negative down
a group. However, adding an electron to
the 2p-orbital leads to greater repulsion
than adding an electron to the larger
3p-orbital. Hence the element with most
negative electron gain enthalpy is chlorine;
the one with the least negative electron
gain enthalpy is phosphorus.
(e) Electronegativity
A qualitative measure of the ability of an atom
in a chemical compound to attract shared
electrons to itself is called electronegativity.
Unlike ionization enthalpy and electron gain
enthalpy, it is not a measureable quantity.
However, a number of numerical scales of
electronegativity of elements viz., Pauling scale,
Mulliken-Jaffe scale, Allred-Rochow scale have
been developed. The one which is the most
In many books, the negative of the enthalpy change for the process depicted in equation 3.3 is defined as the
ELECTRON AFFINITY (Ae ) of the atom under consideration. If energy is released when an electron is added to an atom,
the electron affinity is taken as positive, contrary to thermodynamic convention. If energy has to be supplied to add an
electron to an atom, then the electron affinity of the atom is assigned a negative sign. However, electron affinity is
defined as absolute zero and, therefore at any other temperature (T) heat capacities of the reactants and the products
have to be taken into account in ∆egH = –Ae – 5/2 RT.
Table 3.7  Electron Gain Enthalpies* / (kJ mol–1) of Some Main Group Elements
– 141
– 328
+ 116
– 200
– 349
+  96
– 195
– 325
– 190
– 295
– 174
– 270
Group 1
Group 16
Group 17
Group 0
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
widely used is the Pauling scale. Linus Pauling,
an American scientist, in 1922 assigned
arbitrarily a value of 4.0 to fluorine, the element
considered to have the greatest ability to attract
electrons. Approximate values for the
electronegativity of a few elements are given in
Table 3.8(a)
The electronegativity of any given element
is not constant; it varies depending on the
element to which it is bound. Though it is not
a measurable quantity, it does provide a means
electrons and the nucleus increases as the
atomic radius decreases in a period. The
electronegativity also increases. On the same
account electronegativity values decrease with
the increase in atomic radii down a group. The
trend is similar to that of ionization enthalpy.
Knowing the relationship between
electronegativity and atomic radius, can you
now visualise the relationship between
electronegativity and non-metallic properties?
Atom (Period II)
Electronegativity
Atom (Period III)
Electronegativity
Table 3.8(a)  Electronegativity Values (on Pauling scale) Across the Periods
Electronegativity
Electronegativity
(Group I)
Value
(Group 17)
Value
Table 3.8(b)  Electronegativity Values (on Pauling scale) Down a Family
of predicting the nature of force
that holds a pair of atoms together
– a relationship that you will
explore later.
Electronegativity generally
increases across a period from left
to right (say from lithium to
fluorine) and decrease down a group
(say from fluorine to astatine) in
the periodic table. How can these
trends be explained? Can the
electronegativity be related to
atomic radii, which tend to
decrease across each period from
left to right, but increase down
each group ? The attraction
between the outer (or valence)
Fig. 3.7  The periodic trends of elements in the periodic table
2018-19
CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS AND PERIODICITY IN PROPERTIES
Non-metallic  elements have strong tendency
to gain electrons. Therefore, electronegativity
is directly related to that non-metallic
properties of elements. It can be further
extended to say that the electronegativity is
inversely related to the metallic properties of
elements.
Thus,
increase
electronegativities across a period is
accompanied by an increase in non-metallic
properties (or decrease in metallic properties)
of elements. Similarly, the decrease in
electronegativity down a group is accompanied
by a decrease in non-metallic properties (or
increase in metallic properties) of elements.
All these periodic trends are summarised
in figure 3.7.
3.7.2 Periodic Trends in Chemical
Properties
Most of the trends in chemical properties of
elements, such as diagonal relationships, inert
pair effect, effects of lanthanoid contraction etc.
will be dealt with along the discussion of each
group in later units. In this section we shall
study the periodicity of the valence state shown
by elements and the anomalous properties of
the second period elements (from lithium to
fluorine).
Periodicity of Valence or  Oxidation
States
The valence is the most characteristic property
of the elements and can be understood in terms
of their electronic configurations.  The valence
of representative elements is usually (though
not necessarily) equal to the number of
electrons in the outermost orbitals and / or
equal to eight minus the number of outermost
electrons as shown below.
Nowadays the term oxidation state is
frequently used for valence. Consider the two
oxygen containing compounds: OF2 and Na2O.
The order of electronegativity of the three
elements involved in these compounds is F >
O > Na. Each of the atoms of fluorine, with outer
Group
Number of valence
electron
Valence
electronic configuration 2s22p5, shares one
electron with oxygen in the OF2 molecule. Being
highest electronegative element, fluorine is
given oxidation state –1. Since there are two
fluorine atoms in this molecule, oxygen with
outer electronic configuration 2s
22p4 shares
two electrons with fluorine atoms and thereby
exhibits oxidation state +2. In Na2O, oxygen
being more electronegative accepts two
electrons, one from each of the two sodium
atoms and, thus, shows oxidation state –2. On
the other hand sodium with electronic
configuration 3s1 loses one electron to oxygen
and is given oxidation state +1. Thus, the
oxidation state of an element in a particular
compound can be defined as the charge
acquired by its atom on the basis of
electronegative consideration from other atoms
in the molecule.
Problem 3.8
Using the Periodic Table, predict the
formulas of compounds which might be
formed by the following pairs of elements;
(a) silicon and bromine (b) aluminium and
sulphur.
Solution
(a) Silicon is group 14 element with a
valence of 4; bromine belongs to the
halogen family with a valence of 1.
Hence the formula of the compound
formed would be SiBr4.
(b) Aluminium belongs to group 13 with
a valence of 3; sulphur belongs to
group 16 elements with a valence of
2. Hence, the formula of the compound
formed would be Al2S3.
Some periodic trends observed in the
valence of elements (hydrides and oxides) are
shown in Table 3.9. Other such periodic trends
which occur in the chemical behaviour of the
elements are discussed elsewhere in this book.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
There are many elements which exhibit variable
valence. This is particularly characteristic of
transition elements and actinoids, which we
shall study later.
(b) Anomalous Properties of Second Period
Elements
The first element of each of the groups 1
(lithium) and 2 (beryllium) and groups 13-17
(boron to fluorine) differs in many respects from
the other members of their respective group.
For example, lithium unlike other alkali metals,
and beryllium unlike other alkaline earth
metals, form compounds with pronounced
covalent character; the other members of these
groups predominantly form ionic compounds.
In fact the behaviour of lithium and beryllium
is more similar with the second element of the
Group
Formula
of hydride
Formula
N2O3, N2O5
of oxide
Al2O3
P4O6, P4O10
Cl2 O7
Ga2O3
As2O3, As2O5
In2O3
Sb2O3, Sb2O5
Bi2O3    –
Table 3.9
Periodic Trends in Valence of Elements as shown by the Formulas
of Their Compounds
Property
Element
Metallic radius M/ pm
Ionic radius M+ / pm
following group i.e., magnesium and
aluminium, respectively. This sort of similarity
is commonly referred to as diagonal
relationship in the periodic properties.
What are the reasons for the different
chemical behaviour of the first member of a
group of elements in the s- and p-blocks
compared to that of the subsequent members
in the same group? The anomalous behaviour
is attributed to their small size, large charge/
radius ratio and high electronegativity of the
elements.  In addition, the first member of group
has only four valence orbitals (2s and 2p)
available for bonding, whereas the second
member of the groups have nine valence
orbitals (3s, 3p, 3d). As a consequence of this,
the maximum covalency of the first member of
each group is 4 (e.g., boron can only form
−, whereas the other members
of the groups can expand their
valence shell to accommodate
more than four pairs of electrons
e.g., aluminium AlF6
− forms).
Furthermore, the first member of
p-block elements displays greater
ability to form pπ – pπ  multiple bonds
to itself (e.g., C = C, C ≡ C,  N = N,
N ≡ Ν) and to other second period
elements (e.g., C = O, C = N, C ≡ N,
N = O) compared to subsequent
members of the same group.
2018-19
CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS AND PERIODICITY IN PROPERTIES
Problem 3.9
Are the oxidation state and covalency of
Al in [AlCl(H2O)5]
2+ same ?
Solution
No. The oxidation state of Al is +3 and the
covalency is 6.
3.7.3 Periodic Trends and Chemical
Reactivity
We have observed the periodic trends in certain
fundamental properties such as atomic and
ionic radii, ionization enthalpy, electron gain
enthalpy and valence. We know by now that
the periodicity is related to electronic
configuration. That is, all chemical and
physical properties are a manifestation of the
electronic configuration of elements. We shall
now try to explore relationships between these
fundamental properties of elements with their
chemical reactivity.
The atomic and ionic radii, as we know,
generally decrease in a period from left to right.
As a consequence, the ionization enthalpies
generally increase (with some exceptions as
outlined in section 3.7.1(a)) and electron gain
enthalpies become more negative across a
period. In other words, the ionization enthalpy
of the extreme left element in a period is the
least and the electron gain enthalpy of the
element on the extreme right is the highest
negative (note : noble gases having completely
filled shells have rather positive electron gain
enthalpy values). This results into high
chemical reactivity at the two extremes and the
lowest in the centre. Thus, the maximum
chemical reactivity at the extreme left (among
alkali metals) is exhibited by the loss of an
electron leading to the formation of a cation
and at the extreme right (among halogens)
shown by the gain of an electron forming an
anion. This property can be related with the
reducing and oxidizing behaviour of the
elements which you will learn later. However,
here it can be directly related to the metallic
and non-metallic character of elements. Thus,
the metallic character of an element, which is
highest at the extremely left decreases and the
non-metallic character increases while moving
from left to right across the period. The
chemical reactivity of an element can be best
shown by its reactions with oxygen and
halogens. Here, we shall consider the reaction
of the elements with oxygen only. Elements on
two extremes of a period easily combine with
oxygen to form oxides. The normal oxide
formed by the element on extreme left is the
most basic (e.g., Na2O), whereas that formed
by the element on extreme right is the most
acidic (e.g., Cl2O7). Oxides of elements in the
centre are amphoteric (e.g., Al2O3, As2O3) or
neutral (e.g., CO, NO, N2O). Amphoteric oxides
behave as acidic with bases and as basic with
acids, whereas neutral oxides have no acidic
or basic properties.
Problem 3.10
Show by a chemical reaction with water
that Na2O is a basic oxide and Cl2O7 is an
acidic oxide.
Solution
Na2O with water forms a strong base
whereas Cl2O7 forms strong acid.
Na2O + H2O → 2NaOH
Cl2O7 + H2O → 2HClO4
Their basic or acidic nature can be
qualitatively tested with litmus paper.
Among transition metals (3d series), the change
in atomic radii is much smaller as compared
to those of representative elements across the
period. The change in atomic radii is still
smaller among inner -transition metals
(4f series). The ionization enthalpies are
intermediate between those of s- and p-blocks.
As a consequence, they are less electropositive
than group 1 and 2 metals.
In a group, the increase in atomic and ionic
radii with increase in atomic number generally
results in a gradual decrease in ionization
enthalpies and a regular decrease (with
exception in some third period elements as
shown in section 3.7.1(d)) in electron gain
enthalpies in the case of main group elements.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Thus, the metallic character increases down
the group and non-metallic character
decreases. This trend can be related with their
reducing and oxidizing property which you
will learn later. In the case of transition
elements, however, a reverse trend is observed.
This can be explained in terms of atomic size
and ionization enthalpy.
EXERCISES
What is the basic theme of organisation in the periodic table?
Which important property did Mendeleev use to classify the elements in his periodic
table and did he stick to that?
What is the basic difference in approach between the Mendeleev’s Periodic Law
and the Modern Periodic Law?
On the basis of quantum numbers, justify that the sixth period of the periodic
table should have 32 elements.
SUMMARY
In this Unit, you have studied the development of the Periodic Law and the Periodic
Table. Mendeleev’s Periodic Table was based on atomic masses. Modern Periodic Table
arranges the elements in the order of their atomic numbers in seven horizontal rows
(periods) and eighteen vertical columns (groups or families). Atomic numbers in a period
are consecutive, whereas in a group they increase in a pattern. Elements of the same
group have similar valence shell electronic configuration and, therefore, exhibit similar
chemical properties. However, the elements of the same period have incrementally
increasing number of electrons from left to right, and, therefore, have different valencies.
Four types of elements can be recognized in the periodic table on the basis of their
electronic configurations. These are s-block, p-block, d-block and f-block elements.
Hydrogen with one electron in the 1s orbital occupies a unique position in the periodic
table. Metals comprise more than seventy eight per cent of the known elements. Non-
metals, which are located at the top of the periodic table, are less than twenty in number.
Elements which lie at the border line between metals and non-metals (e.g., Si, Ge, As)
are called metalloids or semi-metals. Metallic character increases with increasing atomic
number in a group whereas decreases from left to right in a period. The physical and
chemical properties of elements vary periodically with their atomic numbers.
Periodic trends are observed in atomic sizes, ionization enthalpies, electron
gain enthalpies, electronegativity and valence. The atomic radii decrease while going
from left to right in a period and increase with atomic number in a group. Ionization
enthalpies generally increase across a period and decrease down a group. Electronegativity
also shows a similar trend. Electron gain enthalpies, in general, become more negative
across a period and less negative down a group. There is some periodicity in valence, for
example, among representative elements, the valence is either equal to the number of
electrons in the outermost orbitals or eight minus this number. Chemical reactivity is
highest at the two extremes of a period and is lowest in the centre. The reactivity on the
left extreme of a period is because of the ease of electron loss (or low ionization enthalpy).
Highly reactive elements do not occur in nature in free state; they usually occur in the
combined form. Oxides formed of the elements on the left are basic and of the elements
on the right are acidic in nature. Oxides of elements in the centre are amphoteric or
neutral.
2018-19
CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS AND PERIODICITY IN PROPERTIES
In terms of period and group where would you locate the element with Z =114?
Write the atomic number of the element present in the third period and seventeenth
group of the periodic table.
Which element do you think would have been named by
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
Seaborg’s group?
Why do elements in the same group have similar physical and chemical properties?
What does atomic radius and ionic radius really mean to you?
How do atomic radius vary in a period and in a group? How do you explain the
variation?
What do you understand by isoelectronic species? Name a species that will be
isoelectronic with each of the following atoms or ions.
(i) F
– (ii)
(iii) Mg2+
Consider the following species :
3–, O
2–, F
–, Na
+, Mg
2+ and Al
What is common in them?
Arrange them in the order of increasing ionic radii.
Explain why cation are smaller and anions larger in radii than their parent atoms?
What is the significance of the terms — ‘isolated gaseous atom’ and ‘ground state’
while defining the ionization enthalpy and electron gain enthalpy?
Hint : Requirements for comparison purposes.
Energy of an electron in the ground state of the hydrogen atom is
–2.18×10–18J. Calculate the ionization enthalpy of atomic hydrogen in terms of
J mol–1.
Hint: Apply the idea of mole concept to derive the answer.
Among the second period elements the actual ionization enthalpies are in the
order Li < B < Be < C < O < N < F < Ne.
Explain why
Be has higher ∆i H than B
O has lower ∆i H than N and F?
How would you explain the fact that the first ionization enthalpy of sodium is
lower than that of magnesium but its second ionization enthalpy is higher than
that of magnesium?
What are the various factors due to which the ionization enthalpy of the main
group elements tends to decrease down a group?
The first ionization enthalpy values (in kJ mol–1) of group 13 elements are :
How would you explain this deviation from the general trend ?
Which of the following pairs of elements would have a more negative electron gain
enthalpy?
(i) O or F
(ii) F or Cl
Would you expect the second electron gain enthalpy of O as positive, more negative
or less negative than the first? Justify your answer.
What is the basic difference between the terms electron gain enthalpy and
electronegativity?
How would you react to the statement that the electronegativity of N on Pauling
scale is 3.0 in all the nitrogen compounds?
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Describe the theory associated with the radius of an atom as it
gains an electron
loses an electron
Would you expect the first ionization enthalpies for two isotopes of the same element
to be the same or different? Justify your answer.
What are the major differences between metals and non-metals?
Use the periodic table to answer the following questions.
Identify an element with five electrons in the outer subshell.
Identify an element that would tend to lose two electrons.
Identify an element that would tend to gain two electrons.
Identify the group having metal, non-metal, liquid as well as gas at the room
temperature.
The increasing order of reactivity among group 1 elements is Li < Na < K < Rb <Cs
whereas that among group 17 elements is F > CI > Br > I. Explain.
Write the general outer electronic configuration of s-, p-, d- and f- block elements.
Assign the position of the element having outer electronic configuration
(i) ns2np4 for n=3 (ii) (n-1)d2ns2 for n=4, and (iii) (n-2) f 7 (n-1)d1ns2 for n=6, in the
periodic table.
The first (∆iH1) and the second (∆iH2) ionization enthalpies (in kJ mol–1) and the
(∆egH) electron gain enthalpy  (in kJ mol–1) of a few elements are given below:
Elements
Which of the above elements is likely to be :
the least reactive element.
the most reactive metal.
the most reactive non-metal.
the least reactive non-metal.
the metal which can form a stable binary halide of the formula MX2(X=halogen).
the metal which can form a predominantly stable covalent halide of the formula
MX (X=halogen)?
Predict the formulas of the stable binary compounds that would be formed by the
combination of the following pairs of elements.
Lithium and oxygen
(b) Magnesium and nitrogen
Aluminium and iodine
(d) Silicon and oxygen
Phosphorus and fluorine
Element 71 and fluorine
In the modern periodic table, the period indicates the value of :
atomic number
atomic mass
principal quantum number
azimuthal quantum number.
Which of the following statements related to the modern periodic table is incorrect?
The p-block has 6 columns, because a maximum of 6 electrons can occupy all
the orbitals in a p-shell.
2018-19
CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS AND PERIODICITY IN PROPERTIES
The d-block has 8 columns, because a maximum of 8 electrons
can occupy all the orbitals in a d-subshell.
Each block contains a number of columns equal to the number of
electrons that can occupy that subshell.
The block indicates value of azimuthal quantum number (l) for the
last subshell that received electrons in building up the electronic
configuration.
Anything that influences the valence electrons will affect the chemistry
of the element. Which one of the following factors does not affect the
valence shell?
Valence principal quantum number (n)
Nuclear charge (Z )
Nuclear mass
Number of core electrons.
The size of isoelectronic species — F
–, Ne and Na+ is affected by
nuclear charge (Z )
valence principal quantum number (n)
electron-electron interaction in the outer orbitals
none of the factors because their size is the same.
Which one of the following statements is incorrect in relation to
ionization enthalpy?
Ionization enthalpy increases for each successive electron.
The greatest increase in ionization enthalpy is experienced on
removal of electron from core noble gas configuration.
End of valence electrons is marked by a big jump in ionization
enthalpy.
Removal of electron from orbitals bearing lower n value is easier
than from orbital having higher n value.
Considering the elements B, Al, Mg, and K, the correct order of their
metallic character is :
(a) B > Al > Mg > K
(b)  Al > Mg > B > K
(c) Mg > Al > K > B
(d)  K > Mg > Al > B
Considering the elements B, C, N, F, and Si, the correct order of their
non-metallic character is :
(a) B > C > Si > N > F
(b)  Si > C > B > N > F
(c) F > N > C > B > Si
(d)  F > N > C > Si > B
Considering the elements F, Cl, O and N, the correct order of their
chemical reactivity in terms of oxidizing property is :
(a) F > Cl > O > N
(b) F > O > Cl > N
(c) Cl > F > O > N
(d) O > F > N > Cl
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Scientists are constantly discovering new compounds, orderly
arranging the facts about them, trying to explain with the
existing knowledge, organising to modify the earlier views or
evolve theories for explaining the newly observed facts.
UNIT 4
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
understand
KÖssel-Lewis
approach to chemical bonding;
explain the octet rule and its
limitations,
Lewis
structures of simple molecules;
explain the formation of different
types of bonds;
describe the VSEPR theory and
predict the geometry of simple
molecules;
explain the valence bond
approach for the formation of
covalent bonds;
predict the directional properties
of covalent bonds;
explain the different types of
hybridisation  involving s, p and
d orbitals and draw shapes of
simple covalent molecules;
describe the molecular orbital
theory of homonuclear diatomic
molecules;
explain the concept of hydrogen
bond.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND
MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
Matter is made up of one or different type of elements.
Under normal conditions no other element exists as an
independent atom in nature, except noble gases. However,
a group of atoms is found to exist together as one species
having characteristic properties. Such a group of atoms is
called a molecule. Obviously there must be some force
which holds these constituent atoms  together in the
molecules. The attractive force which holds various
constituents (atoms, ions, etc.) together in different
chemical species is called a chemical bond. Since the
formation of chemical compounds takes place as a result
of combination of atoms of various elements in different
ways, it raises many questions. Why do atoms combine?
Why are only certain combinations possible? Why do some
atoms combine while certain others do not? Why do
molecules possess definite shapes? To answer such
questions different theories and concepts have been put
forward from time to time. These are Kössel-Lewis
approach, Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion (VSEPR)
Theory, Valence Bond (VB) Theory and Molecular Orbital
(MO) Theory. The evolution of various theories of valence
and the interpretation of the nature of chemical bonds have
closely been related to the developments in the
understanding of the structure of atom, the electronic
configuration of elements and the periodic table. Every
system tends to be more stable and bonding is nature’s
way of lowering the energy of the system to attain stability.
2018-19
CHEMICAL BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
4.1 KÖSSEL-LEWIS APPROACH TO
CHEMICAL BONDING
In order to explain the formation of chemical
bond in terms of electrons, a number of
attempts were made, but it was only in 1916
when Kössel and Lewis succeeded
independently in giving a satisfactory
explanation. They were the first to provide
some logical explanation of valence which was
based on the inertness of noble gases.
Lewis pictured the atom in terms of a
positively charged ‘Kernel’ (the nucleus plus
the inner electrons) and the outer shell that
could accommodate a maximum of eight
electrons. He, further assumed that these
eight electrons occupy the corners of a cube
which surround the ‘Kernel’. Thus the single
outer shell electron of sodium would occupy
one corner of the cube, while in the case of a
noble gas all the eight corners would be
occupied. This octet of electrons, represents
a particularly stable electronic arrangement.
Lewis postulated that atoms achieve the
stable octet when they are linked by
chemical bonds. In the case of sodium and
chlorine, this can happen by the transfer of
an electron from sodium to chlorine thereby
giving the Na+ and Cl
– ions. In the case of
other molecules like Cl2, H2, F2, etc., the bond
is formed by the sharing of a pair of electrons
between the atoms. In the process each atom
attains a stable outer octet of electrons.
Lewis Symbols: In the formation of a
molecule, only the outer shell electrons take
part in chemical combination and they are
known as valence electrons. The inner shell
electrons are well protected and are generally
not involved in the combination process.
G.N. Lewis, an American chemist introduced
simple notations to represent valence
electrons in an atom. These notations are
called Lewis symbols. For example, the Lewis
symbols for the elements of second period are
as under:
Significance of Lewis Symbols : The
number of dots around the symbol represents
the number of valence electrons. This number
of valence electrons helps to calculate the
common or group valence of the element. The
group valence of the elements is generally
either equal to the number of dots in Lewis
symbols or 8 minus the number of dots or
valence electrons.
Kössel, in relation to chemical bonding,
drew attention to the following facts:
In the periodic table, the highly
electronegative halogens and the highly
electropositive alkali metals are separated
by the noble gases;
The formation of a negative ion from a
halogen atom and a positive ion from an
alkali metal atom is associated with the
gain and loss of an electron by the
respective atoms;
The negative and positive ions thus
formed attain stable noble gas electronic
configurations. The noble gases (with the
exception of helium which has a duplet
of electrons) have a particularly stable
outer shell configuration of eight (octet)
electrons, ns2np6.
The negative and positive ions are
stabilized by electrostatic attraction.
For example, the formation of NaCl from
sodium and chlorine, according to the above
scheme, can be explained as:
Na                 →       Na+   +    e–
[Ne] 3s1
Cl  +  e–
→       Cl–
[Ne] 3s2 3p5            [Ne] 3s2 3p6 or [Ar]
Na+  +  Cl–
→      NaCl or Na+Cl–
Similarly the formation of CaF2 may be
shown as:
→      Ca2+  +  2e–
[Ar]4s2
F  + e–
→     F–
[He] 2s2 2p5
[He] 2s2 2p6  or [Ne]
Ca2+ + 2F–   →    CaF2   or  Ca2+(F– )2
The bond formed, as a result of the
electrostatic attraction between the
positive and negative ions was termed as
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
the electrovalent bond. The electrovalence
is thus equal to the number of unit
charge(s) on the ion. Thus, calcium is
assigned a positive electrovalence of two,
while chlorine a negative electrovalence of
Kössel’s postulations provide the basis for
the modern concepts regarding ion-formation
by electron transfer and the formation of ionic
crystalline compounds. His views have proved
to be of great value in the understanding and
systematisation of the ionic compounds. At
the same time he did recognise the fact that
a large number of compounds did not fit into
these concepts.
4.1.1 Octet Rule
Kössel and Lewis in 1916 developed an
important theory of chemical combination
between atoms known as electronic theory
of chemical bonding. According to this,
atoms  can combine either by transfer of
valence electrons from one atom to another
(gaining or losing) or by sharing of valence
electrons in order to have an octet in their
valence shells. This is known as octet rule.
4.1.2 Covalent Bond
Langmuir (1919) refined the Lewis
postulations by abandoning the idea of the
stationary cubical arrangement of the octet,
and by introducing the term covalent bond.
The Lewis-Langmuir theory can be
understood by considering the formation of
the chlorine molecule,Cl2. The Cl atom with
electronic configuration, [Ne]3s2 3p5, is one
electron short of the argon configuration.
The formation of the Cl2 molecule can be
understood in terms of the sharing of a pair
of electrons between the two chlorine atoms,
each chlorine atom contributing one electron
to the shared pair. In the process both
chlorine atoms attain the outer shell octet of
the nearest  noble gas (i.e., argon).
The dots represent electrons. Such
structures are referred to as Lewis dot
structures.
The Lewis dot structures can be written
for other molecules also, in which the
combining atoms may be identical or
different. The important conditions being that:
Each bond is formed as a result of sharing
of an electron pair between the atoms.
Each combining atom contributes at least
one electron to the shared pair.
The combining atoms attain the outer-
shell noble gas configurations as a result
of the sharing of electrons.
Thus in water and carbon tetrachloride
molecules, formation of covalent bonds
can be represented as:
or Cl – Cl
Covalent bond between two Cl atoms
Thus, when two atoms share one
electron pair they are said to be joined by
a single covalent bond. In many compounds
we have multiple bonds between atoms. The
formation of multiple bonds envisages
sharing of more than one electron pair
between two atoms. If two atoms share two
pairs of electrons, the covalent bond
between them is called a double bond. For
example, in the carbon dioxide molecule, we
have two double bonds between the carbon
and oxygen atoms. Similarly in ethene
molecule the two carbon atoms are joined by
a double bond.
Double bonds in CO2 molecule
2018-19
CHEMICAL BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
When combining atoms share three
electron pairs as in the case of two
nitrogen atoms in the N2 molecule and the
two carbon atoms in the ethyne molecule,
a triple bond is formed.
4.1.3 Lewis Representation of Simple
Molecules (the Lewis Structures)
The Lewis dot structures provide a picture
of bonding in molecules and ions in terms
of the shared pairs of electrons and the
octet rule. While such a picture may not
explain the bonding and behaviour of a
molecule completely, it does help in
understanding the formation and properties
of a molecule to a large extent. Writing of
Lewis dot structures of molecules is,
therefore, very useful. The Lewis dot
structures can be written by adopting the
following steps:
The total number of electrons required for
writing the structures are obtained by
adding the valence electrons of the
combining atoms. For example, in the CH4
molecule there are eight valence electrons
available for bonding (4 from carbon and
4 from the four hydrogen atoms).
For anions, each negative charge would
mean addition of one electron. For
cations, each positive charge would result
in subtraction of one electron from the total
number of valence electrons. For example,
for the CO3
2– ion, the two negative charges
indicate that there are two additional
electrons than those provided by the
neutral atoms. For NH4
+ ion, one positive
charge indicates the loss of one electron
from the group of neutral atoms.
Knowing the chemical symbols of the
combining atoms and having knowledge
of the skeletal structure of the compound
(known or guessed intelligently), it is easy
to distribute the total number of electrons
as bonding shared pairs between the
atoms in proportion to the total bonds.
In general the least electronegative atom
occupies the central position in the
molecule/ion. For example in the NF3 and
2–, nitrogen and carbon are the central
atoms whereas fluorine and oxygen
occupy the terminal positions.
After accounting for the shared pairs of
electrons for single bonds, the remaining
electron pairs are either utilized for multiple
bonding or remain as the lone pairs. The
basic requirement being that each bonded
atom gets an octet of electrons.
Lewis representations of a few molecules/
ions are given in Table 4.1.
Table  4.1 The Lewis Representation of Some
Molecules
* Each H atom attains the configuration of helium (a duplet
of electrons)
C2H4 molecule
N2 molecule
C2H2 molecule
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Problem 4.1
Write the Lewis dot structure of CO
molecule.
Solution
Step 1. Count the total number of
valence electrons of carbon and oxygen
atoms. The outer (valence) shell
configurations of carbon and oxygen
atoms are: 2s2 2p2 and 2s2 2p4,
respectively. The valence electrons
available are 4 + 6 =10.
Step 2. The skeletal structure of CO is
written as: C  O
Step 3. Draw a single bond (one shared
electron pair) between C and O and
complete the octet on O, the remaining
two electrons are the lone pair on C.
This does not complete the octet on
carbon and hence we have to resort to
multiple bonding (in this case a triple
bond) between C and O atoms. This
satisfies the octet rule condition for both
atoms.
Problem 4.2
Write the Lewis structure of the nitrite
ion, NO2
Solution
Step 1. Count the total number of
valence electrons of the nitrogen atom,
the oxygen atoms and the additional one
negative charge (equal to one electron).
N(2s2 2p3), O (2s2 2p4)
5 + (2 × 6) +1 = 18 electrons
Step 2. The skeletal structure of NO2
written as :  O   N   O
Step 3. Draw a single bond (one shared
electron pair) between the nitrogen and
each of the oxygen atoms completing the
octets on oxygen atoms. This, however,
does not complete the octet on nitrogen
if the remaining two electrons constitute
lone pair on it.
Hence we have to resort to multiple
bonding between nitrogen and one of the
oxygen atoms (in this case a double
bond). This leads to the following Lewis
dot structures.
4.1.4 Formal Charge
Lewis dot structures, in general, do not
represent the actual shapes of the molecules.
In case of polyatomic ions, the net charge is
possessed by the ion as a whole and not by a
particular atom. It is, however, feasible to
assign a formal charge on each atom. The
formal charge of an atom in a polyatomic
molecule or ion may be defined as the
difference between the number of valence
electrons of that atom in an isolated or free
state and the number of electrons assigned
to that atom in the Lewis structure. It is
expressed as :
Formal charge (F.C.)
on an atom in a Lewis
structure
total number of valence
electrons in the free
total number of non
bonding (lone pair)
electrons
— (1/2)
total number of
bonding(shared)
electrons
2018-19
CHEMICAL BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
4.1.5 Limitations of the Octet Rule
The octet rule, though useful, is not universal.
It is quite useful for understanding the
structures of most of the organic compounds
and it applies mainly to the second period
elements of the periodic table. There are three
types of exceptions to the octet rule.
The incomplete octet of the central atom
In some compounds, the number of electrons
surrounding the central atom is less than
eight. This is especially the case with elements
having less than four valence electrons.
Examples are LiCl, BeH2 and BCl3.
Li, Be and B have 1,2 and 3 valence electrons
only. Some other such compounds are AlCl3
and BF3.
Odd-electron molecules
In molecules with an odd number of electrons
like nitric oxide, NO and nitrogen dioxide,
NO2, the octet rule is not satisfied for all the
atoms
The expanded octet
Elements in and beyond the third period of
the periodic table have, apart from 3s and 3p
orbitals, 3d orbitals also available for bonding.
In a number of compounds of these elements
there are more than eight valence electrons
around the central atom. This is termed as
the expanded octet. Obviously the octet rule
does not apply in such cases.
Some of the examples of such compounds
are: PF5, SF6, H2SO4 and a number of
coordination compounds.
The counting is based on the assumption
that the atom in the molecule owns one
electron of each shared pair and both the
electrons of a lone pair.
Let us consider the ozone molecule (O3).
The Lewis structure of O3 may be drawn as :
The atoms have been numbered as 1, 2
and 3. The formal charge on:
The central O atom marked 1
= 6 – 2 – 1
2  (6) = +1
The end O atom marked 2
= 6 – 4 – 1
2  (4) = 0
The end O atom marked 3
= 6 – 6 – 1
2  (2) = –1
Hence, we represent O3 along with the
formal charges as follows:
We must understand that formal charges
do not indicate real charge separation within
the molecule. Indicating the charges on the
atoms in the Lewis structure only helps in
keeping track of the valence electrons in the
molecule. Formal charges help in the
selection of the lowest energy structure from
a number of possible Lewis structures for a
given species.  Generally the lowest energy
structure is the one with the smallest
formal charges on the atoms. The formal
charge is a factor based on a pure covalent
view of bonding in which electron pairs
are shared equally by neighbouring atoms.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Interestingly, sulphur also forms many
compounds in which the octet rule is obeyed.
In sulphur dichloride, the S atom has an octet
of electrons around it.
Other drawbacks of the octet theory
It is clear that octet rule is based upon
the chemical inertness of noble gases.
However, some noble gases (for example
xenon and krypton) also combine with
oxygen and fluorine to form a number of
compounds like XeF2, KrF2, XeOF2 etc.,
This theory does not account for the shape
of molecules.
It does not explain the relative stability of
the molecules being totally silent about
the energy of a molecule.
4.2 IONIC OR ELECTROVALENT BOND
From the Kössel and Lewis treatment of the
formation of an ionic bond, it follows that the
formation of ionic compounds would
primarily depend upon:
The ease of formation of the positive and
negative ions from the respective neutral
atoms;
The arrangement of the positive and
negative ions in the solid, that is, the
lattice of the crystalline compound.
The formation of a positive ion involves
ionization, i.e.,  removal of electron(s) from
the neutral atom and that of the negative ion
involves the addition of electron(s) to the
neutral atom.
→   M+(g) + e– ;
Ionization enthalpy
X(g) + e–   →   X – (g) ;
Electron gain enthalpy
M+(g)  + X –(g)  →  MX(s)
The electron gain enthalpy, ∆egH, is the
enthalpy change (Unit 3), when a gas phase atom
in its ground state gains an electron. The
electron gain process may be exothermic or
endothermic. The ionization, on the other hand,
is always endothermic. Electron affinity, is the
negative of the energy change accompanying
electron gain.
Obviously ionic bonds will be formed
more easily between elements with
comparatively low ionization enthalpies
and elements with comparatively high
negative value of electron gain enthalpy.
Most ionic compounds have cations
derived from metallic elements and anions
non-metallic
elements.
ammonium ion, NH4
+ (made up of two non-
metallic elements) is an exception. It forms
the cation of a number of ionic compounds.
Ionic compounds in the crystalline state
consist of orderly three-dimensional
arrangements of cations and anions held
together by coulombic interaction energies.
These compounds crystallise in different
crystal structures determined by the size
of the ions, their packing arrangements and
other factors. The crystal structure of
sodium chloride, NaCl (rock salt), for
example is shown below.
In ionic solids, the sum of the electron
gain enthalpy and the ionization enthalpy
may be positive but still the crystal
structure gets stabilized due to the energy
released in the formation of the crystal
lattice. For example: the ionization
enthalpy for Na+(g) formation from Na(g)
is 495.8 kJ mol–1 ; while the electron gain
enthalpy for the change Cl(g) + e–→
Cl– (g) is, – 348.7 kJ mol–1 only. The sum
of the two, 147.1 kJ mol-1 is more than
compensated for by the enthalpy of lattice
formation of NaCl(s) (–788 kJ mol–1).
Therefore, the energy released in the
Rock salt structure
2018-19
CHEMICAL BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
processes is more than the energy absorbed.
Thus a qualitative measure of the
stability of an ionic compound is
provided by its enthalpy of  lattice
formation and not simply by achieving
octet of electrons around the ionic species
in gaseous state.
Since lattice enthalpy plays a key role
in the formation of ionic compounds, it is
important that we learn more about it.
4.2.1 Lattice Enthalpy
The Lattice Enthalpy of an ionic solid is
defined as the energy required to
completely separate one mole of a solid
ionic compound into gaseous constituent
ions. For example, the lattice enthalpy of NaCl
is 788 kJ mol–1. This means that 788 kJ of
energy is required to separate one mole of
solid NaCl into one mole of Na+ (g) and one
mole of Cl– (g) to an infinite distance.
This process involves both the attractive
forces between ions of opposite charges and
the repulsive forces between ions of like
charge. The solid crystal being three-
dimensional; it is not possible to calculate
lattice enthalpy directly from the interaction
of forces of attraction and repulsion only.
Factors associated with the crystal geometry
have to be included.
4.3 BOND PARAMETERS
4.3.1  Bond Length
Bond length is defined as the equilibrium
distance between the nuclei of two bonded
atoms in a molecule. Bond lengths are
measured by spectroscopic, X-ray diffraction
and electron-diffraction techniques about
which you will learn in higher classes. Each
atom of the bonded pair contributes to the
bond length (Fig. 4.1). In the case of a covalent
bond, the contribution from each atom is
called the covalent radius of that atom.
The covalent radius is measured
approximately as the radius of an atom’s
core which is in contact with the core of
an adjacent atom in a bonded situation.
The covalent radius is half of the distance
between two similar atoms joined by a
Fig. 4.1  The bond length in a covalent
molecule AB.
R = rA + rB (R is the bond length and rA and rB
are the covalent radii of atoms  A and B
respectively)
covalent bond in the same molecule.  The van
der Waals radius represents the overall size
of the atom which includes its valence shell
in a nonbonded situation. Further, the van
der Waals radius is half of the distance
between two similar atoms in separate
molecules in a solid. Covalent and van der
Waals radii of chlorine are depicted in Fig.4.2
Fig. 4.2 Covalent and van der Waals radii in a
chlorine molecule. The inner circles
correspond to the size of the chlorine atom
(rvdw and rc are van der Waals and
covalent radii respectively).
r = 99 pm
198 pm
= 180 pm
360 pm
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Some typical average bond lengths for
single, double and triple bonds are shown in
Table 4.2. Bond lengths for some common
molecules are given in Table 4.3.
The covalent radii of some common
elements are listed in Table 4.4.
4.3.2 Bond Angle
It is defined as the angle between the orbitals
containing bonding electron pairs around the
central atom in a molecule/complex ion. Bond
angle is expressed in degree which can be
experimentally determined by spectroscopic
methods. It gives some idea regarding the
distribution of orbitals around the central
atom in a molecule/complex ion and hence it
helps us in determining its shape. For
example H–O–H bond angle in water can be
represented as under :
4.3.3 Bond Enthalpy
It is defined as the amount of energy required
to break one mole of bonds of a particular
type between two atoms in a gaseous state.
The unit of bond enthalpy is kJ mol–1. For
example, the H – H bond enthalpy in hydrogen
molecule is 435.8 kJ mol–1.
H2(g) → H(g) + H(g); ∆aH
V = 435.8 kJ mol–1
Similarly the bond enthalpy for molecules
containing multiple bonds, for example O2 and
N2 will be as under :
O2 (O = O) (g) → O(g) + O(g);
V = 498 kJ mol–1
N2 (N ≡ N) (g) → N(g) + N(g);
V = 946.0 kJ mol–1
It is important that larger the bond
dissociation enthalpy, stronger will be the
bond in the molecule. For a heteronuclear
diatomic molecules like HCl, we have
HCl (g) → H(g) + Cl (g); ∆aH
V = 431.0 kJ mol–1
In case of polyatomic molecules, the
measurement of bond strength is more
complicated. For example in case of H2O
molecule, the enthalpy needed to break the
two O – H bonds is not the same.
Table 4.2
Average Bond Lengths for Some
Single, Double and Triple Bonds
Bond Type
Covalent Bond Length
Table 4.3
Bond Lengths in Some Common
Molecules
Molecule
Bond Length
H2 (H – H)
F2 (F – F)
Cl2 (Cl – Cl)
Br2 (Br – Br)
I2 (I – I)
N2 (N ≡ N)
O2 (O = O)
HF (H – F)
HCl (H – Cl)
HBr (H – Br)
HI (H – I)
Table 4.4  Covalent Radii, *rcov/(pm)
* The values cited are for single bonds, except where
otherwise indicated in parenthesis. (See also Unit 3 for
periodic trends).
2018-19
CHEMICAL BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
H2O(g)  →  H(g) + OH(g); ∆aH1
V =  502 kJ mol–1
OH(g)  →  H(g) + O(g); ∆aH2
V = 427 kJ mol–1
The difference in the ∆aH
V value shows that
the second O – H bond undergoes some change
because of changed chemical environment.
This is the reason for some difference in energy
of the same O – H bond in different molecules
like C2H5OH (ethanol) and water. Therefore in
polyatomic molecules the term mean or
average bond enthalpy is used. It is obtained
by dividing total bond dissociation enthalpy
by the number of bonds broken as explained
below in case of water molecule,
Average bond enthalpy = 502
= 464.5 kJ mol–1
4.3.4 Bond Order
In the Lewis description of covalent bond,
the Bond Order is given by the number of
bonds between the two atoms in a
molecule. The bond order, for example in H2
(with a single shared electron pair), in O2
(with two shared electron pairs) and in N2
(with three shared electron pairs) is 1,2,3
respectively. Similarly in CO (three shared
electron pairs between C and O) the bond
order is 3. For N2, bond order is 3 and its
∆HV  is 946 kJ mol–1; being one of the
highest for a diatomic molecule.
Isoelectronic molecules and ions have
identical bond orders; for example, F2 and
2– have bond order 1. N2, CO and NO+
have bond order 3.
A general correlation useful for
understanding the stablities of molecules
is that: with increase in bond order, bond
enthalpy increases and bond length
decreases.
4.3.5 Resonance Structures
It is often observed that a single Lewis
structure is inadequate for the representation
of a molecule in conformity with its
experimentally determined parameters. For
example, the ozone, O3 molecule can be
equally represented by the structures I and II
shown below:
In both structures we have a O–O single
bond and a O=O double bond. The normal
O–O and O=O bond lengths are 148 pm and
121 pm respectively. Experimentally
determined oxygen-oxygen bond lengths in
the O3 molecule are same (128 pm). Thus the
oxygen-oxygen bonds in the O3 molecule are
intermediate between a double and a single
bond. Obviously, this cannot be represented
by either of the two Lewis structures shown
above.
The concept of resonance was introduced
to deal with the type of difficulty experienced
in the depiction of accurate structures of
molecules like O3. According to the concept
of resonance, whenever a single Lewis
structure cannot describe a molecule
accurately, a number of structures with
similar energy, positions of nuclei, bonding
and non-bonding pairs of electrons are taken
as the canonical structures of the hybrid
which describes the molecule accurately.
Thus for O3, the two structures shown above
constitute the canonical structures or
resonance structures and their hybrid i.e., the
III structure represents the structure of O3
more accurately. This is also called resonance
hybrid. Resonance is represented by a double
headed arrow.
Fig. 4.3  Resonance in the O3 molecule
(structures I and II represent the two canonical
forms while the structure III  is the resonance
hybrid)
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Some of the other examples of resonance
structures are provided by the carbonate ion
and the carbon dioxide molecule.
Problem 4.3
Explain the structure of CO3
2– ion in terms
of resonance.
Solution
The single Lewis structure based on the
presence of two single bonds and one
double bond between carbon and oxygen
atoms is inadequate to represent the
molecule accurately as it represents
unequal bonds. According to the
experimental findings, all carbon to
oxygen bonds in CO3
2– are equivalent.
Therefore the carbonate ion is best
described as a resonance hybrid of the
canonical forms I, II, and III shown below.
Problem 4.4
Explain the structure of CO2 molecule.
Solution
The experimentally determined carbon
to oxygen bond length in CO2 is
115 pm. The lengths of a normal
carbon to oxygen double bond (C=O)
and carbon to oxygen triple bond (C≡O)
are 121 pm and 110 pm respectively.
The carbon-oxygen bond lengths in
CO2 (115 pm) lie between the values
for C=O and C≡O. Obviously, a single
Lewis structure cannot depict this
position and it becomes necessary to
write more than one Lewis structures
and to consider that the structure of
CO2 is best described as a hybrid of
the canonical or resonance  forms I, II
and III.
In general, it may be stated that
Resonance stabilizes the molecule as the
energy of the resonance hybrid is less
than the energy of any single cannonical
structure; and,
Resonance
averages
characteristics as a whole.
Thus the energy of the O3 resonance
hybrid is lower than either of the two
cannonical froms I and II (Fig 4.3).
Many misconceptions are associated
with resonance and the same need to be
dispelled. You should remember that :
The cannonical forms have no real
existence.
The molecule does not exist for a
certain fraction of time in one
cannonical form and for other
fractions of time in other cannonical
forms.
There is no such  equilibrium between
the cannonical forms as we have
between tautomeric forms (keto and
enol) in tautomerism.
The molecule as such has a single
structure which is the resonance
hybrid of the cannonical forms and
which cannot as such be depicted by
a single Lewis structure.
4.3.6 Polarity of Bonds
The existence of a hundred percent ionic or
covalent bond represents an ideal situation.
In reality no bond or a compound is either
completely covalent or ionic. Even in case of
covalent bond between two hydrogen atoms,
there is some ionic character.
When covalent bond is formed between
two similar atoms, for example in H2, O2, Cl2,
N2 or F2, the shared pair of electrons is equally
Fig.4.4
Resonance in CO3
2–, I, II and
III represent the three
canonical forms.
Fig. 4.5
Resonance in CO2 molecule, I, II
and III represent the three
canonical forms.
2018-19
CHEMICAL BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
attracted by the two atoms. As a result electron
pair is situated exactly between the two
identical nuclei. The bond so formed is called
nonpolar covalent bond.  Contrary to this in
case of a heteronuclear molecule like HF, the
shared electron pair between the two atoms
gets displaced more towards fluorine since the
electronegativity of fluorine (Unit 3) is far
greater than that of hydrogen. The resultant
covalent bond is a polar covalent bond.
As a result of polarisation, the molecule
possesses the dipole moment (depicted
below) which can be defined as the product
of the magnitude of the charge and the
distance between the centres of positive and
negative charge. It is usually designated by a
Greek letter ‘µ’. Mathematically, it is expressed
as follows :
Dipole moment (µ) = charge (Q) × distance of
separation (r)
Dipole moment is usually expressed in
Debye units (D). The conversion factor is
1 D = 3.33564 × 10–30  C m
where C is coulomb and m is meter.
Further dipole moment is a vector quantity
and by convention it is depicted by a small
arrow with tail on the negative centre and head
pointing towards the positive centre. But in
chemistry presence of dipole moment is
represented by the crossed arrow (
) put
on Lewis structure of the molecule. The cross
is on positive end and arrow head is on negative
end. For example the dipole moment of HF may
be represented as :
This arrow symbolises the direction of the
shift of electron density in the molecule. Note
that the direction of crossed arrow is opposite
to the conventional direction of dipole moment
vector.
Peter Debye, the Dutch chemist
received Nobel prize in 1936 for
his work on X-ray diffraction and
dipole moments. The magnitude
of the dipole moment is given in
Debye units in order to honour him.
In case of polyatomic molecules the dipole
moment not only depend upon the individual
dipole moments of bonds known as bond
dipoles but also on the spatial arrangement of
various bonds in the molecule. In such case,
the dipole moment of a molecule is the vector
sum of the dipole moments of various bonds.
For example in H2O molecule, which has a bent
structure, the two O–H bonds are oriented at
an angle of 104.50. Net dipole moment of 6.17
× 10–30 C m (1D = 3.33564 × 10–30 C m) is the
resultant of the dipole moments of two O–H
bonds.
Net Dipole moment, µ  = 1.85 D
= 1.85 × 3.33564 × 10
–30 C m = 6.17 ×10
–30 C m
The dipole moment in case of BeF2 is zero.
This is because the two equal bond dipoles
point in opposite directions and cancel the
effect of each other.
In tetra-atomic molecule,  for example in
BF3, the dipole moment is zero although the
B – F bonds are oriented at an angle of 120
one another, the three bond moments give a
net sum of zero as the resultant of any two is
equal and opposite to the third.
Let us study an interesting case of NH3
and NF3 molecule. Both the molecules have
pyramidal shape with a lone pair of electrons
on nitrogen atom. Although fluorine is more
electronegative than nitrogen, the resultant
H         F
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
dipole moment of NH3 ( 4.90 × 10–30 C m) is
greater than that of NF3 (0.8 × 10–30 C m). This
is because, in case of NH3 the orbital dipole
due to lone pair is in the same direction as the
resultant dipole moment of the N – H bonds,
whereas in NF3 the orbital dipole is in the
direction opposite to the resultant dipole
moment of the three N–F bonds. The orbital
dipole because of lone pair  decreases the effect
of the resultant N – F bond moments, which
results in the low dipole moment of NF3 as
represented below :
in terms of the following rules:
The smaller the size of the cation and the
larger the size of the anion, the greater the
covalent character of an ionic bond.
The greater the charge on the cation, the
greater the covalent character of the ionic bond.
For cations of the same size and charge,
the one, with electronic configuration
(n-1)dnnso, typical of transition metals, is
more polarising than the one with a noble
gas configuration, ns2 np6, typical of alkali
and alkaline earth metal cations.
The cation polarises the anion, pulling the
electronic charge toward itself and thereby
increasing the electronic charge between
the two. This is precisely what happens in
a covalent bond, i.e., buildup of electron
charge density between the nuclei. The
polarising power of the cation, the
polarisability of the anion and the extent
of distortion (polarisation) of anion are the
factors, which determine the per cent
covalent character of the ionic bond.
4.4 THE VALENCE SHELL ELECTRON
PAIR REPULSION (VSEPR) THEORY
As already explained, Lewis concept is unable
to explain the shapes of molecules. This theory
provides a simple procedure to predict the
shapes of covalent molecules. Sidgwick
Dipole moments of some molecules are
shown in Table 4.5.
Just as all the covalent bonds have
some partial ionic character, the ionic
bonds also have partial covalent
character. The partial covalent character
of ionic bonds was discussed by Fajans
Type of
Example
Dipole
Geometry
Molecule
Moment, µ(D)
Molecule (AB)
linear
linear
linear
linear
linear
Molecule (AB2)
linear
Molecule (AB3)
trigonal-pyramidal
trigonal-pyramidal
trigonal-planar
Molecule (AB4)
tetrahedral
CHCl3
tetrahedral
tetrahedral
Table 4.5  Dipole Moments of Selected Molecules
2018-19
CHEMICAL BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
and Powell in 1940, proposed a simple theory
based on the repulsive interactions of the
electron pairs in the valence shell of the atoms.
It was further developed and redefined by
Nyholm and Gillespie (1957).
The main postulates of VSEPR theory are
as follows:
The shape of a molecule depends upon
the number of valence shell electron pairs
(bonded or nonbonded) around the central
atom.
Pairs of electrons in the valence shell repel
one another since their electron clouds are
negatively charged.
These pairs of electrons tend to occupy
such positions in space that minimise
repulsion and thus maximise distance
between them.
The valence shell is taken as a sphere with
the electron pairs localising on the
spherical surface at maximum distance
from one another.
A multiple bond is treated as if it is a single
electron pair and the two or three electron
pairs of a multiple bond are treated as a
single super pair.
Where two or more resonance structures
can represent a molecule, the VSEPR
model is applicable to any such structure.
The repulsive interaction of electron pairs
decrease in the order:
Lone pair (lp) – Lone pair (lp) > Lone pair (lp)
– Bond pair (bp) > Bond pair (bp) –
Bond pair (bp)
Nyholm and Gillespie (1957) refined the
VSEPR model by explaining the important
difference between the lone pairs and bonding
pairs of electrons. While the lone pairs are
localised on the central atom, each bonded pair
is shared between two atoms. As a result, the
lone pair electrons in a molecule occupy more
space as compared to the bonding pairs of
electrons. This results in greater repulsion
between lone pairs of electrons as compared
to the lone pair - bond pair and bond pair -
bond pair repulsions. These repulsion effects
result in deviations from idealised shapes and
alterations in bond angles in molecules.
For the prediction of geometrical shapes of
molecules with the help of VSEPR theory, it is
convenient to divide molecules into two
categories as (i) molecules in which the
central atom has no lone pair and (ii)
molecules in which the central atom has
one or more lone pairs.
Table
(page114)
shows
arrangement of electron pairs about a central
atom A (without any lone pairs) and
geometries of some molecules/ions of the type
AB. Table 4.7 (page 115) shows shapes of some
simple molecules and ions in which the central
atom has one or more lone pairs. Table 4.8
(page 116) explains the reasons for the
distortions in the geometry of the molecule.
As depicted in Table 4.6, in the
compounds of AB2, AB3, AB4, AB5 and AB6,
the arrangement of electron pairs and the B
atoms around the central atom A are : linear,
trigonal planar, tetrahedral, trigonal-
bipyramidal and octahedral, respectively.
Such arrangement can be seen in the
molecules like BF3 (AB3), CH4 (AB4) and PCl5
(AB5) as depicted below by their ball and
stick models.
The VSEPR Theory is able to predict
geometry of a large number of molecules,
especially the compounds of p-block elements
accurately. It is also quite successful in
determining the geometry quite-accurately
even when the energy difference between
possible structures is very small. The
theoretical basis of the VSEPR theory
regarding the effects of electron pair repulsions
on molecular shapes is not clear and
continues to be a subject of doubt and
discussion.
Fig. 4.6
The shapes of  molecules in which
central atom has no lone pair
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Table 4.6  Geometry of Molecules in which the Central Atom has No Lone Pair of Electrons
2018-19
CHEMICAL BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
Table 4.7
Shape (geometry) of Some Simple Molecules/Ions with Central Ions having One or
More Lone Pairs of Electrons(E).
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Theoretically the shape
should have been triangular
planar but actually it is found
to be bent or v-shaped. The
reason being the lone pair-
bond pair repulsion is much
more as compared to the
bond pair-bond pair repul-
sion. So the angle is reduced
to 119.5° from 120°.
Had there been a bp in place
of lp the shape would have
been tetrahedral but one
lone pair is present and due
to the repulsion between
lp-bp (which is more than
bp-bp repulsion) the angle
between bond pairs is
reduced to 107° from 109.5°.
The shape should have been
tetrahedral if there were all bp
but two lp are present so the
shape is distorted tetrahedral
or angular. The reason is
lp-lp repulsion is more than
lp-bp repulsion which is more
than bp-bp repulsion. Thus,
the angle is reduced to 104.5°
from 109.5°.
Trigonal
pyramidal
AB2E2
In (a) the lp is present at axial
position so there are three
lp—bp repulsions at 90°. In(b)
the lp is in an equatorial
position, and there are two
lp—bp repulsions. Hence,
arrangement (b) is more
stable. The shape shown in (b)
is described as a distorted
tetrahedron, a folded square or
a see-saw.
(More stable)
Table 4.8  Shapes of Molecules containing Bond Pair and Lone Pair
Shape
Reason for the
shape acquired
Arrangement
of electrons
No. of
pairs
No. of
bonding
pairs
Molecule
2018-19
CHEMICAL BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
In (a) the lp are at
equatorial position so
there are less lp-bp
repulsions
compared to others in
which the lp are at
axial positions. So
structure (a) is most
stable. (T-shaped).
T-shape
AB3E2
Shape
Reason for the
shape acquired
Arrangement
of electrons
No. of
pairs
No. of
bonding
pairs
Molecule
4.5 VALENCE BOND THEORY
As we know that Lewis approach helps in
writing the structure of molecules but it fails
to explain the formation of chemical bond. It
also does not give any reason for the difference
in bond dissociation enthalpies and bond
lengths in molecules like H2 (435.8 kJ mol-1,
74 pm) and F2 (155 kJ mol-1, 144 pm),
although in both the cases a single covalent
bond is formed by the sharing of an electron
pair between the respective atoms. It also gives
no idea about the shapes of polyatomic
molecules.
Similarly the VSEPR theory gives the
geometry of simple molecules but
theoretically, it does not explain them and also
it has limited applications. To overcome these
limitations the two important theories based
on quantum mechanical principles are
introduced. These are valence bond (VB) theory
and molecular orbital (MO) theory.
Valence bond theory was introduced by
Heitler and London (1927) and developed
further by Pauling and others.  A discussion
of the valence bond theory is based on the
knowledge of atomic orbitals, electronic
configurations of elements (Units 2), the
overlap criteria of atomic orbitals, the
hybridization of atomic orbitals and the
principles of variation and superposition. A
rigorous treatment of the VB theory in terms
of these aspects is beyond the scope of this
book. Therefore, for the sake of convenience,
valence bond theory has been discussed in
terms of qualitative and non-mathematical
treatment only. To start with, let us consider
the formation of hydrogen molecule which is
the simplest of all molecules.
Consider two hydrogen atoms A and B
approaching each other having nuclei NA  and
NB and electrons present in them are
represented by eA and eB. When the two atoms
are at large distance from each other, there is
no interaction between them. As these two
atoms approach each other, new attractive and
repulsive forces begin to operate.
Attractive forces arise between:
nucleus of one atom and its  own electron
that is NA – eA and NB– eB.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
(ii) nucleus of one atom and electron of other
atom i.e., NA– eB, NB– eA.
Similarly repulsive forces arise between
(i) electrons of two atoms like eA – eB,
(ii) nuclei of two atoms NA – NB.
Attractive forces tend to bring the two
atoms close to each other whereas repulsive
forces tend to push them apart (Fig. 4.7).
Experimentally it has been found that the
magnitude of new attractive force is more than
the new repulsive forces. As a result, two
atoms approach each other and potential
energy decreases. Ultimately a stage is
reached where the net force of attraction
balances the force of repulsion and system
acquires minimum energy. At this stage two
Fig. 4.7
Forces of attraction and repulsion during
the formation of H2 molecule.
hydrogen atoms are said to be bonded together
to form a stable molecule having the bond
length of 74 pm.
Since the energy gets released when the
bond is formed between two hydrogen atoms,
the hydrogen molecule is more stable than that
of isolated hydrogen atoms. The energy so
released is called as bond enthalpy, which is
corresponding to minimum in the curve
depicted in Fig. 4.8. Conversely, 435.8 kJ of
energy is required to dissociate one mole of
H2 molecule.
H2(g) + 435.8 kJ mol–1 → H(g) + H(g)
4.5.1 Orbital Overlap Concept
In the formation of hydrogen molecule, there
is a minimum energy state when two hydrogen
atoms are so near that their atomic orbitals
undergo partial interpenetration. This partial
merging of atomic orbitals is called overlapping
of atomic orbitals which results in the pairing
of electrons. The extent of overlap decides the
strength of a covalent bond. In general, greater
the overlap the stronger is the bond formed
between two atoms. Therefore, according to
orbital overlap concept, the formation of a
covalent bond between two atoms results by
pairing of electrons present in the valence shell
having opposite spins.
Fig. 4.8 The potential energy curve for the
formation of H2 molecule as a function of
internuclear distance of the H atoms. The
minimum in the curve corresponds to the
most stable state of H2.
2018-19
CHEMICAL BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
4.5.2  Directional Properties of Bonds
As we have already seen, the covalent bond is
formed by overlapping of atomic orbitals. The
molecule of hydrogen is formed due to the
overlap of 1s-orbitals of two H atoms.
In case of polyatomic molecules like CH4,
NH3 and H2O, the geometry of the molecules is
also important in addition to the bond
formation. For example why is it so that CH4
molecule has tetrahedral shape and HCH bond
angles are 109.5°? Why is the shape of NH3
molecule pyramidal ?
The valence bond theory explains the
shape, the formation and directional properties
of bonds in polyatomic molecules like CH4, NH3
and H2O, etc. in terms of overlap and
hybridisation of atomic orbitals.
4.5.3 Overlapping of Atomic Orbitals
When orbitals of two atoms come close to form
bond, their overlap may be positive, negative
or zero depending upon the sign (phase) and
direction of orientation of amplitude of orbital
wave function in space (Fig. 4.9). Positive and
negative sign on boundary surface diagrams
in the Fig. 4.9 show the sign (phase) of orbital
wave function and are not related to charge.
Orbitals forming bond should have same sign
(phase) and orientation in space. This is called
positive overlap. Various overlaps of s and p
orbitals are depicted in Fig. 4.9.
The criterion of overlap, as the main factor
for the formation of covalent bonds applies
uniformly to the homonuclear/heteronuclear
diatomic molecules and polyatomic molecules.
We know that the shapes of CH4, NH3, and H2O
molecules are tetrahedral, pyramidal and bent
respectively. It would be therefore interesting
to use VB theory to find out if these geometrical
shapes can be explained in terms of the orbital
overlaps.
Let us first consider the CH4 (methane)
molecule. The electronic configuration of
carbon in its ground state is [He]2s2 2p2 which
in the excited state becomes [He] 2s1 2px
1 2py
1. The energy required for this excitation is
compensated by the release of energy due to
overlap between the orbitals of carbon and the
Fig.4.9
Positive, negative and zero overlaps of
s and p atomic orbitals
hydrogen.The four atomic orbitals of carbon,
each with an unpaired electron can overlap
with the 1s orbitals of the four H atoms which
are also singly occupied. This will result in the
formation of four C-H bonds. It will, however,
be observed that while the three p orbitals of
carbon are at 90° to one another, the HCH
angle for these will also be 90°. That is three
C-H bonds will be oriented at 90° to one
another. The 2s orbital of carbon and the 1s
orbital of H are spherically symmetrical and
they can overlap in any direction. Therefore
the direction of the fourth C-H bond cannot
be ascertained. This description does not fit
in with the tetrahedral HCH angles of 109.5°.
Clearly, it follows that simple atomic orbital
overlap does not account for the directional
characteristics of bonds in CH4. Using similar
procedure and arguments, it can be seen that in the
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
case of NH3 and H2O molecules, the HNH and
HOH angles should be 90°. This is in
disagreement with the actual bond angles of
107° and 104.5° in the NH3 and H2O
molecules respectively.
4.5.4 Types of Overlapping and Nature of
Covalent Bonds
The covalent bond may be classified into two
types depending upon the types of
overlapping:
(i) Sigma(σ) bond, and (ii) pi(π) bond
(i) Sigma(σ) bond : This type of covalent bond
is formed by the end to end (head-on)
overlap of bonding orbitals along the
internuclear axis. This is called as head
on overlap or axial overlap. This can be
formed by any one of the following types
of combinations of atomic orbitals.
s-s overlapping : In this case, there is
overlap of two half filled s-orbitals along
the internuclear axis as shown below :
s-p overlapping: This type of overlap
occurs between half filled s-orbitals of one
atom and half filled p-orbitals of another
atom.
p–p overlapping : This type of overlap
takes place between half filled p-orbitals
of the two approaching atoms.
(ii) pi(π
π π ) bond : In the formation of π  bond
the atomic orbitals overlap in such a way
that their axes remain parallel to each other
and perpendicular to the internuclear axis.
The orbitals formed due to sidewise
overlapping consists of two saucer type
charged clouds above and below the plane
of the participating atoms.
4.5.5 Strength of Sigma and pi Bonds
Basically the strength of a bond depends upon
the extent of overlapping. In case of sigma bond,
the overlapping of orbitals takes place to a
larger extent. Hence, it is stronger as compared
to the pi bond where the extent of overlapping
occurs to a smaller extent. Further, it is
important to note that in the formation of
multiple bonds between two atoms of a
molecule, pi bond(s) is formed in addition to a
sigma bond.
4.6 HYBRIDISATION
In order to explain the characteristic
geometrical shapes of polyatomic molecules
like CH4, NH3 and H2O etc., Pauling introduced
the concept of hybridisation. According to him
the atomic orbitals combine to form new set of
equivalent orbitals known as hybrid orbitals.
Unlike pure orbitals, the hybrid orbitals are
used in bond formation. The phenomenon is
known as hybridisation which can be defined
as the process of intermixing of the orbitals of
slightly different energies so as to redistribute
their energies, resulting in the formation of new
set of orbitals of equivalent energies and shape.
For example when one 2s and three 2p-orbitals
of carbon hybridise, there is the formation of
four new sp3 hybrid orbitals.
Salient features of hybridisation: The main
features of hybridisation are as under :
1. The number of hybrid orbitals is equal to
the number of the atomic orbitals that get
hybridised.
2. The hybridised orbitals are always
equivalent in energy and shape.
2018-19
CHEMICAL BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
3. The hybrid orbitals are more effective in
forming stable bonds than the pure atomic
orbitals.
4. These hybrid orbitals are directed in space
in some preferred direction to have
minimum repulsion between electron
pairs and thus a stable arrangement.
Therefore, the type of hybridisation
indicates the geometry of the molecules.
Important conditions for hybridisation
The orbitals present in the valence shell
of the atom are hybridised.
(ii) The orbitals undergoing hybridisation
should have almost equal energy.
(iii) Promotion of electron is not essential
condition prior to hybridisation.
(iv) It is not necessary that only half filled
orbitals participate in hybridisation. In
some cases, even filled orbitals of valence
shell take part in hybridisation.
4.6.1  Types of Hybridisation
There are various types of hybridisation
involving s, p and d orbitals. The different
types of hybridisation are as under:
(I) sp hybridisation: This type of
hybridisation involves the mixing of one s and
one p orbital resulting in the formation of two
equivalent sp hybrid orbitals. The suitable
orbitals for sp hybridisation are s and pz, if
the hybrid orbitals are to lie along the z-axis.
Each sp hybrid orbitals has 50% s-character
and 50% p-character. Such a molecule in
which the central atom is sp-hybridised and
linked directly to two other central atoms
possesses linear geometry. This type of
hybridisation is also known as diagonal
hybridisation.
The two sp hybrids point in the opposite
direction along the z-axis with projecting
positive lobes and very small negative lobes,
which provides more effective overlapping
resulting in the formation of stronger bonds.
Example
molecule
having
hybridisation
BeCl 2: The ground state electronic
configuration of Be is 1s22s2. In the exited state
one of the 2s-electrons is promoted to
vacant 2p orbital to account for its bivalency.
One 2s and one 2p-orbital gets hybridised to
form two sp hybridised orbitals. These two
sp hybrid orbitals are oriented in opposite
direction forming an angle of 180°. Each of
the sp hybridised orbital overlaps with the
2p-orbital of chlorine axially and form two Be-
Cl sigma bonds. This is shown in Fig. 4.10.
(II) sp2 hybridisation : In this hybridisation
there is involvement of one s and two
p-orbitals in order to form three equivalent sp2
hybridised orbitals. For example, in BCl3
molecule, the ground state electronic
configuration of central boron atom is
1s22s22p1. In the excited state, one of the 2s
electrons is promoted to vacant 2p orbital as
Fig.4.10
(a) Formation of  sp hybrids from s and
p orbitals;  (b) Formation of the linear
BeCl2 molecule
Fig.4.11 Formation of sp2 hybrids and the BCl3
molecule
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
a result boron has three unpaired electrons.
These three orbitals (one 2s and two 2p)
hybridise to form three sp2 hybrid orbitals. The
three hybrid orbitals so formed are oriented in
a trigonal planar arrangement and overlap with
2p orbitals of chlorine to form three B-Cl
bonds. Therefore, in BCl3 (Fig. 4.11), the
geometry is trigonal planar with ClBCl bond
angle of 120°.
(III) sp3 hybridisation: This type of
hybridisation can be explained by taking the
example of CH4 molecule in which there is
mixing of one s-orbital and three p-orbitals of
the valence shell to form four sp3 hybrid orbital
of equivalent energies and shape. There is 25%
s-character and 75% p-character in each sp3
hybrid orbital. The four sp3 hybrid orbitals so
formed are directed towards the four corners
of the tetrahedron. The angle between sp3
hybrid orbital is 109.5° as shown in Fig. 4.12.
Fig.4.12 Formation of sp3 hybrids by the
combination of s , px , py and pz atomic
orbitals of carbon and the formation of
CH4 molecule
The structure of NH3 and H2O molecules
can also be explained with the help of sp3
hybridisation. In NH3, the valence shell (outer)
electronic configuration of nitrogen in the
ground state is 2
z  having three
unpaired electrons in the sp3 hybrid orbitals
and a lone pair of electrons is present in the
fourth one. These three hybrid orbitals overlap
with 1s orbitals of hydrogen atoms to form
three N–H sigma bonds. We know that the force
of repulsion between a lone pair and a bond
pair is more than the force of repulsion
between two bond pairs of electrons. The
molecule thus gets distorted and the bond
angle is reduced to 107° from 109.5°. The
geometry of such a molecule will be pyramidal
as shown in Fig. 4.13.
Fig.4.13  Formation of NH3 molecule
In case of H2O molecule, the four oxygen
orbitals (one 2s and three 2p) undergo sp3
hybridisation forming four sp3 hybrid orbitals
out of which two contain one electron each and
the other two contain a pair of electrons. These
four sp3 hybrid orbitals acquire a tetrahedral
geometry, with two corners occupied by
hydrogen atoms while the other two by the lone
pairs. The bond angle in this case is reduced
to 104.5° from 109.5° (Fig. 4.14)  and the
molecule thus acquires  a V-shape or
angular geometry.
Fig.4.14  Formation of H2O molecule
2018-19
CHEMICAL BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
4.6.2 Other Examples of sp3, sp2 and sp
Hybridisation
sp3 Hybridisation in C2H6 molecule: In
ethane molecule both the carbon atoms
assume sp3 hybrid state. One of the four sp3
hybrid orbitals of carbon atom overlaps axially
with similar orbitals of other atom to form
sp3-sp3 sigma bond while the other three
hybrid orbitals of each carbon atom are used
in forming sp3–s sigma bonds with hydrogen
atoms as discussed in section 4.6.1(iii).
Therefore in ethane C–C bond length is 154
pm and each C–H bond length is 109 pm.
sp2 Hybridisation in C2H4: In the formation
of ethene molecule, one of the sp2 hybrid
orbitals of carbon atom overlaps axially with
sp2 hybridised orbital of another carbon atom
to form C–C sigma bond. While the other two
sp2 hybrid orbitals of each carbon atom are
used for making sp2–s sigma bond with two
hydrogen atoms. The unhybridised orbital (2px
or 2py) of one carbon atom overlaps sidewise
with the similar orbital of the other carbon
atom to form weak π bond, which consists of
two equal electron clouds distributed above
and below the plane of carbon and hydrogen
atoms.
Thus, in ethene molecule, the carbon-
carbon bond consists of one sp2–sp2 sigma
bond and one pi (π ) bond between p orbitals
which are not used in the hybridisation and
are perpendicular to the plane of molecule;
the bond length 134 pm. The C–H bond is
sp2–s sigma with bond length 108 pm. The H–
C–H bond angle is 117.6° while the H–C–C
angle is 121°. The formation of sigma and pi
bonds in ethene is shown in Fig. 4.15.
Fig. 4.15  Formation of sigma and pi bonds in ethene
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
sp Hybridisation  in C2H2 : In the formation
of ethyne molecule, both the carbon atoms
undergo sp-hybridisation having two
unhybridised orbital i.e., 2py and 2px.
One sp hybrid orbital of one carbon atom
overlaps axially with sp hybrid orbital of the
other carbon atom to form C–C sigma bond,
while the other hybridised orbital of each
carbon atom overlaps axially with the half
filled s orbital of hydrogen atoms forming σ
bonds. Each of the two unhybridised p orbitals
of both the carbon atoms overlaps sidewise to
form two π bonds between the carbon atoms.
So the triple bond between the two carbon
atoms is made up of one sigma and two pi
bonds as shown in Fig. 4.16.
4.6.3 Hybridisation of Elements involving
d Orbitals
The elements present in the third period
contain d orbitals in addition to s and p
orbitals. The energy of the 3d orbitals are
comparable to the energy of the 3s and 3p
orbitals. The energy of 3d orbitals are also
comparable to those of 4s and 4p orbitals. As
a consequence the hybridisation involving
either 3s, 3p and 3d or 3d, 4s and 4p is
possible. However, since the difference in
energies of 3p and 4s orbitals is significant, no
hybridisation involving 3p, 3d and 4s orbitals
is possible.
The important hybridisation schemes
involving s, p and d orbitals are summarised
below:
Fig.4.16
Formation of sigma and pi bonds in
ethyne
Shape of
Hybridisation
Atomic
Examples
molecules/
orbitals
Square
d+s+p(2)
[Ni(CN)4]2–,
planar
[Pt(Cl)4]2–
Trigonal
s+p(3)+d
PF5, PCl5
bipyramidal
Square
sp3d2
s+p(3)+d(2)
pyramidal
Octahedral
sp3d2
s+p(3)+d(2)
SF6, [CrF6]3–
d2sp3
d(2)+s+p(3)
[Co(NH3)6]3+
(i) Formation of PCl5 (sp3d hybridisation):
The ground state and the excited state outer
electronic configurations of phosphorus (Z=15)
are represented below.
sp3d hybrid orbitals filled by electron pairs
donated by five Cl atoms.
2018-19
CHEMICAL BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
Now the five orbitals (i.e., one s, three p and
one d orbitals) are available for hybridisation
to yield a set of five sp3d hybrid orbitals which
are directed towards the five corners of a
trigonal bipyramidal as depicted in the Fig.
4.17.
Fig. 4.17
Trigonal bipyramidal geometry of PCl5
molecule
It should be noted that all the bond angles
in trigonal bipyramidal geometry are not
equivalent. In PCl5 the five sp3d orbitals of
phosphorus overlap with the singly occupied
p orbitals of chlorine atoms to form five P–Cl
sigma bonds. Three P–Cl bond lie in one plane
and make an angle of 120° with each other;
these bonds are termed as equatorial bonds.
The remaining two P–Cl bonds–one lying
above and the other lying below the equatorial
plane, make an angle of 90° with the plane.
These bonds are called axial bonds. As the axial
bond pairs suffer more repulsive interaction
from the equatorial  bond pairs, therefore axial
bonds have been found to be slightly longer
and hence slightly weaker than the equatorial
bonds; which makes PCl5 molecule more
reactive.
(ii) Formation of SF6 (sp3d2 hybridisation):
In SF6 the central sulphur atom has the
ground state outer electronic configuration
3s23p4. In the exited state the available six
orbitals i.e., one s, three p and two d are singly
occupied by electrons. These orbitals hybridise
to form six new sp3d2 hybrid orbitals, which
are projected towards the six corners of a
regular octahedron in SF6. These six sp3d2
hybrid orbitals overlap with singly occupied
orbitals of fluorine atoms to form six S–F sigma
bonds. Thus SF6 molecule has a regular
octahedral geometry as shown in Fig. 4.18.
sp3d2 hybridisation
4.7 MOLECULAR ORBITAL THEORY
Molecular orbital (MO) theory was developed
by F. Hund and R.S. Mulliken in 1932. The
salient features of this theory are :
The electrons in a molecule are present
in the various molecular orbitals as the
electrons of atoms are present in the
various atomic orbitals.
The atomic orbitals of comparable
energies and proper symmetry combine
to form molecular orbitals.
(iii)
While an electron in an atomic orbital is
influenced by one nucleus, in a
molecular orbital it is influenced by two
or more nuclei depending upon the
number of atoms in the molecule. Thus,
Fig. 4.18  Octahedral geometry of SF6 molecule
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
an atomic orbital is monocentric while a
molecular orbital is polycentric.
The number of molecular orbital formed
is equal to the number of combining
atomic orbitals. When two atomic
orbitals combine, two molecular orbitals
are formed. One is known as bonding
molecular orbital while the other is
called antibonding molecular orbital.
The bonding molecular orbital has  lower
energy and hence greater stability than
corresponding
antibonding
molecular orbital.
Just as the electron probability
distribution around a nucleus in an
atom is given by an atomic orbital, the
electron probability distribution around
a group of nuclei in a molecule is given
by a molecular orbital.
(vii)
The molecular orbitals like atomic
orbitals are filled in accordance with the
aufbau principle obeying the Pauli’s
exclusion principle and the Hund’s rule.
4.7.1 Formation of Molecular Orbitals
Linear Combination of Atomic
Orbitals (LCAO)
According to wave mechanics, the atomic
orbitals can be expressed by wave functions
(ψ ’s) which represent the amplitude of the
electron waves. These are obtained from the
solution of Schrödinger wave equation.
However, since it cannot be solved for any
system containing more than one electron,
molecular orbitals which are one electron wave
functions for molecules are difficult to obtain
directly from the solution of Schrödinger wave
equation. To overcome this problem, an
approximate method known as linear
combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO) has
been adopted.
Let us apply this method to the
homonuclear diatomic hydrogen molecule.
Consider the hydrogen molecule consisting
of two atoms A and B. Each hydrogen atom in
the ground state has one electron in 1s orbital.
The atomic orbitals of these atoms may be
represented by the wave functions ψA and ψB.
Mathematically, the formation of molecular
orbitals may be described by the linear
combination of atomic orbitals that can take
place by addition and by subtraction of wave
functions of individual atomic orbitals as
shown below :
ψMO = ψA + ψB
Therefore, the two molecular orbitals
σ and σ* are formed as :
σ   =  ψA + ψB
σ* =  ψA – ψB
The molecular orbital σ formed by the
addition of atomic orbitals is called the
bonding molecular orbital while the
molecular orbital σ* formed by the subtraction
of atomic orbital is called antibonding
molecular orbital as depicted in Fig. 4.19.
Fig.4.19 Formation of bonding (σ)
antibonding (σ*) molecular orbitals by the
linear  combination of atomic orbitals ψA
and ψB centered on two atoms A and B
respectively.
Qualitatively, the formation of molecular
orbitals can be understood in terms of the
constructive or destructive interference of the
electron waves of the combining atoms. In the
formation of bonding molecular orbital, the
two electron waves of the bonding atoms
reinforce each other due to constructive
interference while in the formation of
σ* = ψA – ψB
σ  = ψA + ψB
2018-19
CHEMICAL BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
antibonding molecular orbital, the electron
waves cancel each other due to destructive
interference. As a result, the electron density
in a bonding molecular orbital is located
between the nuclei of the bonded atoms
because of which the repulsion between the
nuclei is very less while in case of an
antibonding molecular orbital, most of the
electron density is located away from the space
between the nuclei. Infact, there is a nodal
plane (on which the electron density is zero)
between the nuclei and hence the repulsion
between the nuclei is high. Electrons placed in
a bonding molecular orbital tend to hold the
nuclei together and stabilise a molecule.
Therefore, a bonding molecular orbital always
possesses lower energy than either of the
atomic orbitals that have combined to form it.
In contrast, the electrons placed in the
antibonding molecular orbital destabilise the
molecule. This is because the mutual repulsion
of the electrons in this orbital is more than the
attraction between the electrons and the nuclei,
which causes a net increase in energy.
It may be noted that the energy of the
antibonding orbital is raised above the energy
of the parent atomic orbitals that have
combined and the energy of the bonding orbital
has been lowered than the parent orbitals. The
total energy of two molecular orbitals, however,
remains the same as that of two original atomic
orbitals.
4.7.2 Conditions for the Combination of
Atomic Orbitals
The linear combination of atomic orbitals to
form molecular orbitals takes place only if the
following conditions are satisfied:
1.The combining atomic orbitals must
have the same or nearly the same energy.
This means that 1s orbital can combine with
another 1s orbital but not with 2s orbital
because the energy of 2s orbital is appreciably
higher than that of 1s orbital. This is not true
if the atoms are very different.
2.The combining atomic orbitals must
have the same symmetry about the
molecular axis. By convention z-axis is
taken as the molecular axis. It is important
to note that atomic orbitals having same or
nearly the same energy will not combine if
they do not have the same symmetry. For
example, 2pz orbital of one atom can combine
with 2pz orbital of the other atom but not
with the 2px or 2py orbitals because of their
different symmetries.
3.The combining atomic orbitals  must
overlap to the maximum extent. Greater
the extent of overlap, the greater will be the
electron-density between the nuclei of a
molecular orbital.
4.7.3 Types of Molecular Orbitals
Molecular orbitals of diatomic molecules are
designated as σ (sigma), π (pi), δ (delta), etc.
In this nomenclature, the sigma (σ)
molecular orbitals are symmetrical around
the bond-axis while pi (π) molecular orbitals
are not symmetrical. For example, the linear
combination of 1s orbitals centered on two
nuclei produces two molecular orbitals which
are symmetrical around the bond-axis. Such
molecular orbitals are of the σ type and are
designated as σ1s and σ*1s [Fig. 4.20(a),page
124]. If internuclear axis is taken to be in
the z-direction, it can be seen that a linear
combination of 2pz- orbitals of two atoms
also produces two sigma molecular orbitals
designated as σ2pz and σ*2pz. [Fig. 4.20(b)]
Molecular orbitals obtained from 2px and
2py orbitals are not symmetrical around the
bond axis because of the presence of positive
lobes above and negative lobes below the
molecular plane. Such molecular orbitals, are
labelled as π and  π* [Fig. 4.20(c)]. A π bonding
MO has larger electron density above and
below the inter -nuclear axis. The π*
antibonding MO has a node between the nuclei.
4.7.4 Energy Level Diagram for Molecular
Orbitals
We have seen that 1s atomic orbitals on two
atoms form two molecular orbitals designated
as σ1s and σ*1s. In the same manner, the 2s
and 2p atomic orbitals (eight atomic orbitals
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Fig. 4.20 Contours and energies of bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals formed through
combinations of (a) 1s atomic orbitals; (b) 2pz atomic orbitals and (c) 2px atomic orbitals.
on two atoms) give rise to the following eight
molecular orbitals:
Antibonding  MOs
Bonding        MOs
The energy levels of these molecular
orbitals have been determined experimentally
from spectroscopic data for homonuclear
diatomic molecules of second row elements of
the periodic table. The increasing order of
2018-19
CHEMICAL BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
energies of various molecular orbitals for O2
and F2 is given below:
However, this sequence of energy levels of
molecular orbitals is not correct for the
remaining molecules Li2, Be2, B2, C2, N2. For
instance, it has been observed experimentally
that  for  molecules such as B2, C2, N2, etc. the
increasing order of energies of various
molecular orbitals is
The important characteristic feature of this
order is that the energy of σ2p z
molecular orbital is higher than that
of π 2px and π 2py molecular orbitals.
4.7.5 Electronic Configuration and
Molecular Behaviour
The distribution of electrons among various
molecular orbitals is called the electronic
configuration of the molecule. From the
electronic configuration of the molecule, it is
possible to get important information about
the molecule as discussed below.
Stability of Molecules:  If Nb is the number
of electrons occupying  bonding orbitals and
Na the number occupying the antibonding
orbitals, then
the molecule is stable if Nb is greater than
Na, and
(ii) the molecule is unstable if Nb is less
than Na.
In (i) more bonding orbitals are occupied
and so the bonding influence is stronger and a
stable molecule results. In (ii) the antibonding
influence is stronger and therefore the molecule
is unstable.
Bond order
Bond order (b.o.) is defined as one half the
difference between the number of electrons
present in the bonding and the antibonding
orbitals i.e.,
Bond order (b.o.) = ½ (Nb–Na)
The rules discussed above regarding the
stability of the molecule can be restated in
terms of bond order as follows: A positive bond
order (i.e., Nb > Na) means a stable molecule
while a negative (i.e., Nb<Na) or zero (i.e.,
Nb = Na) bond order means an unstable
molecule.
Nature of the bond
Integral bond order values of 1, 2 or 3
correspond to single, double or triple bonds
respectively as studied in the classical
concept.
Bond-length
The bond order between two atoms in a
molecule may be taken as an approximate
measure of the bond length. The bond length
decreases as bond order increases.
Magnetic nature
If all the molecular orbitals in a molecule are
doubly occupied, the substance is
diamagnetic (repelled by magnetic field).
However if one or more molecular orbitals are
singly occupied it is paramagnetic (attracted
by magnetic field), e.g., O2 molecule.
4.8 BONDING IN SOME HOMONUCLEAR
DIATOMIC MOLECULES
In this section we shall discuss bonding in
some homonuclear diatomic molecules.
1.  Hydrogen molecule (H2 ): It is formed by
the combination of two hydrogen atoms. Each
hydrogen atom has one electron in 1s orbital.
Therefore, in all there are two electrons in
hydrogen molecule which are present in σ1s
molecular orbital. So electronic configuration
of hydrogen molecule is
H2 : (σ1s)2
The bond order of H2 molecule can be
calculated as given below:
Bond order = N
This means that the two hydrogen atoms
are bonded together by a single covalent bond.
The bond dissociation energy of hydrogen
molecule has been found to be 438 kJ mol–1
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
and bond length equal to 74 pm. Since no
unpaired electron is present in hydrogen
molecule, therefore, it is diamagnetic.
2. Helium molecule (He2 ): The electronic
configuration of helium atom is 1s2. Each helium
atom contains 2 electrons, therefore, in He2
molecule there would be 4 electrons. These
electrons will be accommodated in σ1s and σ*1s
molecular orbitals leading to electronic
configuration:
: (σ1s)2 (σ*1s)2
Bond order of He2
is ½(2 – 2) = 0
He2 molecule is therefore unstable and
does not exist.
Similarly, it can be shown that Be2
molecule (σ1s)2 (σ*1s)2 (σ2s)2 (σ*2s)2 also does
not exist.
3. Lithium molecule (Li2 ): The electronic
configuration of lithium is 1s2, 2s1 . There are
six electrons in Li2. The electronic configuration
of Li2 molecule, therefore, is
Li2 : (σ1s)2 (σ*1s)2 (σ2s)2
The above configuration is also written as
KK(σ2s)2 where KK represents the closed K shell
structure (σ1s)2 (σ*1s)2.
From the electronic configuration of Li2
molecule it is clear that there are four electrons
present in bonding molecular orbitals and two
electrons present in antibonding molecular
orbitals. Its bond order, therefore, is ½ (4 – 2)
= 1. It means that Li2 molecule is stable and
since it has no unpaired electrons it should be
diamagnetic.  Indeed diamagnetic Li 2
molecules are known to exist in the vapour
phase.
4. Carbon molecule (C2 ): The electronic
configuration of carbon is 1s2 2s2 2p2. There
are twelve electrons in C2. The electronic
configuration of C2 molecule, therefore, is
C2 : σ
or KK
) ( *
The bond order of C2 is ½ (8 – 4) = 2 and C2
should be diamagnetic. Diamagnetic C2
molecules have indeed been detected in vapour
phase. It is important to note that double bond
in C2 consists of both pi bonds because of the
presence of four electrons in two pi molecular
orbitals. In most of the other molecules a
double bond is made up of a sigma bond and
a pi bond. In a similar fashion the bonding in
N2 molecule can be discussed.
5. Oxygen molecule (O2 ): The electronic
configuration of oxygen atom is 1s2 2s2 2p4.
Each oxygen atom has 8 electrons, hence, in
O2 molecule there are 16 electrons. The
electronic configuration of O2 molecule,
therefore, is
π * 2
KK ( 2 )
From the electronic configuration of O2
molecule it is clear that ten electrons are present
in bonding molecular orbitals and six electrons
are present in antibonding molecular orbitals.
Its bond order, therefore, is
Bond order
So in oxygen molecule, atoms are held
by a double bond. Moreover, it may be noted
that it contains two unpaired electrons in
π * 2px and π * 2p y molecular  orbitals,
therefore, O2 molecule should be
paramagnetic,
prediction
corresponds to experimental observation.
In this way, the theory successfully explains
the paramagnetic nature of oxygen.
Similarly, the electronic configurations of
other homonuclear diatomic molecules of the
second row of the periodic table can be written.
In Fig.4.21 are given the molecular orbital
occupancy and molecular properties for B2
through Ne2. The sequence of MOs and their
electron population are shown. The bond
energy, bond length, bond order, magnetic
properties and valence electron configuration
appear below the orbital diagrams.
2018-19
CHEMICAL BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
4.9 HYDROGEN BONDING
Nitrogen, oxygen and fluorine are the higly
electronegative elements. When they are
attached to a hydrogen atom to form covalent
bond, the electrons of the covalent bond are
shifted towards the more electronegative atom.
This partially positively charged hydrogen
atom forms a bond with the other more
electronegative atom. This bond is known as
hydrogen bond and is weaker than the
covalent bond. For example, in HF molecule,
the hydrogen bond exists between hydrogen
atom of one molecule and fluorine atom of
another molecule as depicted below :
Here, hydrogen bond acts as a bridge between
two atoms which holds one atom by covalent
bond and the other by hydrogen bond.
Hydrogen bond is represented by a dotted line
(– – –) while a solid line represents the covalent
bond. Thus, hydrogen bond can be defined
as the attractive force which binds
hydrogen atom of one molecule with the
electronegative atom (F, O or N) of another
molecule.
4.9.1 Cause of Formation of Hydrogen
When hydrogen is bonded to strongly
electronegative element ‘X’, the electron pair
shared between the two atoms moves far away
from hydrogen atom. As a result the hydrogen
atom becomes highly electropositive with
respect to the other atom ‘X’. Since there is
displacement of electrons towards X, the
hydrogen acquires fractional positive charge
(δ +) while ‘X’ attain fractional negative charge
Fig. 4.21  MO occupancy and molecular properties for B2 through Ne2.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
SUMMARY
Kössel’s first insight into the mechanism of formation of electropositive and electronegative
ions related the process to the attainment of noble gas configurations by the respective
ions. Electrostatic attraction between ions is the cause for their stability. This gives the
concept of electrovalency.
The first description of covalent bonding was provided by Lewis in terms of the sharing
of electron pairs between atoms and he related the process to the attainment of noble gas
configurations by reacting atoms as a result of sharing of electrons. The Lewis dot symbols
show the number of valence electrons of the atoms of a given element and Lewis dot
structures show pictorial representations of bonding in molecules.
An ionic compound is pictured as a three-dimensional aggregation of positive and
negative ions in an ordered arrangement called the crystal lattice. In a crystalline solid
there is a charge balance between the positive and negative ions. The crystal lattice is
stabilized by the enthalpy of lattice formation.
While a single covalent bond is formed by sharing of an electron pair between two
atoms, multiple bonds result from the sharing of two or three electron pairs. Some bonded
atoms have additional pairs of electrons not involved in bonding. These are called lone-
pairs of electrons. A Lewis dot structure shows the arrangement of bonded pairs and lone
pairs around each atom in a molecule. Important parameters, associated with chemical
bonds, like: bond length, bond angle, bond enthalpy, bond order and bond polarity
have significant effect on the properties of compounds.
A number of molecules and polyatomic ions cannot be described accurately by a single
Lewis structure and a number of descriptions (representations) based on the same skeletal
structure are written and these taken together represent the molecule or ion. This is a very
important and extremely useful concept called resonance. The contributing structures or
canonical forms taken together constitute the resonance hybrid which represents the
molecule or ion.
(δ–). This results in the formation of a polar
molecule having electrostatic force of attraction
which can be represented as :
The magnitude of H-bonding depends on
the physical state of the compound. It is
maximum in the solid state and minimum in
the gaseous state. Thus, the hydrogen bonds
have strong influence on the structure and
properties of the compounds.
4.9.2 Types of H-Bonds
There are two types of H-bonds
Intermolecular hydrogen bond
Intramolecular hydrogen bond
(1) Intermolecular hydrogen bond : It is
formed between two different molecules of the
same or different compounds. For example, H-
bond in case of HF molecule, alcohol or water
molecules, etc.
(2) Intramolecular hydrogen bond : It is
formed when hydrogen atom is in between the
two highly electronegative  (F, O, N) atoms
present within the same molecule. For example,
in o-nitrophenol the hydrogen is in between
the two oxygen atoms.
Fig. 4.22 Intramolecular hydrogen bonding in
o-nitrophenol molecule
2018-19
CHEMICAL BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
The VSEPR model used for predicting the geometrical shapes of molecules is based on
the assumption that electron pairs repel each other and, therefore, tend to remain as far
apart as possible. According to this model, molecular geometry is determined by repulsions
between lone pairs and lone pairs ; lone pairs and bonding pairs and bonding pairs and
bonding pairs. The order of these repulsions being : lp-lp > lp-bp > bp-bp
The valence bond (VB) approach to covalent bonding is basically concerned with the
energetics of covalent bond formation about which the Lewis and VSEPR models are silent.
Basically the VB theory discusses bond formation  in terms of overlap of orbitals. For
example the formation of the H2 molecule from two hydrogen atoms involves the overlap of
the 1s orbitals of the two H atoms which are singly occupied. It is seen that the potential
energy of the system gets lowered as the two H atoms come near to each other. At the
equilibrium inter-nuclear distance (bond distance) the energy touches a minimum. Any
attempt to bring the nuclei still closer results in a sudden increase in energy and consequent
destabilization of the molecule. Because of orbital overlap the electron density between the
nuclei increases which helps in bringing them closer. It is however seen that the actual
bond enthalpy and bond length values are not obtained by overlap alone and other variables
have to be taken into account.
For explaining the characteristic shapes of polyatomic molecules Pauling introduced
the concept of hybridisation of atomic orbitals. sp,sp2, sp3 hybridizations of atomic orbitals
of  Be, B,C, N and O are used to explain the formation and geometrical shapes of molecules
like BeCl2, BCl3, CH4, NH3 and H2O. They also explain the formation of multiple bonds in
molecules like C2H2 and C2H4.
The molecular orbital (MO) theory describes bonding in terms of the combination
and arrangment of atomic orbitals to form molecular orbitals that are associated with the
molecule as a whole. The number of molecular orbitals are always equal to the number of
atomic orbitals from which they are formed. Bonding molecular orbitals increase electron
density between the nuclei and are lower in energy than the individual atomic orbitals.
Antibonding molecular orbitals have a region of zero electron density between the nuclei
and have more energy than the individual atomic orbitals.
The electronic configuration of the molecules is written by filling electrons in the
molecular orbitals in the order of increasing energy levels. As in the case of atoms, the
Pauli exclusion principle and Hund’s rule are applicable for the filling of molecular orbitals.
Molecules are said to be stable if the number of elctrons in bonding molecular orbitals is
greater than that in antibonding molecular orbitals.
Hydrogen bond is formed when a hydrogen atom finds itself between two highly
electronegative atoms such as F, O and N. It may be intermolecular (existing between two
or more molecules of the same or different substances) or intramolecular (present within
the same molecule). Hydrogen bonds have a powerful effect on the structure and properties
of many compounds.
EXERCISES
Explain the formation of a chemical bond.
Write Lewis dot symbols for atoms of the following elements : Mg, Na, B, O, N, Br.
Write Lewis symbols for the following atoms and ions:
S and S2–; Al and Al3+; H and H
Draw the Lewis structures for the following molecules and ions :
H2S, SiCl4, BeF2, CO3
2−, HCOOH
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Define octet rule. Write its significance and limitations.
Write the favourable factors for the formation of ionic bond.
Discuss the shape of the following molecules using the VSEPR model:
BeCl2, BCl3, SiCl4, AsF5, H2S, PH3
Although geometries of NH3 and H2O molecules are distorted tetrahedral, bond
angle in water is less than that of ammonia. Discuss.
How do you express the bond strength in terms of bond order ?
Define the bond length.
Explain the important aspects of resonance with reference to the CO3
2− ion.
H3PO3 can be represented by structures 1 and 2 shown below. Can these two
structures be taken as the canonical forms of the resonance hybrid representing
H3PO3 ? If not, give reasons for the same.
Write the resonance structures for SO3, NO2 and NO3
Use Lewis symbols to show electron transfer between the following atoms to form
cations and anions : (a) K and S  (b) Ca and O (c) Al and N.
Although both CO2 and H2O are triatomic molecules, the shape of H2O molecule
is bent while that of CO2 is linear. Explain this on the basis of dipole moment.
Write the significance/applications of dipole moment.
Define electronegativity. How does it differ from electron gain enthalpy ?
Explain with the help of suitable example polar covalent bond.
Arrange the bonds in order of increasing ionic character in the molecules: LiF,
K2O, N2, SO2 and ClF3.
The skeletal structure of CH3COOH as shown below is correct, but some of the
bonds are shown incorrectly. Write the correct Lewis structure for acetic acid.
Apart from tetrahedral geometry, another possible geometry for CH4 is square
planar with the four H atoms at the corners of the square and the C atom at its
centre. Explain why CH4 is not square planar ?
Explain why BeH2 molecule has a zero dipole moment although the Be–H bonds
are polar.
Which out of NH3 and NF3 has higher dipole moment and why ?
What is meant by hybridisation of atomic orbitals? Describe the shapes of sp,
sp2, sp3 hybrid orbitals.
2018-19
CHEMICAL BONDING AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
Describe the change in hybridisation (if any) of the Al atom in the following
reaction.
Is there any change in the hybridisation of B and N atoms as a result of the
following reaction?
F B.NH
Draw diagrams showing the formation of a double bond and a triple bond between
carbon atoms in C2H4 and C2H2 molecules.
What is the total number of sigma and pi bonds in the following molecules?
(a) C2H2  (b)  C2H4
Considering x-axis as the internuclear axis which out of the following will not
form a sigma bond and why?  (a) 1s and 1s (b) 1s and 2px ; (c) 2py and 2py
(d) 1s and 2s.
Which hybrid orbitals are used by carbon atoms in the following molecules?
CH3–CH3; (b) CH3–CH=CH2; (c) CH3-CH2-OH; (d) CH3-CHO (e) CH3COOH
What do you understand by bond pairs and lone pairs of electrons? Illustrate by
giving one exmaple of each type.
Distinguish between a sigma and a pi bond.
Explain the formation of H2 molecule on the basis of valence bond theory.
Write the important conditions required for the linear combination of atomic orbitals
to form molecular orbitals.
Use molecular orbital theory to explain why the Be2 molecule does not exist.
Compare the relative stability of the following species and indicate their magnetic
properties;
O ,O ,O
− (superoxide), O2
2− (peroxide)
Write the significance of a plus and a minus sign shown in representing the
orbitals.
Describe the hybridisation in case of PCl5. Why are the axial bonds longer as
compared to equatorial bonds?
Define hydrogen bond. Is it weaker or stronger than the van der Waals forces?
What is meant by the term bond order? Calculate the bond order of : N2, O2, O2
and O2
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
UNIT 5
After studying this unit you will be
able to
explain the existence of different
states of matter in terms of
balance between intermolecular
forces and thermal energy of
particles;
explain the laws governing
behaviour of ideal gases;
apply gas laws in various real life
situations;
explain the behaviour of real
gases;
describe the conditions required
for liquifaction of gases;
realise that there is continuity in
gaseous and liquid state;
differentiate between gaseous
state and vapours; and
explain properties of liquids in
terms
intermolecular
attractions.
STATES OF MATTER
INTRODUCTION
In previous units we have learnt about the properties
related to single particle of matter, such as atomic size,
ionization enthalpy, electronic charge density, molecular
shape and polarity, etc. Most of the observable
characteristics of chemical systems with which we are
familiar represent bulk properties of matter, i.e., the
properties associated with a collection of a large number
of atoms, ions or molecules. For example, an individual
molecule of a liquid does not boil but the bulk boils.
Collection of water molecules have wetting properties;
individual molecules do not wet. Water can exist as ice,
which is a solid; it can exist as liquid; or it can exist in
the gaseous state as water vapour or steam. Physical
properties of ice, water and steam are very different. In
all the three states of water chemical composition of water
remains the same i.e., H2O. Characteristics of the three
states of water depend on the energies of molecules and
on the manner in which water molecules aggregate. Same
is true for other substances also.
Chemical properties of a substance do not change with
the change of its physical state; but rate of chemical
reactions do depend upon the physical state. Many times
in calculations while dealing with data of experiments we
require knowledge of the state of matter. Therefore, it
becomes necessary for a chemist to know the physical
The snowflake falls, yet lays not long
Its feath’ry grasp on Mother Earth
Ere Sun returns it to the vapors Whence it came,
Or to waters tumbling down the rocky slope.
Rod O’ Connor
2018-19
STATES OF MATTER
laws which govern the behaviour of matter in
different states. In this unit, we will learn
more about these three physical states of
matter particularly liquid and gaseous states.
To begin with, it is necessary to understand
the nature of intermolecular forces, molecular
interactions and effect of thermal energy on
the  motion of particles because a balance
between  these determines the state of a
substance.
INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
Intermolecular forces are the forces of
attraction and repulsion between interacting
particles (atoms and molecules). This term
does not include the electrostatic forces that
exist between the two oppositely charged ions
and the forces that hold atoms of a molecule
together i.e., covalent bonds.
Attractive intermolecular forces are known
as van der Waals forces, in honour of Dutch
scientist Johannes van der Waals (1837-
1923), who explained the deviation of real
gases from the ideal behaviour through these
forces. We will learn about this later in this
unit. van der Waals forces vary considerably
in magnitude and include dispersion forces
or London forces, dipole-dipole forces, and
dipole-induced dipole forces. A particularly
strong type of dipole-dipole interaction is
hydrogen bonding. Only a few elements can
participate in hydrogen bond formation,
therefore it is treated as a separate
category. We have already learnt about this
interaction in Unit 4.
At this point, it is important to note that
attractive forces between an ion and a dipole
are known as ion-dipole forces and these are
not van der Waals forces. We will now learn
about different types of van der Waals forces.
5.1.1 Dispersion Forces or London Forces
Atoms and nonpolar molecules are electrically
symmetrical and have no dipole moment
because their electronic charge cloud is
symmetrically distributed. But a dipole may
develop momentarily even in such atoms and
molecules. This can be understood as follows.
Suppose we have two atoms ‘A’ and ‘B’  in the
close vicinity of each other (Fig. 5.1a). It may
so happen that momentarily electronic charge
distribution in one of the atoms, say ‘A’,
becomes unsymmetrical i.e., the charge cloud
is more on one side than the other (Fig. 5.1 b
and c). This results in the development of
instantaneous dipole on the atom ‘A’ for a very
short time. This instantaneous or transient
dipole distorts the electron density of the
other atom ‘B’, which is close to it and as a
consequence a dipole is induced in the
atom ‘B’.
The temporary dipoles of atom ‘A’ and ‘B’
attract each other. Similarly temporary dipoles
are induced in molecules also. This force of
attraction was first proposed by the German
physicist Fritz London, and for this reason
force of attraction between two temporary
Fig. 5.1 Dispersion forces or London forces
between atoms.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
dipoles is known as London force. Another
name for this force is dispersion force. These
forces are always attractive and interaction
energy is inversely proportional to the sixth
power of the distance between two interacting
particles (i.e., 1/r 6 where r is the distance
between two particles). These forces are
important only at short distances (~500 pm)
and their magnitude depends on the
polarisability of the particle.
5.1.2 Dipole - Dipole Forces
Dipole-dipole forces act between the molecules
possessing permanent dipole. Ends of the
dipoles possess “partial charges” and these
charges are shown by Greek letter delta (δ).
Partial charges are always less than the unit
electronic charge (1.6×10–19 C). The polar
molecules interact with neighbouring
molecules. Fig 5.2 (a) shows electron cloud
distribution in the dipole of hydrogen chloride
and Fig. 5.2 (b) shows dipole-dipole interaction
between two HCl molecules. This interaction
is stronger than the London forces but is
weaker than ion-ion interaction because only
partial charges are involved. The attractive
force decreases with the increase of distance
between the dipoles. As in the above case here
also, the interaction energy is inversely
proportional to distance between polar
molecules. Dipole-dipole interaction energy
between stationary polar molecules (as in
solids) is proportional to 1/r3  and that
between rotating polar molecules is
proportional to 1/r 6, where r is the distance
between polar molecules. Besides dipole-
dipole interaction, polar molecules can
interact by London forces also. Thus
cumulative effect is that the total of
intermolecular forces in polar molecules
increase.
5.1.3 Dipole–Induced Dipole Forces
This type of attractive forces operate between
the polar molecules having permanent dipole
and the molecules lacking permanent dipole.
Permanent dipole of the polar molecule
induces dipole on the electrically neutral
molecule by deforming its electronic cloud
(Fig. 5.3). Thus an induced dipole is developed
in the other molecule. In this case also
interaction energy is proportional to 1/r 6
where r is the distance between two
molecules. Induced dipole moment depends
upon the dipole moment present in the
permanent dipole and the polarisability of the
electrically neutral molecule. We have already
learnt in Unit 4 that molecules of larger size
can be easily polarized. High polarisability
increases the strength of attractive
interactions.
Fig. 5.2 (a) Distribution of electron cloud in HCl –
a polar molecule, (b) Dipole-dipole
interaction between two HCl molecules
Fig. 5.3 Dipole - induced dipole interaction
between permanent dipole and induced
dipole
In this case also cumulative effect of
dispersion forces and dipole-induced dipole
interactions exists.
5.1.4  Hydrogen bond
As already mentioned in section (5.1); this is
special case of dipole-dipole interaction. We
have already learnt about this in Unit 4. This
2018-19
STATES OF MATTER
is found in the molecules in which highly polar
N–H, O–H or H–F bonds are present.  Although
hydrogen bonding is regarded as being limited
to N, O and F; but species such as Cl  may
also participate in hydrogen bonding. Energy
of hydrogen bond varies between 10 to 100
kJ mol–1. This is quite a significant amount of
energy; therefore, hydrogen bonds are
powerful force in determining the structure and
properties of many compounds, for example
proteins and nucleic acids. Strength of the
hydrogen bond is determined by the coulombic
interaction between the lone-pair electrons of
the electronegative atom of one molecule and
the hydrogen atom of other molecule.
Following diagram shows the formation of
hydrogen bond.
Intermolecular forces discussed so far are
all attractive. Molecules also exert repulsive
forces on one another. When two molecules
are brought into close contact with each other,
the repulsion between the electron clouds and
that between the nuclei of two molecules comes
into play. Magnitude of the repulsion rises very
rapidly as the distance separating the
molecules decreases. This is the reason that
liquids and solids are hard to compress. In
these states molecules are already in close
contact; therefore they resist further
compression; as that would result in the
increase of repulsive interactions.
5.2  THERMAL ENERGY
Thermal energy is the energy of a body arising
from motion of its atoms or molecules. It is
directly proportional to the temperature of the
substance. It is the measure of average
kinetic energy of the particles of the matter
and is thus responsible for movement of
particles. This movement of particles is called
thermal motion.
5.3 INTERMOLECULAR FORCES vs
THERMAL INTERACTIONS
We have already learnt that intermolecular
forces tend to keep the molecules together but
thermal energy of the molecules tends to keep
them apart. Three states of matter are the result
of balance between intermolecular forces and
the thermal energy of the molecules.
When molecular interactions are very
weak, molecules do not cling together to make
liquid or solid unless thermal energy is
reduced by lowering the temperature. Gases
do not liquify on compression only, although
molecules come very close to each other and
intermolecular forces operate to the maximum.
However, when thermal energy of molecules
is reduced by lowering the temperature; the
gases can be very easily liquified.
Predominance of thermal energy and the
molecular interaction energy of a substance
in three states is depicted as follows :
We have already learnt the cause for the
existence of the three states of matter. Now
we will learn more about gaseous and liquid
states and the laws which govern the
behaviour of matter in these states. We shall
deal with the solid state in class XII.
5.4 THE GASEOUS STATE
This is the simplest state of matter.
Throughout our life we remain immersed in
the ocean of air which is a mixture of gases.
We spend our life in the lowermost layer of
the atmosphere  called troposphere, which is
held to the surface of the earth by gravitational
force. The thin layer of atmosphere is vital to
our life. It shields us from harmful radiations
and contains substances like dioxygen,
dinitrogen, carbon dioxide, water vapour, etc.
Let us now focus our attention on the
behaviour of substances which exist in the
gaseous state under normal conditions of
temperature and pressure. A look at the
periodic table shows that only eleven elements
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
exist as gases under normal conditions
(Fig 5.4).
The gaseous state is characterized by the
following physical properties.
Gases are highly compressible.
Gases exert pressure equally in all
directions.
Gases have much lower density than the
solids and liquids.
The volume and the shape of  gases are
not fixed. These assume volume and shape
of the container.
Gases mix evenly and completely in all
proportions without any mechanical aid.
Simplicity of gases is due to the fact that
the forces of interaction between their
molecules  are negligible. Their behaviour is
governed by same general laws, which were
discovered as a result of their experimental
studies. These laws are relationships between
measurable properties of gases. Some of  these
properties like pressure, volume, temperature
and mass are very important because
relationships between these variables describe
state of the gas. Interdependence of these
variables leads to the formulation of gas laws.
In the next section we will learn about gas
laws.
5.5  THE GAS LAWS
The gas laws which we will study now are the
result of research carried on for several
centuries on the physical properties of gases.
The first reliable measurement on properties
of gases was made by Anglo-Irish scientist
Robert Boyle in 1662. The law which he
formulated is known as Boyle’s Law. Later
on attempts to fly in air with the help of hot
air balloons motivated Jaccques Charles and
Joseph Lewis Gay Lussac to discover
additional gas laws. Contribution from
Avogadro and others provided lot of
information about gaseous state.
5.5.1 Boyle’s Law (Pressure - Volume
Relationship)
On the basis of his experiments, Robert Boyle
reached to the conclusion that at constant
temperature, the pressure of a fixed
amount  (i.e., number of moles n) of gas
varies inversely with its volume. This is
known as Boyle’s law. Mathematically, it can
be written as
( at constant T and n)             (5.1)
= k  1
(5.2)
where k1 is the proportionality constant. The
value of constant k1 depends upon the
amount of the gas, temperature of the gas
and the units in which p and V are expressed.
On rearranging equation (5.2) we obtain
pV = k1
(5.3)
It means that at constant temperature,
product of pressure and volume of a fixed
amount of gas is constant.
If a fixed amount of gas at constant
temperature T occupying volume V1 at
pressure p1 undergoes expansion, so that
volume becomes V2 and pressure becomes p2,
then according to Boyle’s law :
1 = p
2= constant
(5.4)
(5.5)
Fig. 5.4  Eleven elements that exist as gases
2018-19
STATES OF MATTER
Figure 5.5 shows two conventional ways
of graphically presenting Boyle’s law.
Fig. 5.5 (a) is the graph of equation (5.3) at
different temperatures. The value of k1 for each
curve is different because for a given mass of
gas, it varies only with temperature. Each
curve corresponds to a different constant
temperature and is known as an isotherm
(constant temperature plot). Higher curves
correspond to higher temperature. It should
be noted that volume of the gas doubles if
pressure is halved. Table 5.1 gives effect of
pressure on volume of 0.09 mol of CO2 at
300 K.
Fig 5.5 (b) represents the graph between p
V . It is a straight line passing through
origin. However at high pressures, gases
deviate from Boyle’s law and under such
conditions a straight line is not obtained in the
graph.
Experiments of Boyle, in a quantitative
manner prove that gases are highly
compressible because when a given mass of a
gas is compressed, the same number of
molecules occupy a smaller space. This means
that gases become denser at high pressure. A
relationship can be obtained between density
and pressure of a gas by using Boyle’s law:
By definition, density ‘d’ is related to the
mass ‘m’ and the volume ‘V’ by the relation
. If we put value of V in this equation
from Boyle’s law equation, we obtain the
relationship.
Pressure/104 Pa
Volume/10–3 m3
(1/V )/m–3
pV/102 Pa m3
112.0
22.40
22.30
22.47
22.50
22.44
22.48
22.40
Table 5.1 Effect of Pressure on the Volume of 0.09 mol CO2 Gas at 300 K.
Fig. 5.5 (b)  Graph of pressure of a gas, p vs. 1
Fig. 5.5(a) Graph of pressure, p vs. Volume, V of
a gas at different temperatures.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
d = 
p = k′ p
This shows that at a constant temperature,
pressure is directly proportional to the density
of  a fixed mass of the gas.
Problem 5.1
A balloon is filled with hydrogen at room
temperature. It will burst if pressure
exceeds 0.2 bar. If at 1 bar pressure the
gas occupies 2.27 L volume, upto what
volume can the balloon be expanded ?
Solution
According to Boyle’s Law p1V1 = p2V2
If p1 is 1 bar, V1 will be 2.27 L
If p2 = 0.2 bar, then V
=11.35 L
Since balloon bursts at 0.2 bar pressure,
the volume of balloon should be less than
11.35 L.
5.5.2 Charles’ Law (Temperature - Volume
Relationship)
Charles and Gay Lussac performed several
experiments on gases independently to
improve upon hot air balloon technology.
Their investigations showed that for a fixed
mass of a gas at constant pressure, volume
of a gas increases on increasing temperature
and decreases on cooling. They found that
for each degree rise in temperature, volume
of a gas increases by
273.15  of the original
volume of the gas at 0 °C. Thus if volumes of
the gas at 0 °C and at t °C are V0 and Vt
respectively, then
273.15
273.15
273.15+t
273.15
(5.6)
At this stage, we define a new scale of
temperature such that t °C on new scale is given
by T = 273.15 + t and 0 °C will be given by
T0 = 273.15. This new temperature scale is
called the Kelvin temperature scale or
Absolute temperature scale.
Thus 0°C on the celsius scale is equal to
273.15 K at the absolute scale. Note that
degree sign is not used while writing the
temperature in absolute temperature scale,
i.e., Kelvin scale. Kelvin scale of temperature
is also called Thermodynamic scale of
temperature and is used in all scientific
works.
Thus we add 273 (more precisely 273.15)
to the celsius temperature to obtain
temperature at Kelvin scale.
If we write Tt = 273.15 + t and T0 = 273.15
in the equation (5.6) we obtain the
relationship
0                                        (5.7)
Thus we can write a general equation as
follows.
(5.8)
constant
k2                       (5.9)
Thus V = k2 T                                (5.10)
The value of constant k2 is determined by
the pressure of the gas, its amount and the
units in which volume V is expressed.
Equation (5.10) is the mathematical
expression for Charles’ law, which states that
pressure remaining constant, the volume
2018-19
STATES OF MATTER
of a fixed mass of a gas is directly
proportional to its absolute temperature.
Charles found that for all gases, at any given
pressure, graph of volume vs temperature (in
celsius) is a straight line and on extending to
zero volume, each line intercepts the
temperature axis at – 273.15 °C. Slopes of
lines obtained at different pressure are
different but at zero volume all the lines meet
the temperature axis at – 273.15 °C (Fig. 5.6).
Each line of the volume vs temperature
graph is called isobar.
Observations of Charles can be interpreted
if we put the value of t in equation (5.6) as
– 273.15 °C. We can see that the volume of
the gas at – 273.15 °C will be zero. This means
that gas will not exist. In fact all the gases get
liquified before this temperature is reached.
The lowest hypothetical or imaginary
temperature at which gases are supposed to
occupy zero volume is called Absolute zero.
All gases obey Charles’ law at very low
pressures and high temperatures.
Problem 5.2
On a ship sailing in Pacific Ocean where
temperature is 23.4°C, a balloon is filled
with 2 L air. What will be the volume of
the balloon when the ship reaches Indian
ocean, where temperature is 26.1°C ?
Solution
V1 = 2 L
T2 = 26.1 + 273
T1 = (23.4 + 273) K
=  299.1 K
= 296.4 K
From Charles law
299 1
296 4
= 2L × 1.009
= 2.018L
Fig. 5.6  Volume vs Temperature ( °C) graph
5.5.3 Gay Lussac’s Law (Pressure-
Temperature Relationship)
Pressure in well inflated tyres of automobiles
is almost constant, but on a hot summer day
this increases considerably and tyre may
burst if pressure is not adjusted properly.
During winters, on a cold morning one may
find the pressure in the tyres of a vehicle
decreased considerably. The mathematical
relationship
between
pressure
temperature was given by Joseph Gay Lussac
and is known as Gay Lussac’s law. It states
that at constant volume, pressure of a fixed
amount of a gas varies directly with the
temperature. Mathematically,
constant = k3
This relationship can be derived from
Boyle’s law and Charles’ Law. Pressure vs
temperature (Kelvin) graph at constant molar
volume is shown in Fig. 5.7. Each line of this
graph is called isochore.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
5.5.4 Avogadro Law (Volume - Amount
Relationship)
In 1811 Italian scientist Amedeo Avogadro
tried to combine conclusions of Dalton’s atomic
theory and Gay Lussac’s law of combining
volumes (Unit 1) which is now known as
Avogadro law. It states that equal volumes
of all gases under the same conditions of
temperature and pressure contain equal
number of molecules. This means that as
long as the temperature and pressure remain
constant, the volume depends upon number
of molecules of the gas or in other words
amount of the gas. Mathematically we can write
where n is the number of moles
of the gas.
(5.11)
The number of molecules in one mole of a
gas has been determined to be 6.022 ×1023 and
is known as  Avogadro constant. You
will find that this is the same number which
Fig. 5.7
Pressure vs temperature (K) graph
(Isochores) of a gas.
we came across while discussing definition of
a ‘mole’ (Unit 1).
Since volume of a gas is directly
proportional to the number of moles; one mole
of each gas at standard temperature and
pressure (STP)* will have same volume.
Standard temperature and pressure means
273.15 K (0°C) temperature and 1 bar (i.e.,
exactly 10 5 pascal) pressure. These
values approximate freezing temperature
of water and atmospheric pressure at sea
level.  At STP molar volume of an ideal gas
or a combination of ideal gases is
22.71098 L mol–1.
Molar volume of some gases is given in
(Table 5.2).
Argon
22.37
Carbon dioxide
22.54
Dinitrogen
22.69
Dioxygen
22.69
Dihydrogen
22.72
Ideal gas
22.71
Table 5.2
Molar volume in litres  per mole of
some gases at 273.15 K  and 1 bar
(STP).
Number of moles of a gas can be calculated
as follows
n = m
(5.12)
Where m = mass of the gas under
investigation and M = molar mass
Thus,
V = k4 m
(5.13)
Equation (5.13) can be rearranged as
follows :
M = k4 m
M  = k4d
(5.14)
The previous standard is still often used, and applies to all chemistry data more than decade old. In this definition STP
denotes the same temperature of 0°C (273.15 K), but a slightly higher pressure of 1 atm (101.325 kPa). One mole of any gas
of a combination of gases occupies 22.413996 L of volume at STP.
Standard ambient temperature and pressure (SATP), conditions are also used in some scientific works. SATP conditions
means 298.15 K and 1 bar  (i.e., exactly 105 Pa).  At SATP (1 bar and 298.15 K), the molar volume of an ideal gas is
24.789 L mol–1.
2018-19
STATES OF MATTER
Here ‘d’ is the density of the gas. We can conclude
from equation (5.14) that the density of a gas is
directly proportional to its molar mass.
A gas that follows Boyle’s law, Charles’ law
and Avogadro law strictly is called an ideal
gas. Such a gas is hypothetical. It is assumed
that intermolecular forces are not present
between the molecules of an ideal gas. Real
gases follow these laws only under certain
specific conditions when forces of interaction
are practically negligible. In all other situations
these deviate from ideal behaviour. You will
learn about the deviations later in this unit.
5.6 IDEAL GAS EQUATION
The three laws which we have learnt till now
can be combined together in a single equation
which is known as ideal gas equation.
At constant T and n;
p   Boyle’s Law
At constant p and n;
V ∝ T  Charles’ Law
At constant p and T ; V ∝ n Avogadro Law
Thus,
(5.15)
(5.16)
where R is proportionality constant. On
rearranging the equation (5.16) we obtain
pV = n RT                                           (5.17)
⇒R = pV
(5.18)
R is called gas constant. It is same for all gases.
Therefore it is also called Universal Gas
Constant. Equation (5.17) is called ideal gas
equation.
Equation (5.18) shows that the value of
R depends upon units in which p, V and T
are measured. If three variables in this
equation are known, fourth can be
calculated. From this equation we can see
that at constant temperature and pressure
n moles of any gas will have the same volume
because V
and n,R,T and p are
constant. This equation will be applicable to
any gas, under those conditions when
behaviour of the gas approaches ideal
behaviour. Volume of  one mole of an ideal
gas under STP  conditions (273.15 K and 1
bar pressure) is 22.710981 L mol–1. Value
of R for one mole of an ideal gas can be
calculated under these conditions
as follows :
= 8.314 Pa m3 K
–1 mol
= 8.314 × 10–2 bar L K
–1 mol
= 8.314 J K
–1 mol
At STP conditions used earlier
(0 °C and 1 atm pressure), value of R is
8.20578 × 10–2 L atm K–1 mol–1.
Ideal gas equation is a relation between
four variables and it describes the state of
any gas, therefore, it is also called equation
of state.
Let us now go back to the ideal gas
equation. This is the relationship for the
simultaneous variation of the variables. If
temperature, volume and pressure of a fixed
amount of gas vary from T1, V1 and p1 to T2,
V2 and p2 then we can write
(5.19)
Equation (5.19) is a very useful equation.
If out of six, values of five variables are known,
the value of unknown variable can be
calculated from the equation (5.19). This
equation is also known as Combined gas law.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Problem 5.3
At 25°C and 760 mm of Hg pressure a
gas occupies 600 mL volume. What will
be its pressure at a height where
temperature is 10°C and volume of the
gas is 640 mL.
Solution
p1 = 760 mm Hg, V1= 600 mL
T1 = 25 + 273 = 298 K
V2 = 640 mL  and T2 = 10 + 273 = 283 K
According to Combined gas law
) × (
) × (
676 6
mm Hg
) × (
by the mixture of non-reactive gases is
equal to the sum of the partial pressures
of individual gases i.e., the pressures which
these gases would exert if they were enclosed
separately in the same volume and under the
same conditions of temperature. In a mixture
of gases, the pressure exerted by the individual
gas is called partial pressure. Mathematically,
pTotal = p1+p2+p3+......(at constant T, V)   (5.23)
where pTotal is the total pressure exerted by
the mixture of gases and p1, p2 , p3 etc. are
partial pressures of gases.
Gases are generally collected over water
and therefore are moist. Pressure of dry gas
can be calculated by subtracting vapour
pressure of water from the total pressure of
the moist gas which contains water vapours
also. Pressure exerted by saturated water
vapour is called aqueous tension. Aqueous
tension of water at different temperatures is
given in Table 5.3.
pDry gas = pTotal – Aqueous tension           (5.24)
Table 5.3 Aqueous Tension of Water (Vapour
Pressure) as a Function of
Temperature
Partial pressure in terms of mole fraction
Suppose at the temperature T, three gases,
enclosed in the volume V, exert partial
pressure p1, p2 and p3 respectively,  then,
(5.25)
(5.26)
5.6.1 Density and Molar Mass of a
Gaseous Substance
Ideal gas equation can be rearranged as follows:
Replacing n by m
M  , we get
T                                       (5.20)
M = R
T  (where d is the density)   (5.21)
On rearranging equation (5.21) we get the
relationship for calculating molar mass of a gas.
M = d
(5.22)
5.6.2 Dalton’s Law of Partial Pressures
The law was formulated by John Dalton in
1801. It states that the total pressure  exerted
2018-19
STATES OF MATTER
(5.27)
where n1 n2 and n3 are number of moles of these
gases. Thus, expression for total pressure will be
pTotal =  p1 + p2 + p3
= (n1 + n2 + n3) RT
(5.28)
On dividing p1 by ptotal we get
total
where n = n1+n2+n3
x1 is called mole fraction of first gas.
Thus, p1 = x1 ptotal
Similarly for other two gases we can write
p2 = x2 ptotal and p3 = x3 ptotal
Thus a general equation can be written as
pi  = xi ptotal                                      (5.29)
where pi and xi are partial pressure and mole
fraction of ith gas respectively. If total pressure
of a mixture of gases is known, the equation
(5.29) can be used to find out pressure exerted
by individual gases.
Number of moles of neon
167 5
g mol−
=  8.375 mol
Mole fraction of dioxygen
8 375
10 585
5.7 KINETIC ENERGY AND MOLECULAR
SPEEDS
Molecules of gases remain in continuous
motion. While moving they collide with each
other and with the walls of the container. This
results in change of their speed and
redistribution of energy. So the speed and
energy of all the molecules of the gas at any
instant are not the same. Thus, we can obtain
only average value of speed of molecules. If
there are n number of molecules in a sample
and their individual speeds are u1, u2, …….un,
then average speed of molecules uav  can be
calculated as follows:
.........
Problem 5.4
A neon-dioxygen mixture contains
70.6 g dioxygen and 167.5 g neon. If
pressure of the mixture of gases in the
cylinder is 25 bar. What is the partial
pressure of dioxygen and neon in the
mixture ?
Number of moles of dioxygen
g mol−
= 2.21 mol
Mole fraction of neon =
8 375
8 375
=  0.79
Alternatively,
mole fraction of neon = 1– 0.21 = 0.79
Partial pressure          = mole fraction  ×
of a gas                            total pressure
⇒ Partial pressure    = 0.21 × (25 bar)
of oxygen              = 5.25 bar
Partial pressure        = 0.79 × (25 bar)
of neon                       = 19.75 bar
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Maxwell and Boltzmann have shown that
actual distribution of molecular speeds
depends on temperature and molecular mass
of a gas. Maxwell derived a formula for
calculating the number of molecules
possessing a particular speed. Fig. 5.8 shows
schematic plot of number of molecules vs.
molecular speed at two different temperatures
T 1 and T 2 (T 2 is higher than  T 1). The
distribution of speeds shown in the plot is
called Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution
of speeds.
the molecular speed distribution curve of
chlorine and nitrogen given in Fig. 5.9.
Though at a particular temperature the
individual speed of molecules keeps
changing, the distribution of speeds remains
same.
The graph shows that number of molecules
possessing very high and very low speed is very
small. The maximum in the curve represents
speed possessed by maximum number of
molecules. This speed is called most
probable speed, ump. This is very close to the
average speed of the molecules. On
increasing the temperature most probable
speed increases. Also, speed distribution
curve broadens at higher temperature.
Broadening of the curve shows that number
of molecules moving at higher speed
increases. Speed distribution also depends
upon mass of molecules. At the same
temperature, gas molecules with heavier
mass have slower speed than lighter gas
molecules. For example, at the same
temperature lighter nitrogen molecules move
faster than heavier chlorine molecules.
Hence, at any given temperature, nitrogen
molecules have higher value of most probable
speed than the chlorine molecules. Look at
Fig. 5.8: Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution of speeds
Fig. 5.9: Distribution of molecular speeds for chlorine
and nitrogen at 300 K
We know that kinetic energy of a particle is
given by the expression:
Kinetic Energy
Therefore, if we want to know average
translational kinetic energy, 1
mu , for the
movement of a gas particle in a straight line,
we require the value of mean of square of
speeds, u2 , of all molecules. This is
represented as follows:
= u +u +..........u
The mean square speed is the direct
measure of the average kinetic energy of gas
molecules. If we take the square root of the
mean of the square of speeds then we get a
value of speed which is different from most
probable speed and average speed. This speed
is called root mean square speed and is given
by the expression as follows:
urms= u2
Root mean square speed, average speed
and the most probable speed have following
relationship:
urms > uav > ump
2018-19
STATES OF MATTER
The ratio between the three speeds is given
below :
ump: uav : urms : : 1 : 1.128 : 1.224
5.8 KINETIC MOLECULAR THEORY OF
GASES
So far we have learnt the laws (e.g., Boyle’s law,
Charles’ law etc.) which are concise statements
of experimental facts observed in the laboratory
by the scientists. Conducting careful
experiments is an important aspect of scientific
method and it tells us how the particular
system is behaving under different conditions.
However, once the experimental facts are
established, a scientist is curious to know why
the system is behaving in that way. For
example, gas laws help us to predict that
pressure increases when we compress gases
but we would like to know what happens at
molecular level when a gas is compressed ? A
theory is constructed to answer such
questions. A theory is a model (i.e., a mental
picture) that enables us to better understand
our observations. The theory that attempts to
elucidate the behaviour of gases is known as
kinetic molecular theory.
Assumptions or postulates of the kinetic-
molecular theory of gases are given below.
These postulates are related to atoms and
molecules which cannot be seen, hence it is
said to provide a microscopic model of gases.
Gases consist of large number of identical
particles (atoms or molecules) that are so
small and so far apart on the average that
the actual volume of the molecules is
negligible in comparison to the empty space
between them. They are considered as point
masses. This assumption explains the
great compressibility of gases.
There is no force of attraction between the
particles of a gas at ordinary temperature and
pressure. The support for this assumption
comes from the fact that gases expand and
occupy all the space available to them.
Particles of a gas are always in constant and
random motion. If the particles were at rest
and occupied fixed positions, then a gas would
have had a fixed shape which is not observed.
Particles of a gas move in all possible
directions in straight lines. During their
random motion, they collide with each
other and with the walls of the container.
Pressure is exerted by the gas as a result
of collision of the particles with the walls of
the container.
Collisions of gas molecules are perfectly
elastic. This means that total energy of
molecules before and after the collision
remains same. There may be exchange of
energy between colliding molecules, their
individual energies may change, but the
sum of their energies remains constant.  If
there were loss of kinetic energy, the motion
of molecules will stop and gases will settle
down. This is contrary to what is actually
observed.
At any particular time, different particles
in the gas have different speeds and hence
different kinetic energies. This assumption
is reasonable because as the particles
collide, we expect their speed to change.
Even if initial speed of all the particles was
same, the molecular collisions will disrupt
this uniformity. Consequently, the particles
must have different speeds, which go on
changing constantly. It is possible to show
that though the individual speeds are
changing, the distribution of speeds
remains constant at a particular
temperature.
If a molecule has variable speed, then it
must have a variable kinetic energy. Under
these circumstances, we can talk only
about average kinetic energy. In kinetic
theory, it is assumed that average kinetic
energy of the gas molecules is directly
proportional to the absolute temperature.
It is seen that on heating a gas at constant
volume, the pressure increases. On heating
the gas, kinetic energy of the particles
increases and these strike the walls of the
container more frequently, thus, exerting
more pressure.
Kinetic theory of gases allows us to derive
theoretically, all the gas laws studied in the
previous sections. Calculations and predictions
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
based on kinetic theory of gases agree very well
with the experimental observations and thus
establish the correctness of this model.
5.9 BEHAVIOUR OF REAL GASES:
DEVIATION FROM IDEAL GAS
BEHAVIOUR
Our theoritical model of gases corresponds
very well with the experimental observations.
Difficulty arises when we try to test how far
the relation pV = nRT reproduce actual
pressure-volume-temperature relationship
of gases. To test this point we plot pV  vs p plot
of  gases because at constant temperature, pV
will be constant (Boyle’s law) and pV  vs p
graph at all pressures will be a straight line
parallel to x-axis. Fig. 5.10 shows such a plot
constructed from actual data for several gases
at 273 K.
negative deviation from ideal behaviour, the pV
value decreases with increase in pressure and
reaches to a minimum value characteristic of
a gas. After that pV value starts increasing. The
curve then crosses the line for ideal gas and
after that shows positive deviation
continuously. It is thus, found that real gases
do not follow ideal gas equation perfectly under
all conditions.
Deviation from ideal behaviour also
becomes apparent when pressure vs volume
plot is drawn. The pressure vs volume plot of
experimental data (real gas) and that
theoretically calculated from Boyle’s law (ideal
gas) should coincide. Fig 5.11 shows these
plots. It is apparent that at very high pressure
the measured volume is more than the
calculated volume. At low pressures, measured
and calculated volumes approach each other.
Fig. 5.10 Plot of  pV vs p for real gas and
ideal gas
Fig. 5.11 Plot of pressure vs volume for real gas
and ideal gas
It can be seen easily that at constant
temperature pV vs p plot for real gases is not a
straight line. There is a significant deviation
from ideal behaviour. Two types of curves are
seen. In the curves for dihydrogen and helium,
as the pressure increases the value of pV also
increases. The second type of plot is seen in
the case of other gases like carbon monoxide
and methane. In these plots first there is a
It is found that real gases do not follow,
Boyle’s law, Charles law and Avogadro law
perfectly under all conditions. Now two
questions arise.
Why do gases deviate from the ideal
behaviour?
(ii) What are the conditions under which gases
deviate from ideality?
2018-19
STATES OF MATTER
We get the answer of the first question if we
look into postulates of kinetic theory once
again. We find that two assumptions of the
kinetic theory do not hold good. These are
(a) There is no force of attraction between the
molecules of a gas.
(b) Volume of the molecules of a gas is
negligibly small in comparison to the space
occupied by the gas.
If assumption (a) is correct, the gas will
never liquify. However, we know that gases do
liquify when cooled and compressed. Also,
liquids formed are very difficult to compress.
This means that forces of repulsion are
powerful enough and prevent squashing of
molecules in tiny volume. If assumption (b) is
correct, the pressure vs volume graph of
experimental data (real gas) and that
theoritically calculated from Boyles law (ideal
gas) should coincide.
Real gases show deviations from ideal gas
law because molecules interact with each other.
At high pressures molecules of gases are very
close to each other. Molecular interactions start
operating. At high pressure, molecules do not
strike the walls of the container with full impact
because these are dragged back by other
molecules due to molecular attractive forces.
This affects the pressure exerted by the
molecules on the walls of the container. Thus,
the pressure exerted by the gas is lower than
the pressure exerted by the ideal gas.
ideal
2                         (5.30)
Here, a is a constant.
Repulsive forces also become significant.
Repulsive interactions are short-range
interactions and are significant when
molecules are almost in contact. This is the
situation at high pressure. The repulsive forces
cause the molecules to behave as small but
impenetrable spheres. The volume occupied
by the molecules also becomes significant
because instead of moving in volume V, these
are now restricted to volume (V–nb) where nb
is approximately the total volume occupied by
the molecules themselves. Here, b is a constant.
Having taken into account the corrections for
pressure and volume, we can rewrite equation
(5.17) as
(5.31)
Equation (5.31) is known as van der Waals
equation. In this equation n is number of moles
of the gas. Constants a and b are called van
der Waals constants and their value depends
on the characteristic of a gas. Value of ‘a’ is
measure of magnitude of intermolecular
attractive forces within the gas and is
independent of temperature and pressure.
Also,
temperature,
intermolecular forces become significant. As
the molecules travel with low average speed,
these can be captured by one another due to
attractive forces. Real gases show ideal
behaviour when conditions of temperature and
pressure are such that the intermolecular
forces are practically negligible. The real gases
show ideal behaviour when pressure
approaches zero.
The deviation from ideal behaviour can be
measured in terms of compressibility factor
Z, which is the ratio of product pV and nRT.
Mathematically
(5.32)
For ideal gas Z = 1 at all temperatures and
pressures because pV = n RT. The graph of Z
vs p will be a straight line parallel to pressure
axis (Fig. 5.12, page 152). For gases which
deviate from ideality, value of Z  deviates from
unity. At very low pressures all gases shown
have Z ≈1  and behave as ideal gas. At high
pressure all the gases have Z > 1. These are
more difficult to compress. At intermediate
pressures, most gases have Z < 1. Thus gases
show ideal behaviour when the volume
correction
observed
pressure
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
occupied is large so that the volume of the
molecules can be neglected in comparison
to it. In other words, the behaviour of the gas
becomes more ideal when pressure is very low.
Upto what pressure a gas will follow the ideal
gas law, depends upon nature of the gas and
its temperature. The temperature at which a real
gas obeys ideal gas law over an appreciable
range of pressure is called Boyle temperature
or Boyle point. Boyle point of a gas depends
upon its nature. Above their Boyle point, real
gases show positive deviations from ideality and
Z values are greater than one. The forces of
attraction between the molecules are very feeble.
Below Boyle temperature real gases first show
decrease in Z  value with increasing pressure,
which reaches a minimum value. On further
increase in pressure, the value of Z  increases
continuously. Above explanation shows that at
low pressure and high temperature gases show
ideal behaviour. These conditions are different
for different gases.
More insight is obtained in the significance
of Z if we note the following derivation
(5.33)
If the gas shows ideal behaviour then
ideal
. On putting this value of
in equation (5.33) we have Z
ideal     (5.34)
From equation (5.34) we can see that
compressibility factor is the ratio of actual
molar volume of a gas to the molar volume of
it, if it were an ideal gas at that temperature
and pressure.
In the following sections we will see that it
is not possible to distinguish between gaseous
state and liquid state and that liquids may be
considered as continuation of gas phase into a
region of small volumes and very high
molecular attraction. We will also see how we
can use isotherms of gases for predicting the
conditions for liquifaction of gases.
LIQUIFACTION OF GASES
First complete data on pressure-volume-
temperature relations of a substance in both
gaseous and liquid state was obtained by
Thomas Andrews on Carbon dioxide. He plotted
isotherms of carbon dioxide at various
temperatures (Fig. 5.13). Later on it was found
that real gases behave in the same manner as
carbon dioxide. Andrews noticed that at high
temperatures isotherms look like that of an
ideal gas and the gas cannot be liquified even at
very high pressure. As the temperature is
lowered, shape of the curve changes and data
show considerable deviation from ideal
behaviour. At 30.98°C carbon dioxide remains
gas upto 73 atmospheric pressure. (Point E in
Fig. 5.13). At 73 atmospheric pressure, liquid
carbon dioxide appears for the first time. The
temperature 30.98°C is called critical
temperature (TC) of carbon dioxide. This is the
highest temperature at which liquid carbon
dioxide is observed. Above this temperature it
is gas. Volume of one mole of the gas at critical
temperature is called critical volume (VC) and
pressure at this temperature is called critical
pressure (pC). The critical temperature, pressure
and volume are called critical constants. Further
increase in pressure simply compresses the
Fig. 5.12 Variation of compressibility factor for
some gases
2018-19
STATES OF MATTER
Thus we see that a point like A in the Fig. 5.13
represents gaseous state. A point like D
represents liquid state and a point under the
dome shaped area represents existence of liquid
and gaseous carbon dioxide in equilibrium. All
the gases upon compression at constant
temperature (isothermal compression) show the
same behaviour as shown by carbon dioxide.
Also above discussion shows that gases should
be cooled below their critical temperature for
liquification. Critical temperature of a gas is
highest temperature at which liquifaction of the
gas first occurs. Liquifaction of so called
permanent gases (i.e., gases which show
continuous positive deviation in Z value)
requires cooling as well as considerable
compression. Compression brings the
molecules in close vicinity and cooling slows
down the movement of molecules therefore,
intermolecular interactions may hold the closely
and slowly moving molecules together and the
gas liquifies.
It is possible to change a gas into liquid or
a liquid into gas by a process in which always
a single phase is present. For example in
Fig. 5.13 we can move from point A to F
vertically by increasing the temperature, then
we can reach the point G by compressing the
gas at the constant temperature along this
isotherm (isotherm at 31.1°C). The pressure
will increase. Now we can move vertically down
towards D by lowering the temperature. As
soon as we cross the point H on the critical
isotherm we get liquid. We end up with liquid
but in this series of changes we do not pass
through two-phase region. If process is carried
out at the critical temperature, substance
always remains in one phase.
Thus there is continuity between the
gaseous and liquid state. The term fluid is used
for either a liquid or a gas to recognise this
continuity. Thus a liquid can be viewed as a
very dense gas. Liquid and gas can be
distinguished only when the fluid is below its
critical temperature and its pressure and
volume lie under the dome, since in that
situation liquid and gas are in equilibrium and
a surface separating the two phases is visible.
In the absence of this surface there is no
liquid carbon dioxide and the curve represents
the compressibility of the liquid. The steep line
represents the isotherm of liquid. Even a slight
compression results in steep rise in pressure
indicating very low compressibility of the liquid.
Below 30.98 °C, the behaviour of the gas on
compression is quite different. At 21.5 °C,
carbon dioxide remains as a gas only upto
point B. At point B, liquid of a particular volume
appears. Further compression does not change
the pressure. Liquid and gaseous carbon
dioxide coexist and further application of
pressure results in the condensation of more
gas until the point C is reached. At point C, all
the gas has been condensed and further
application of pressure merely compresses the
liquid as shown by steep line. A slight
compression from volume V2 to V3 results in
steep rise in pressure from p2 to p3 (Fig. 5.13).
Below 30.98 °C (critical temperature) each
curve shows the similar trend. Only length of
the horizontal line increases at lower
temperatures. At critical point horizontal
portion of the isotherm merges into one point.
Fig. 5.13 Isotherms of carbon dioxide at various
temperatures
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
fundamental way of distinguishing between
two states. At critical temperature, liquid
passes into gaseous state imperceptibly and
continuously; the surface separating two
phases disappears (Section 5.11.1). A gas
below the critical temperature can be liquified
by applying pressure, and is called vapour of
the substance. Carbon dioxide gas below its
critical temperature is called carbon dioxide
vapour. Critical constants for some common
substances are given in Table 5.4.
between them and under normal conditions
liquids are denser than gases.
Molecules of liquids are held together by
attractive intermolecular forces. Liquids have
definite volume because molecules do not
separate from each other. However, molecules
of liquids can move past one another freely,
therefore, liquids can flow, can be poured and
can assume the shape of the container in which
these are stored. In the following sections we
will look into some of the physical properties
of the liquids such as vapour pressure, surface
tension and viscosity.
5.11.1 Vapour Pressure
If an evacuated container is partially filled with
a liquid, a portion of liquid evaporates to fill
the remaining volume of the container with
vapour. Initially the liquid evaporates and
pressure exerted by vapours on the walls of
the container (vapour pressure) increases. After
some time it becomes constant, an equilibrium
is established between liquid phase and
vapour phase. Vapour pressure at this stage
is known as equilibrium vapour pressure or
saturated vapour pressure.. Since process of
vapourisation is temperature dependent; the
temperature must be mentioned while
reporting the vapour pressure of a liquid.
When a liquid is heated in an open vessel,
the liquid vapourises from the surface. At the
temperature at which vapour pressure of the
liquid becomes equal to the external pressure,
vapourisation can occur throughout the bulk
of the liquid and vapours expand freely into
the surroundings. The condition of free
vapourisation throughout the liquid is called
boiling. The temperature at which vapour
pressure of liquid is equal to the external
pressure is called boiling temperature at that
pressure. Vapour pressure of some common
liquids at various temperatures is given in
(Fig. 5.14, page 155). At 1 atm pressure boiling
temperature is called normal boiling point.
If pressure is 1 bar then the boiling point is
called standard boiling point of the liquid.
Standard boiling point of the liquid is slightly
lower than the normal boiling point because
Table 5.4 Critical Constants for Some
Substances
Problem 5.5
Gases possess characteristic critical
temperature which depends upon the
magnitude of intermolecular forces
between the gas particles. Critical
temperatures of ammonia and carbon
dioxide are 405.5 K and 304.10 K
respectively. Which of  these gases will
liquify first when you start cooling from
500 K  to their critical temperature ?
Solution
Ammonia will liquify first because its
critical temperature will be reached first.
Liquifaction of CO2 will require more
cooling.
LIQUID STATE
Intermolecular forces are stronger in liquid
state than in gaseous state. Molecules in liquids
are so close that there is very little empty space
2018-19
STATES OF MATTER
1 bar pressure is slightly less than 1 atm
pressure. The normal boiling point of water is
100 °C (373 K), its standard boiling point is
99.6 °C (372.6 K).
At high altitudes atmospheric pressure is
low. Therefore liquids at high altitudes boil at
lower temperatures in comparison to that at
sea level. Since water boils at low temperature
on hills, the pressure cooker is used for
cooking food. In hospitals surgical instruments
are sterilized in autoclaves in which boiling
point of water is increased by increasing the
pressure above the atmospheric pressure by
using a weight covering the vent.
Boiling does not occur when liquid is
heated in a closed vessel. On heating
continuously vapour pressure increases. At
first a clear boundary is visible between liquid
and vapour phase because liquid is more dense
than vapour. As the temperature increases
more and more molecules go to vapour phase
and density of vapours rises. At the same time
liquid becomes less dense. It expands because
molecules move apart. When density of liquid
and vapours becomes the same; the clear
boundary between liquid and vapours
disappears. This temperature is  called critical
temperature about which we have already
discussed in section 5.10.
5.11.2 Surface Tension
It is well known fact that liquids assume the
shape of the container. Why is it then small
drops of mercury form spherical bead instead
of spreading on the surface. Why do particles
of soil at the bottom of river remain separated
but they stick together when taken out ? Why
does a liquid rise (or fall) in a thin capillary as
soon as the capillary touches the surface of
the liquid ? All these phenomena are caused
due to the characteristic property of liquids,
called surface tension.  A molecule in the bulk
of liquid experiences equal intermolecular
forces from all sides. The molecule, therefore
does not experience any net force. But for the
molecule on the surface of liquid, net attractive
force is towards the interior of the liquid (Fig.
5.15), due to the molecules below it. Since there
are no molecules above it.
Liquids tend to minimize their surface area.
The molecules on the surface experience a net
downward force and have more energy than
Fig. 5.14 Vapour pressure vs temperature curve
of some common liquids.
Fig. 5.15 Forces acting on a molecule on liquid
surface and on a molecule inside the
liquid
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
the molecules in the bulk, which do not
experience any net force. Therefore, liquids tend
to have minimum number of molecules at their
surface. If surface of the liquid is increased by
pulling a molecule from the bulk, attractive
forces will have to be overcome. This will
require expenditure of energy. The energy
required to increase the surface area of the
liquid by one unit is defined as surface energy.
Its dimensions are J m–2.  Surface tension is
defined as the force acting per unit length
perpendicular to the line drawn on the surface
of liquid. It is denoted by Greek letter γ
(Gamma). It has dimensions of kg s–2 and in SI
unit it is expressed as N m–1. The lowest energy
state of the liquid will be when surface area is
minimum. Spherical shape satisfies this
condition, that is why mercury drops are
spherical in shape. This is the reason that sharp
glass edges are heated for making them
smooth. On heating, the glass melts and the
surface of the liquid tends to take the rounded
shape at the edges, which makes the edges
smooth. This is called fire polishing of glass.
Liquid tends to rise (or fall) in the capillary
because of surface tension. Liquids wet the
things because they spread across their surfaces
as thin film. Moist soil grains are pulled together
because surface area of thin film of water is
reduced. It is surface tension which gives
stretching property to the surface of a liquid.
On flat surface, droplets are slightly flattened
by the effect of gravity; but in the gravity free
environments drops are perfectly spherical.
The magnitude of surface tension of a liquid
depends on the attractive forces between the
molecules. When the attractive forces are large,
the surface tension is large. Increase in
temperature increases the kinetic energy of the
molecules and effectiveness of intermolecular
attraction decreases, so surface tension
decreases as the temperature is raised.
5.11.3 Viscosity
It is one of the characteristic properties of
liquids. Viscosity is a measure of resistance to
flow which arises due to the internal friction
between layers of fluid as they slip past one
another while liquid flows. Strong
intermolecular forces between molecules hold
them together and resist movement of layers
past one another.
When a liquid flows over a fixed surface,
the layer of molecules in the immediate contact
of surface is stationary. The velocity of upper
layers increases as the distance of layers from
the fixed layer increases. This type of flow in
which there is a regular gradation of velocity
in passing from one layer to the next is called
laminar flow. If we choose any layer in the
flowing liquid (Fig.5.16), the layer above it
accelerates its flow and the layer below this
Fig. 5.16  Gradation of velocity in the laminar
retards its flow.
If the velocity of the layer at a distance dz
is changed by a value du then velocity gradient
is given by the amount . du
dz  A force is required
to maintain the flow of layers. This force is
proportional to the area of contact of layers
and velocity gradient i.e.
(A is the area of contact)
F ∝A du
(where, du
dz  is velocity gradient;
the change in velocity with distance)
F ∝A du
ηA du
2018-19
STATES OF MATTER
SUMMARY
Intermolecular forces operate between the particles of matter. These forces differ from
pure electrostatic forces that exist between two oppositely charged ions. Also, these do
not include forces that hold atoms of a covalent molecule together through covalent
bond. Competition between thermal energy and intermolecular interactions determines
the state of matter. “Bulk” properties of matter such as behaviour of gases, characteristics
of solids and liquids and change of state depend upon energy of constituent particles
and the type of interaction between them. Chemical properties of a substance do not
change with change of state, but the reactivity depends upon the physical state.
Forces of interaction between gas molecules are negligible and are almost independent
of their chemical nature. Interdependence of some observable properties namely
pressure, volume, temperature and mass leads to different gas laws obtained from
experimental studies on gases. Boyle’s law states that under isothermal condition,
pressure of a fixed amount of a gas is inversely proportional to its volume. Charles’ law
is a relationship between volume and absolute temperature under isobaric condition. It
states that volume of a fixed amount of gas is directly proportional to its absolute
temperature V
) . If state of a gas is represented by p1, V1 and T1 and it changes to
state at p2, V2 and T2, then relationship between these two states is given by combined
gas law according to which
. Any one of the variables of this gas can be
found out if other five variables are known. Avogadro law states that equal volumes of
all gases under same conditions of temperature and pressure contain equal number of
molecules. Dalton’s law of partial pressure states that total pressure exerted by a
mixture of non-reacting gases is equal to the sum of partial pressures exerted by them.
Thus p = p1+p2+p3+ ... . Relationship between pressure, volume, temperature and number
of moles of a gas describes its state and is called equation of state of the gas. Equation
of state for ideal gas is pV=nRT, where R is a gas constant and its value depends upon
units chosen for pressure, volume and temperature.
At high pressure and low temperature intermolecular forces start operating strongly
between the molecules of gases because they come close to each other. Under suitable
temperature and pressure conditions gases can be liquified. Liquids may be considered
as continuation of gas phase into a region of small volume and very strong molecular
attractions. Some properties of liquids e.g., surface tension and viscosity are due to
strong intermolecular attractive forces.
‘ η’ is proportionality constant and is called
coefficient of viscosity. Viscosity coefficient
is the force when velocity gradient is unity and
the area of contact is unit area. Thus ‘
measure of viscosity. SI unit of viscosity
coefficient is 1 newton second per square metre
(N s m–2) = pascal second (Pa s = 1kg m–1s–1). In
cgs system the unit of coefficient of viscosity is
poise (named after great scientist Jean Louise
Poiseuille).
1 poise = 1 g cm–1s–1 = 10–1kg m–1s–1
Greater the viscosity, the more slowly the
liquid flows. Hydrogen bonding and van der
Waals forces are strong enough to cause high
viscosity. Glass is an extremely viscous liquid.
It is so viscous that many of its properties
resemble solids.
Viscosity of liquids decreases as the
temperature rises because at high temperature
molecules have high kinetic energy and can
overcome the intermolecular forces to slip past
one another between the layers.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
EXERCISES
What will be the minimum pressure required to compress 500 dm3 of air at 1 bar to
200 dm3 at 30°C?
A vessel of 120 mL capacity contains a certain amount of gas at 35 °C and 1.2 bar
pressure. The gas is transferred to another vessel of volume 180 mL at 35 °C. What
would be its pressure?
Using the equation of state pV=nRT; show that at a given temperature density of a
gas is proportional to gas pressure p.
At 0°C, the density of a certain oxide of a gas at 2 bar is same as that of dinitrogen
at 5 bar. What is the molecular mass of the oxide?
Pressure of 1 g of an ideal gas A at 27 °C is found to be 2 bar. When 2 g of another
ideal gas B is introduced in the same flask at same temperature the pressure
becomes 3 bar. Find a relationship between their molecular masses.
The drain cleaner, Drainex contains small bits of aluminum which react with caustic
soda to produce dihydrogen. What volume of dihydrogen at 20 °C and one bar will
be released when 0.15g of aluminum reacts?
What will be the pressure exerted by a mixture of 3.2 g of methane and 4.4 g of
carbon dioxide contained in a 9 dm3 flask at 27 °C ?
What will be the pressure of the gaseous mixture when 0.5 L of H2 at 0.8 bar and
2.0 L of dioxygen at 0.7 bar are introduced in a 1L vessel at 27°C?
Density of a gas is found to be 5.46 g/dm3 at 27 °C at 2 bar pressure. What will be
its density at STP?
34.05 mL of phosphorus vapour weighs 0.0625 g at 546 °C and 0.1 bar pressure.
What is the molar mass of phosphorus?
A student forgot to add the reaction mixture to the round bottomed flask at 27 °C
but instead he/she placed the flask on the flame. After a lapse of time, he realized
his mistake, and using a pyrometer he found the temperature of the flask was 477
°C. What fraction of air would have been expelled out?
Calculate the temperature of 4.0 mol of a gas occupying 5 dm3 at 3.32 bar.
(R = 0.083 bar dm3 K–1 mol–1).
Calculate the total number of electrons present in 1.4 g of dinitrogen gas.
How much time would it take to distribute one Avogadro number of wheat grains, if
1010 grains are distributed each second ?
Calculate the total pressure in a mixture of 8 g of dioxygen and 4 g of dihydrogen
confined in a vessel of 1 dm3 at 27°C. R = 0.083 bar dm3 K–1 mol–1.
Pay load is defined as the difference between the mass of displaced air and the
mass of the balloon. Calculate the pay load when a balloon of radius 10 m, mass
100 kg is filled with helium at 1.66 bar at 27°C. (Density of air = 1.2 kg m–3 and
R = 0.083 bar dm3 K–1 mol–1).
Calculate the volume occupied by 8.8 g of CO2 at 31.1°C and 1 bar pressure.
R  = 0.083 bar L K–1 mol–1.
2.9 g of a gas at 95 °C occupied the same volume as 0.184 g of dihydrogen at 17 °C,
at the same pressure. What is the molar mass of the gas?
A mixture of dihydrogen and dioxygen at one bar pressure contains 20% by weight
of dihydrogen. Calculate the partial pressure of dihydrogen.
2018-19
STATES OF MATTER
What would be the SI unit for the quantity pV 2T 2/n ?
In terms of Charles’ law explain why –273 °C is the lowest possible temperature.
Critical temperature for carbon dioxide and methane are 31.1 °C and –81.9 °C
respectively. Which of these has stronger intermolecular forces and why?
Explain the physical significance of van der Waals parameters.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
THERMODYNAMICS
It is the only physical theory of universal content concerning
which I am convinced that, within the framework of the
applicability of its basic concepts, it will never be overthrown.
Albert Einstein
After studying this Unit, you will
be able to
explain the terms : system and
surroundings;
discriminate between close,
open and isolated systems;
explain internal energy, work
and heat;
state
first
thermodynamics and  express
it mathematically;
calculate energy changes as
work and heat contributions
in chemical systems;
explain state functions: U, H.
correlate  ∆U and ∆H;
measure experimentally ∆U
and ∆H;
define standard states for ∆H;
calculate enthalpy changes for
various types of reactions;
state and apply Hess’s law of
constant heat summation;
differentiate between extensive
and intensive properties;
define spontaneous and non-
spontaneous processes;
explain
entropy
thermodynamic state function
and apply it for spontaneity;
explain Gibbs energy change
(∆G); and
establish relationship between
∆G and spontaneity, ∆G and
equilibrium constant.
Chemical energy stored by molecules can be released as heat
during chemical reactions when a fuel like methane, cooking
gas or coal burns in air. The chemical energy may also be
used to do mechanical work when a fuel burns in an engine
or to provide electrical energy through a galvanic cell like
dry cell. Thus, various forms of energy are interrelated and
under certain conditions, these may be transformed from
one form into  another. The study of these energy
transformations forms the subject matter of thermodynamics.
The laws of thermodynamics deal with energy changes of
macroscopic systems involving a large number of molecules
rather than microscopic systems containing a few molecules.
Thermodynamics is not concerned about how and at what
rate these energy transformations are carried out, but is
based on initial and final states of a system undergoing the
change. Laws of thermodynamics apply only when a system
is in equilibrium or moves from one equilibrium state to
another equilibrium state. Macroscopic properties like
pressure and temperature do not change with time for a
system in equilibrium state. In this unit, we would like to
answer some of the important questions through
thermodynamics, like:
How do we determine the energy changes involved in a
chemical reaction/process? Will it occur or not?
What drives a chemical reaction/process?
To what extent do the chemical reactions proceed?
UNIT 6
2018-19
THERMODYNAMICS
6.1  THERMODYNAMIC TERMS
We are interested in chemical reactions and the
energy changes accompanying them. For this
we need to know certain thermodynamic
terms. These are discussed below.
6.1.1 The System and the Surroundings
A system in thermodynamics refers to that
part of universe in which observations are
made and remaining universe constitutes the
surroundings. The surroundings include
everything other than the system. System and
the surroundings together constitute the
universe .
The universe = The system + The surroundings
However, the entire universe other than
the system is not affected by the changes
taking place in the system. Therefore, for
all practical purposes, the surroundings
are that portion of the remaining universe
which can interact with the system.
Usually, the region of space in the
neighbourhood of the system constitutes
its surroundings.
For example, if we are studying the
reaction between two substances A and B
kept in a beaker, the beaker containing the
reaction mixture is the system and the room
where the beaker is kept is the surroundings
(Fig. 6.1).
be real or imaginary. The wall that separates
the system from the surroundings is called
boundary. This is designed to allow us to
control and keep track of all movements of
matter and energy in or out of the system.
6.1.2 Types of the System
We, further classify the systems according to
the movements of matter and energy in or out
of the system.
1. Open System
In an open system,  there is exchange of energy
and matter between system and surroundings
[Fig. 6.2 (a)]. The presence of reactants in an
open beaker is an example of an open system*.
Here the boundary is an imaginary surface
enclosing the beaker and reactants.
2. Closed System
In a closed system, there is no exchange of
matter, but exchange of energy is possible
between system and the surroundings
[Fig. 6.2 (b)]. The presence of reactants in a
closed vessel made of conducting material e.g.,
copper or steel is an example of a closed
system.
Fig. 6.2  Open, closed and isolated systems.
Fig. 6.1 System and the surroundings
Note that the system may be defined by
physical boundaries, like beaker or test tube,
or the system may simply be defined by a set
of Cartesian coordinates specifying a
particular volume in space. It is necessary to
think of the system as separated from the
surroundings by some sort of wall which may
*  We could have chosen only the reactants as system then walls of the beakers will act as boundary.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
3. Isolated System
In an isolated system, there is  no exchange of
energy or matter between the system and the
surroundings [Fig. 6.2 (c)]. The presence of
reactants in a thermos flask or any other closed
insulated vessel is an example of an isolated
system.
6.1.3 The State of the System
The system must be described in order to make
any useful calculations by specifying
quantitatively each of the properties such as
its pressure (p), volume (V), and temperature
(T ) as well as the composition of the system.
We need to describe the system by specifying
it before and after the change. You would recall
from your Physics course that the state of a
system in mechanics is completely specified at
a given instant of time, by the position and
velocity of each mass point of the system. In
thermodynamics, a different and much simpler
concept of the state of a system is introduced.
It does not need detailed knowledge of motion
of each particle  because, we deal with average
measurable properties of the system. We specify
the state of the system by state functions or
state variables.
The state of a thermodynamic system is
described by its measurable or macroscopic
(bulk) properties. We can describe the state of
a gas by quoting its pressure (p), volume (V),
temperature (T ), amount (n) etc. Variables like
p, V, T are called state variables or state
functions because their values depend only
on the state of the system and not on how it is
reached. In order to completely define the state
of a system it is not necessary to define all the
properties of the system; as only a certain
number of properties can be varied
independently. This number depends on the
nature of the system. Once these minimum
number of macroscopic properties are fixed,
others automatically have definite values.
The state of the surroundings can never
be completely specified; fortunately it is not
necessary to do so.
6.1.4 The Internal Energy as a State
Function
When we talk about our chemical system
losing or gaining energy, we need to introduce
a quantity which represents the total energy
of the system. It may be chemical, electrical,
mechanical or any other type of energy you
may think of, the sum of all these is the energy
of the system. In thermodynamics, we call it
the internal energy, U of the system, which may
change, when
heat passes into or out of the system,
work is done on or by the system,
matter enters or leaves the system.
These systems are classified accordingly as
you have already studied in section 6.1.2.
(a) Work
Let us first examine a change in internal
energy by doing work. We take a system
containing some quantity of water in a thermos
flask or in an insulated beaker. This would not
allow exchange of heat between the system
and surroundings through its boundary and
we call this type of system as adiabatic. The
manner in which the state of such a system
may be changed will be called adiabatic
process. Adiabatic process is a process in
which there is no transfer of heat between the
system and surroundings. Here, the wall
separating the system and the surroundings
is called the adiabatic wall (Fig 6.3).
Let us bring the change in the internal
energy of the system by doing some work on
Fig. 6.3
An adiabatic system which does not
permit the transfer of heat through its
boundary.
it. Let us call the  initial state of the system as
state A and its temperature as  TA. Let the
internal energy of the system in state A be
called UA. We can change the state of the system
in two different ways.
2018-19
THERMODYNAMICS
One way: We do some mechanical work, say
1 kJ, by rotating a set of small paddles and
thereby churning water. Let the new state be
called B state  and its temperature, as TB. It is
found that TB > TA and the change in
temperature, ∆T = TB–TA. Let the internal
energy of the system in state B be UB and the
change in internal energy, ∆U =UB– UA.
Second way: We now do an equal amount (i.e.,
1kJ) electrical work with the help of an
immersion rod  and note down the temperature
change. We find that the change in temperature
is same as in the earlier case, say, TB – TA.
In fact, the experiments in the above
manner were done by J. P. Joule between
1840–50 and he was able to show that a given
amount of work done on the system, no matter
how it was done (irrespective of path) produced
the same change of state, as measured by the
change in the temperature of the system.
So, it seems appropriate to define a
quantity, the internal energy U, whose value
is characteristic of the state of a system,
whereby the adiabatic work, wad required to
bring about a change of state is equal to the
difference between the value of U in one state
and that in another state, ∆U i.e.,
Therefore, internal energy, U, of the system
is a state function.
By conventions of IUPAC in chemical
thermodynamics. The positive sign expresses
that wad  is positive when work is done on the
system and the internal energy of system
increases. Similarly, if the work is done by the
system,wad will be negative because internal
energy of the system decreases.
Can you name some other familiar state
functions? Some of other familiar state
functions are V, p, and  T. For example, if we
bring a change in temperature of the system
from 25°C to 35°C, the change in temperature
is 35°C–25°C = +10°C, whether we go straight
up to 35°C or we cool the system for a few
degrees, then take the system to the final
temperature. Thus, T is a state function and
the change in temperature is independent of
the route taken. Volume of water in a pond,
for example, is a state function, because
change in volume of its water is independent
of the route by which water is filled in the
pond, either by rain or by tubewell or by both.
(b) Heat
We can also change the internal energy of a
system by transfer of heat from the
surroundings to the system or vice-versa
without expenditure of work. This exchange
of energy, which is a result of temperature
difference is called heat, q. Let us consider
bringing about the same change in temperature
(the same initial and final states as before in
section 6.1.4 (a) by transfer of heat through
thermally conducting walls instead of
adiabatic walls (Fig. 6.4).
We take water at temperature, TA in a
container having thermally conducting walls,
say made up of copper and enclose it in a huge
heat reservoir at temperature, TB. The heat
absorbed by the system (water), q can be
measured in terms of temperature difference ,
TB – TA. In this case change in internal energy,
∆U= q, when no work is done at constant
volume.
By conventions of IUPAC in chemical
thermodynamics. The  q is positive, when
heat is transferred from the surroundings to
the system and the internal energy of the
system increases and q is negative when
heat is transferred from system to the
surroundings resulting in decrease of the
internal energy of the system..
Earlier negative sign was assigned when the work is done on the system and positive sign when the work is done by the
system. This is still followed in physics books, although IUPAC has recommended the use of new sign convention.
Fig. 6.4
A system which allows heat transfer
through its boundary.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
(c)  The general case
Let us consider the general case in which a
change of state is brought about both by
doing work and by transfer of heat. We write
change in internal energy for this case as:
∆U = q  + w
(6.1)
For a given change in state, q and w can
vary depending on how the change is carried
out. However, q +w = ∆U will depend only on
initial and final state. It will be independent of
the way the change is carried out. If there is
no transfer of energy as heat or as work
(isolated system) i.e., if w = 0 and q = 0, then
∆ U = 0.
The equation 6.1 i.e., ∆U = q + w is
mathematical statement of the first law of
thermodynamics, which states that
The energy of an isolated system is
constant.
It is commonly stated as the law of
conservation of energy i.e., energy can neither
be created nor be destroyed.
Note: There is considerable difference between
the character of the thermodynamic property
energy and that of a mechanical property such
as volume. We can specify an unambiguous
(absolute) value for volume of a system in a
particular state, but not the absolute value of
the internal energy. However, we can measure
only the changes in the internal energy, ∆U of
the system.
Problem 6.1
Express the change in internal energy of
a system when
No heat is absorbed by the system
from the surroundings, but work (w)
is done on the system. What type of
wall does the system have ?
No work is done on the system, but
q  amount of heat is taken out from
the system and given to the
surroundings. What type of wall does
the system have?
(iii)
w amount of work is done by the
system and q amount of heat is
supplied to the system. What type of
system would it be?
Solution
(i) ∆ U = w ad, wall is adiabatic
∆ U = – q, thermally conducting walls
(iii)
∆ U = q – w, closed system.
6.2 APPLICATIONS
Many chemical reactions involve the generation
of gases capable of doing mechanical work or
the generation of heat. It is important for us to
quantify these changes and relate them to the
changes in the internal energy. Let us see how!
6.2.1 Work
First of all, let us concentrate on the nature of
work a system can do. We will consider only
mechanical work i.e., pressure-volume work.
For understanding pressure-volume
work, let us consider a cylinder which
contains one mole of an ideal gas fitted with a
frictionless piston. Total volume of the gas is
Vi and pressure of the gas inside is p. If
external pressure is pex which is greater  than
p, piston is moved inward till the pressure
inside becomes equal to pex. Let this change
Fig. 6.5(a) Work done on an ideal gas in a
cylinder when it is compressed by a
constant external pressure, pex
(in single step) is equal to the shaded
area.
2018-19
THERMODYNAMICS
be achieved in a single step and the final
volume be Vf . During this compression,
suppose piston moves a distance, l  and is
cross-sectional area of the piston is A
[Fig. 6.5(a)].
then, volume change = l × A = ∆V = (Vf  – Vi )
We also know,
force
pressure
Therefore, force on the piston = pex . A
If  w is the work done on the system by
movement of the piston then
w = force × distance = pex . A .l
= pex . (–∆V) = – pex ∆V = – pex (Vf – Vi )       (6.2)
The negative sign of this expression is
required to obtain conventional sign for w,
which will be positive. It indicates that in case
of compression work is done on the system.
Here (Vf – Vi ) will be negative and negative
multiplied by negative will be positive. Hence
the sign obtained for the work will be positive.
If the pressure is not constant at every
stage of compression, but changes in number
of finite steps, work done on the gas will be
summed over all the steps and will be equal
[Fig. 6.5 (b)]
If the pressure is not constant but changes
during the process such that it is always
infinitesimally greater than the pressure of the
gas, then, at each stage of compression, the
volume decreases by an infinitesimal amount,
dV. In such a case we can calculate the work
done on the gas by the relation
w = −∫p dV
( 6.3)
Here, pex at each stage is equal to (pin + dp) in
case of compression [Fig. 6.5(c)]. In an
expansion process under similar conditions,
the external pressure is always less than the
pressure of the system i.e., pex = (pin– dp). In
general case we can write, pex = (pin +  dp). Such
processes are called reversible processes.
A process or change is said to be
reversible, if a change is brought out in
such a way that the process could, at any
moment, be reversed by an infinitesimal
change. A reversible process proceeds
infinitely slowly by a series of equilibrium
states such that system and the
surroundings are always in near
equilibrium with each other. Processes
Fig. 6.5 (c) pV-plot when pressure is not constant
and changes in infinite steps
(reversible
conditions)
during
compression from initial volume, Vi to
final volume, Vf . Work done on the gas
is represented by the shaded area.
Fig. 6.5 (b) pV-plot when pressure is not constant
and changes in finite steps during
compression from initial volume, Vi to
final volume, Vf . Work done on the gas
is represented by the shaded area.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
other than reversible processes are known
as irreversible processes.
In chemistry, we face problems that can
be solved if we relate the work term to the
internal pressure of the system. We can
relate work to internal pressure of the system
under reversible conditions by writing
equation 6.3 as follows:
dp dV
Since dp × dV is very small we can write
= −∫p
(6.4)
Now, the pressure of the gas (pin which we
can write as p now) can be expressed in terms
of its volume through gas equation. For n mol
of an ideal gas i.e., pV =nRT
Therefore, at constant temperature (isothermal
process),
w rev = −
= – 2.303 nRT log
(6.5)
Free expansion: Expansion of a gas in
vacuum (pex = 0) is called free expansion. No
work is done during free expansion of an ideal
gas whether the process is reversible or
irreversible (equation 6.2 and 6.3).
Now, we  can write equation 6.1 in number
of ways depending on the type of processes.
Let us substitute w = – pex∆V (eq. 6.2) in
equation 6.1, and we get
If a process is carried out at constant volume
(∆V = 0), then
∆U = qV
the subscript V  in qV
denotes that heat is
supplied at constant volume.
Isothermal and free expansion of an
ideal gas
For isothermal (T = constant) expansion of an
ideal gas into vacuum ; w = 0 since pex = 0.
Also, Joule determined experimentally that
q = 0; therefore, ∆U = 0
Equation 6.1,
can be
expressed for isothermal irreversible and
reversible changes as follows:
For isothermal irreversible change
q = – w = pex (Vf – Vi )
For isothermal reversible change
q = – w = nRT ln
=  2.303 nRT log
For adiabatic change, q = 0,
∆U = wad
Problem 6.2
Two litres of an ideal gas at a pressure of
10 atm expands isothermally at 25 °C into
a vacuum until its total volume is 10 litres.
How much heat is absorbed and how much
work is done in the expansion ?
Solution
We have  q = – w =  pex (10 – 2) = 0(8) = 0
No work is done; no heat is absorbed.
Problem 6.3
Consider the same expansion, but this
time against a constant external pressure
of 1 atm.
Solution
We have  q = – w =  pex (8) = 8 litre-atm
Problem 6.4
Consider the expansion given in problem
6.2, for 1 mol of an ideal gas conducted
reversibly.
Solution
We have q = – w =  2.303 nRT log V
= 2.303 × 1 × 0.8206 × 298 × log
2018-19
THERMODYNAMICS
= 2.303 x 0.8206 x 298 x log 5
= 2.303 x 0.8206 x 298 x 0.6990
= 393.66 L atm
Remember ∆H = qp, heat absorbed by the
system at constant pressure.
∆H is negative for exothermic reactions
which evolve heat during the reaction and
∆H is positive for endothermic reactions
which absorb heat from the surroundings.
At constant volume (∆V = 0), ∆U = qV,
therefore equation 6.8 becomes
∆H = ∆U = q
The difference between  ∆H and ∆U is not
usually significant for systems consisting of
only solids and / or liquids. Solids and liquids
do not suffer any significant volume changes
upon heating. The difference, however,
becomes significant when gases are involved.
Let us consider a reaction involving gases. If
VA is the total volume of the gaseous reactants,
VB is the total volume of the gaseous products,
nA is the number of moles of gaseous reactants
and nB is the number of moles of gaseous
products, all at constant pressure and
temperature, then using the ideal gas law, we
write,
pVA = nART
pVB = nBRT
Thus,  pVB – pVA = nBRT – nART = (nB–nA)RT
p (VB – VA) = (nB – nA) RT
or      p ∆V = ∆ngRT
(6.9)
Here, ∆ng refers to the number of moles of
gaseous products minus the number of moles
of gaseous reactants.
Substituting the value of p∆V from
equation 6.9 in equation 6.8, we get
∆H = ∆U + ∆ngRT
(6.10)
The equation 6.10 is useful for calculating
∆H from ∆U and vice versa.
Problem 6.5
If water vapour is assumed to be a perfect
gas, molar enthalpy change for
vapourisation of 1 mol of water at 1bar
and 100°C is 41kJ mol–1. Calculate the
internal energy change, when
6.2.2 Enthalpy, H
(a) A Useful New State Function
We know that the heat absorbed at constant
volume is equal to change in the internal
energy i.e., ∆U = q
V. But most of chemical
reactions are carried out not at constant
volume, but in flasks or test tubes under
constant atmospheric pressure. We need to
define another state function which may be
suitable under these conditions.
We may write equation (6.1) as
∆U = qp – p∆V at constant pressure, where qp
is heat absorbed by the system and –p∆V
represent expansion work done by the system.
Let us represent the initial state by
subscript 1 and final state  by 2
We can rewrite the above equation as
U2–U1 = qp – p (V2 – V1)
On rearranging, we get
qp = (U2 + pV2) – (U1 + pV1)
(6.6)
Now we can define another thermodynamic
function, the enthalpy H [Greek word
enthalpien, to warm or heat content] as :
H = U + pV
(6.7)
so, equation (6.6) becomes
qp= H2 – H1 = ∆H
Although q is a path dependent function,
H is a state function because it depends on U,
p and V, all of which are state functions.
Therefore, ∆H is independent of path. Hence,
qp is also independent of path.
For finite changes at constant pressure, we
can write equation 6.7 as
∆H = ∆U + ∆pV
Since p is constant, we can write
∆H = ∆U + p∆V
(6.8)
It is important to note that when heat  is
absorbed by the system at constant pressure,
we are actually measuring changes in the
enthalpy.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
1 mol of water is vapourised at 1 bar
pressure and 100°C.
Solution
(i)  The change
H O g
or ∆U = ∆H – ∆n
, substituting the
values, we get
41 00
kJ mol
J mol K
= 41.00 kJ mol-1 – 3.096 kJ mol-1
= 37.904 kJ mol–1
(b) Extensive and Intensive Properties
In thermodynamics, a distinction is made
between extensive properties and intensive
properties. An extensive property is a
property whose value depends on the
quantity or size of matter present in the
system. For example, mass, volume,
internal energy, enthalpy, heat capacity, etc.
are extensive properties.
Those properties which do not depend
on the quantity or size of matter present are
known as intensive properties. For
example temperature, density, pressure etc.
are intensive properties. A molar property,
χm, is the value of an extensive property χ of
the system for 1 mol of the substance. If n
is the amount of matter, χ
m = n  is
independent of the amount of matter. Other
examples are molar volume, Vm and molar
heat capacity, Cm. Let us understand the
distinction between extensive and intensive
properties by considering a gas enclosed in
a container of volume V and at temperature
T [Fig. 6.6(a)]. Let us make a partition such
that volume is halved, each part [Fig. 6.6
(b)] now has one half of the original volume,
2 , but the temperature will still remain the
same i.e., T. It is clear that volume is an
extensive property and temperature is an
intensive property.
(c) Heat Capacity
In this sub-section, let us see how to measure
heat transferred to a system. This heat appears
as a rise in temperature of the system in case
of heat absorbed by the system.
The increase of temperature is proportional
to the heat transferred
coeff
The magnitude of the coefficient depends
on the size, composition and nature of the
system. We can also write it as q = C ∆T
The coefficient, C is called the heat capacity.
Thus, we can measure the heat supplied
by monitoring the temperature rise, provided
we know the heat capacity.
When C is large, a given amount of heat
results in only a small temperature rise. Water
has a large heat capacity i.e., a lot of energy is
needed to raise its temperature.
C is directly proportional to amount of
substance. The molar heat capacity of a
substance, Cm=
, is the heat capacity for
one mole of the substance and is the quantity
of heat needed to raise the temperature of
one mole by one degree celsius (or one
kelvin). Specific heat, also called specific heat
capacity is the quantity of heat required to
raise the temperature of one unit mass of a
Fig. 6.6(a)  A gas at volume V and temperature T
Fig. 6.6 (b) Partition, each part having half the
volume of the gas
2018-19
THERMODYNAMICS
substance by one degree celsius (or one
kelvin). For finding out the heat, q, required
to raise the temperatures of a sample, we
multiply the specific heat of the substance,
c, by the mass m, and temperatures change,
∆T  as
(6.11)
(d) The Relationship between Cp and CV
for an Ideal Gas
At constant volume, the heat capacity, C is
denoted by CV and at constant pressure, this
is denoted by Cp . Let us find the relationship
between the two.
We can write equation for heat, q
at constant volume as qV = C
at constant pressure as qp = C
The difference between Cp and CV can be
derived for an ideal gas as:
For a mole of an ideal gas, ∆H = ∆U + ∆(pV )
= ∆U + ∆(RT )
= ∆U + R∆T
(6.12)
On putting the values of ∆H and ∆U,
we have
Cp – CV = R
(6.13)
6.3 MEASUREMENT OF ∆U AND ∆H:
CALORIMETRY
We can measure energy changes associated
with chemical or physical processes by an
experimental technique called calorimetry. In
calorimetry, the process is carried out in a
vessel called calorimeter, which is immersed
in a known volume of a liquid. Knowing the
heat capacity of the liquid in which calorimeter
is immersed and the heat capacity of
calorimeter, it is possible to determine the heat
evolved in the process by measuring
temperature changes. Measurements are
made under two different conditions:
i)   at constant volume,  qV
ii)  at constant pressure,  qp
(a) ∆U Measurements
For chemical reactions, heat absorbed at
constant volume, is measured in a bomb
calorimeter (Fig. 6.7). Here, a steel vessel (the
bomb) is immersed in a water bath. The whole
device is called calorimeter. The steel vessel is
immersed in water bath to ensure that no heat
is lost to the surroundings. A combustible
substance is burnt in pure dioxygen supplied
Fig. 6.7  Bomb calorimeter
in the steel bomb. Heat evolved during the
reaction is transferred to the water around the
bomb and its temperature is monitored. Since
the bomb calorimeter is sealed, its volume does
not change i.e., the energy changes associated
with reactions are measured at constant
volume. Under these conditions, no work is
done  as the reaction is carried out at constant
volume in the bomb calorimeter. Even for
reactions involving gases, there is no work
done as ∆V = 0. Temperature change of the
calorimeter produced by the completed
reaction is then converted to qV, by using the
known heat capacity of the calorimeter with
the help of equation 6.11.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
(b) ∆H Measurements
Measurement of heat change at constant pressure
(generally under atmospheric pressure) can be
done in a calorimeter shown in Fig. 6.8. We know
that ∆Η = qp (at constant p) and, therefore, heat
absorbed or evolved, qp at constant pressure is
also called the heat of reaction or enthalpy of
reaction, ∆rH.
In an exothermic reaction, heat is evolved,
and system loses heat to the surroundings.
Therefore, qp will be negative and ∆rH will also
be negative. Similarly in an endothermic
reaction, heat is absorbed, qp is positive and
∆rH will be positive.
Problem 6.6
1g of graphite is burnt in a bomb
calorimeter in excess of oxygen at 298 K
and 1 atmospheric pressure according to
the equation
C (graphite) + O2 (g) → CO2 (g)
During the reaction, temperature rises
from 298 K to 299 K. If the heat capacity
Fig. 6.8 Calorimeter for measuring heat changes
at constant pressure (atmospheric
pressure).
of the bomb calorimeter is 20.7kJ/K,
what is the enthalpy change for the above
reaction at 298 K and 1 atm?
Solution
Suppose q is the quantity of heat from the
reaction mixture and CV is the heat capacity
of the calorimeter, then the quantity of heat
absorbed by the calorimeter.
q = CV × ∆T
Quantity of heat from the reaction will
have the same magnitude but opposite
sign because the heat lost by the system
(reaction mixture) is equal to the heat
gained by the calorimeter.
(Here, negative sign indicates the
exothermic nature of the reaction)
Thus, ∆U for the combustion of the 1g of
graphite = – 20.7 kJK–1
For combustion of 1 mol of graphite,
−× −(
= – 2.48 ×102 kJ mol–1 ,
Since ∆ ng = 0,
∆ H = ∆ U = – 2.48 ×102 kJ mol–1
6.4 ENTHALPY CHANGE, ∆rH OF A
REACTION – REACTION ENTHALPY
In a chemical reaction, reactants are converted
into products and is represented by,
Reactants  →  Products
The enthalpy change accompanying a
reaction is called the reaction enthalpy. The
enthalpy change of a chemical reaction, is given
by the symbol ∆rH
∆rH = (sum of enthalpies of products) – (sum
of enthalpies of reactants)
products
reactants
(6.14)
Here symbol ∑
(sigma) is used for
summation and ai and bi are the stoichiometric
2018-19
THERMODYNAMICS
coefficients of the products and reactants
respectively in the balanced chemical
equation. For example, for the reaction
CH4 (g)  +  2O2 (g)   →   CO2 (g)  + 2H2O (l)
oducts
= [Hm (CO2 ,g) + 2Hm  (H2O, l)]– [Hm (CH4 , g)
+ 2Hm (O2, g)]
where Hm is the molar enthalpy.
Enthalpy change is a very useful quantity.
Knowledge of this quantity is required when
one needs to plan the heating or cooling
required to maintain an industrial chemical
reaction at constant temperature. It is also
required to calculate temperature dependence
of equilibrium constant.
(a) Standard Enthalpy of Reactions
Enthalpy of a reaction depends on the
conditions under which a reaction is carried
out. It is, therefore, necessary that we must
specify some standard conditions. The
standard enthalpy of reaction is the
enthalpy change for a reaction when all
the participating substances are in their
standard states.
The standard state of a substance at a
specified temperature is its pure form at
1 bar. For example, the standard state of liquid
ethanol at 298 K is pure liquid ethanol at
1 bar; standard state of solid iron at 500 K is
pure iron at 1 bar. Usually data are taken
at 298 K.
Standard conditions are denoted by adding
the superscript 0 to the symbol ∆H, e.g., ∆H0
(b) Enthalpy Changes during Phase
Transformations
Phase transformations also involve energy
changes. Ice, for example, requires heat for
melting. Normally this melting takes place at
constant pressure (atmospheric pressure) and
during phase change, temperature remains
constant (at 273 K).
H2O(s) → H2O(l); ∆fusH
0 = 6.00 kJ moI–1
Here ∆fusH
0 is enthalpy of fusion in standard
state. If water freezes, then process is reversed
and equal amount of heat is given off to the
surroundings.
The enthalpy change that accompanies
melting of one mole of a solid substance
in standard state is called standard
enthalpy of fusion or molar enthalpy of
fusion, ∆fusH 0.
Melting of a solid is endothermic, so all
enthalpies of fusion are positive. Water requires
Table 6.1  Standard Enthalpy Changes of Fusion and Vaporisation
(Tf and Tb are melting and boiling points, respectively)
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
heat for evaporation. At constant temperature
of its boiling point Tb and at constant pressure:
H2O(l) → H2O(g); ∆vapH
0 = + 40.79 kJ moI–1 ∆vapH
is the standard enthalpy of vaporisation.
Amount of heat required to vaporize
one mole of a liquid at constant
temperature and under standard pressure
(1bar) is called its standard enthalpy of
vaporization or molar enthalpy of
vaporization, ∆vapH 0.
Sublimation is direct conversion of a solid
into its vapour. Solid CO2  or  ‘dry ice’ sublimes
at 195K with ∆subH
0=25.2 kJ mol–1;
naphthalene sublimes slowly and for this
∆sub H0 = 73.0 kJ mol–1 .
Standard enthalpy of sublimation,
∆subH
0 is the change in enthalpy when one
mole of a solid substance sublimes at a
constant temperature and under standard
pressure (1bar).
The magnitude of the enthalpy change
depends on the strength of the intermolecular
interactions in the substance undergoing the
phase transfomations. For example, the strong
hydrogen bonds between water molecules hold
them tightly in liquid phase. For an organic
liquid, such as acetone, the intermolecular
dipole-dipole interactions are significantly
weaker. Thus, it requires less heat to vaporise
1 mol of acetone than it does to vaporize 1 mol
of water. Table 6.1 gives values of standard
enthalpy changes of fusion and vaporisation
for some substances.
Problem 6.7
A swimmer coming out from a pool is
covered with a film of water weighing
about 18g. How much heat must be
supplied to evaporate this water at
298 K ? Calculate the internal energy of
vaporisation at 298K.
∆vap H
0 for water
at 298K= 44.01kJ mol–1
Solution
We can represent the process of
evaporation as
H O( )
H O(g)
vaporisation
No. of moles in 18 g H2O(l) is
18g mol−
Heat supplied to evaporate18g water at
298 K
= n × ∆vap H
= (1 mol) × (44.01 kJ mol–1)
= 44.01 kJ
(assuming steam behaving as an ideal
gas).
44 01
1 8 314
( )( .
vapU V =
44 01
41 53
Problem 6.8
Assuming the water vapour to be a perfect
gas, calculate the internal energy change
when 1 mol of water at 100°C and 1 bar
pressure is converted to ice at 0°C. Given
the enthalpy of fusion of ice is 6.00 kJ  mol-
1 heat capacity of water is 4.2 J/g°C
The change take place as follows:
Step - 1
1 mol H2O (l, 100°C) à 1
mol (l, 0°C) Enthalpy
change ∆H1
Step - 2
1 mol H2O (l, 0°C) à 1 mol
H2O( S, 0°C) Enthalpy
change ∆H2
Total enthalpy change will be -
∆H = ∆H1 + ∆H2
∆H1  = - (18 x 4.2 x 100) J mol-1
= - 7560 J mol-1 = - 7.56 k J mol-1
∆H2 = - 6.00 kJ mol-1
2018-19
THERMODYNAMICS
aggregation (also known as reference
states)  is called Standard Molar Enthalpy
of Formation. Its symbol is ∆fH 0, where
the subscript ‘ f ’ indicates that one mole of
the compound in question has been formed
in its standard state from its elements in their
most stable states of aggregation. The reference
state of an element is its most stable state of
aggregation at 25°C and 1 bar pressure.
For example, the reference state of dihydrogen
is H2 gas and those of dioxygen, carbon and
sulphur are O2 gas, Cgraphite and Srhombic
respectively. Some reactions with standard
molar enthalpies of formation are as follows.
Table 6.2
Standard Molar Enthalpies of Formation (∆f H
y) at 298K of a
Few  Selected Substances
Therefore,
∆H = - 7.56 kJ mol-1 + (-6.00 kJ mol-1)
= -13.56 kJ mol-1
There is negligible change in the volume
during the change form liquid to solid
state.
Therefore, p∆v = ∆ng RT = 0
∆H = ∆U = - 13.56kJ mol-1
Standard Enthalpy of Formation
The standard enthalpy change for the
formation of one mole of a compound from
its elements in their most stable states of
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
H2(g) + ½O2 (g) → H2O(1);
∆f H0 = –285.8 kJ mol–1
C (graphite, s) + 2H2(g) → Ch4 (g);
∆f H0 = –74.81 kJ mol–1
2C (graphite, s)+3H2 (g)+ ½O2(g) → C2H5OH(1);
∆f H0 = – 277.7kJ mol–1
It is important to understand that a
standard molar enthalpy of formation, ∆fH
is just a special case of ∆rH
0, where one mole
of a compound is formed from its constituent
elements, as in the above three equations,
where 1 mol of each, water, methane and
ethanol is formed. In contrast, the enthalpy
change for an exothermic reaction:
CaO(s) + CO2(g) → CaCo3(s);
∆rH0 = – 178.3kJ mol–1
is not an enthalpy of formation of calcium
carbonate, since calcium carbonate has been
formed from other compounds, and not from
its constituent elements. Also, for the reaction
given below, enthalpy change is not standard
enthalpy of formation, ∆fH
0 for HBr(g).
H2(g) + Br2(l) → 2HBr(g);
∆r H0 = – 178.3kJ mol–1
Here two moles, instead of one mole of the
product is formed from the elements, i.e., .
∆r H0 = 2∆f H0
Therefore, by dividing all coefficients in the
balanced equation by 2, expression for
enthalpy of formation of HBr (g) is written as
½H2(g) + ½Br2(1) → HBr(g);
∆f H0 = – 36.4 kJ mol–1
Standard enthalpies of formation of some
common substances are given in Table 6.2.
By convention, standard enthalpy for
formation, ∆fH
0, of an element in reference
state, i.e., its most stable state of aggregation
is taken as zero.
Suppose,  you are a chemical engineer and
want to know how much heat is required to
decompose calcium carbonate to lime and
carbon dioxide, with all the substances in their
standard state.
CaCO3(s) → CaO(s) + CO2(g); ∆r H0  = ?
Here, we can make use of standard enthalpy
of formation and calculate the enthalpy
change for the reaction. The following general
equation can be used for the enthalpy change
calculation.
∆rH0 =
i∑ai ∆f H0 (products) –
i∑bi ∆f H0 (reactants)
(6.15)
where a and b represent the coefficients of the
products and reactants in the balanced
equation. Let us apply the above equation for
decomposition of calcium carbonate. Here,
coefficients ‘a’ and ‘b’ are 1 each. Therefore,
∆rH0 = ∆f H0 = [CaO(s)]+ ∆f H0 [CO2(g)]
– ∆f H0 = [CaCO3(s)]
=1 (–635.1 kJ mol–1) + 1(–393.5 kJ mol–1)
–1(–1206.9 kJ mol–1)
= 178.3 kJ mol–1
Thus, the decomposition of CaCO3 (s) is an
endothermic process and you have to heat it
for getting the desired products.
(d) Thermochemical Equations
A balanced chemical equation together with
the value of its ∆rH is called a thermochemical
equation. We specify the physical state
(alongwith allotropic state) of the substance in
an equation. For example:
C2H5OH(l) + 3O2(g) → 2CO2(g) + 3H2O(l);
∆rH0 = – 1367 kJ mol–1
The above equation describes the
combustion of liquid ethanol at constant
temperature and pressure. The negative sign
of enthalpy change indicates that this is an
exothermic reaction.
It would be necessary to remember the
following conventions regarding thermo-
chemical equations.
1. The coefficients in a balanced thermo-
chemical equation refer to the number of
moles (never molecules) of reactants and
products involved in the reaction.
2. The numerical value of ∆rH
0 refers to the
number of moles of substances specified
by an equation. Standard enthalpy change
0 will have units as kJ mol–1.
2018-19
THERMODYNAMICS
To illustrate the concept, let us consider
the calculation of heat of reaction for the
following  reaction :
H O l
( ) +
( ) →
( ) +
From the Table (6.2) of standard enthalpy of
formation (∆f H 0), we find :
∆f H 0 (H2O,l) = –285.83 kJ mol–1;
∆f H 0 (Fe2O3,s)  = – 824.2 kJ mol–1;
Also  ∆f H 0 (Fe, s) = 0 and
∆f H 0 (H2, g) = 0 as per convention
Then,
∆f H 1
0 = 3(–285.83 kJ mol–1)
– 1(– 824.2 kJ mol–1)
=  (–857.5 + 824.2) kJ mol–1
=  –33.3 kJ mol–1
Note that the coefficients used in these
calculations are pure numbers, which are
equal to the respective stoichiometric
coefficients. The unit for ∆rH
kJ mol–1, which means per mole of reaction.
Once we balance the chemical equation in a
particular way, as above, this defines the mole
of reaction. If we had balanced the equation
differently, for example,
H O l
( ) +
( ) →
( ) +
then this amount of reaction would be one
mole of reaction and ∆rH
0 would be
∆f H 2
0 = 3
2 (–285.83 kJ mol–1)
2 (–824.2 kJ mol–1)
= (– 428.7 + 412.1) kJ mol–1
= –16.6 kJ mol–1 =  ½ ∆r H 1
It shows that enthalpy is an extensive quantity.
3. When a chemical equation is reversed, the
value of ∆rH
0 is reversed in sign. For
example
N2(g) + 3H2 (g) → 2NH3 (g);
∆r H 0 = – 91.8 kJ. mol–1
2NH3(g) → N2(g) + 3H2 (g);
∆r H 0 = + 91.8 kJ mol–1
Hess’s Law of Constant Heat
Summation
We know that enthalpy is a state function,
therefore the change in enthalpy is
independent  of the path between initial state
(reactants) and final state (products). In other
words, enthalpy change for a reaction is the
same whether it occurs in one step or in a
series of steps. This may be stated as follows
in the form of Hess’s Law.
If a reaction takes place in several steps
then its standard reaction enthalpy is the
sum of the standard enthalpies of the
intermediate reactions into which the
overall reaction may be divided at the same
temperature.
Let us understand the importance of this
law with the help of an example.
Consider the enthalpy change for the
reaction
C (graphite,s) + 1
2 O2 (g) → CO (g); ∆r H 0 = ?
Although CO(g) is the major product, some
CO2 gas is always produced in this reaction.
Therefore, we cannot measure enthalpy change
for the above reaction directly. However, if we
can find some other reactions involving related
species, it is possible to calculate the enthalpy
change for the above reaction.
Let us consider the following reactions:
C (graphite,s) + O2 (g) → CO2 (g);
∆r H 0 = – 393.5 kJ mol–1 (i)
CO (g) + 1
2 O2 (g) → CO2 (g)
∆r H 0 = – 283.0 kJ mol–1 (ii)
We can combine the above two reactions
in such a way so as to obtain the desired
reaction. To get one mole of CO(g) on the right,
we reverse equation (ii). In this, heat is
absorbed instead of being released, so we
change sign of ∆rH
0 value
CO2 (g) → CO (g) + 1
2 O2 (g);
∆r H 0 = + 283.0 kJ mol–1 (iii)
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Adding equation (i) and (iii), we get the
desired equation,
C graphite s
( ) →
for which ∆r H 0  = (– 393.5 + 283.0)
= – 110.5 kJ mol–1
In general, if enthalpy of an overall reaction
A→B along one route is ∆rH and ∆rH1, ∆rH2,
∆rH3..... representing enthalpies of reactions
leading to same product, B along another
route,then we have
∆rH = ∆rH1 + ∆rH2 + ∆rH3 ...
(6.16)
It can be represented as:
6.5 ENTHALPIES FOR DIFFERENT TYPES
OF REACTIONS
It is convenient to give name to enthalpies
specifying the types of reactions.
Standard Enthalpy of Combustion
(symbol : ∆cH 0)
Combustion reactions are exothermic in
nature. These are important in industry,
rocketry, and other walks of life. Standard
enthalpy of combustion is defined as the
enthalpy change per mole (or per unit amount)
of a substance, when it undergoes combustion
and all the reactants and products being in
their standard states at the specified
temperature.
Cooking gas in cylinders contains mostly
butane (C4H10). During complete combustion
of one mole of butane, 2658 kJ of heat is
released. We can write the thermochemical
reactions for this as:
∆C H 0  = – 2658.0 kJ mol–1
Similarly, combustion of glucose gives out
2802.0 kJ/mol of heat, for which the overall
equation is :
C H O
∆C H 0  = – 2802.0 kJ mol–1
Our body also generates energy from food
by the same overall process as combustion,
although the final products are produced after
a series of complex bio-chemical reactions
involving enzymes.
Problem 6.9
The combustion of one mole of benzene
takes place at 298 K and 1 atm. After
combustion, CO2(g) and H2O (1) are
produced and 3267.0 kJ of heat is
liberated. Calculate the standard
enthalpy of formation, ∆f H
0 of benzene.
Standard enthalpies of formation of
CO2(g) and
H O(l) are –393.5 kJ mol–1
and – 285.83 kJ mol–1 respectively.
Solution
The formation reaction of benezene is
given by :
C graphite
( ) →
∆f H 0  = ? ... (i)
The enthalpy of combustion of 1 mol of
benzene is :
H O l
( ) +
( ) +
∆C H 0  = – 3267 kJ mol–1... (ii)
The enthalpy of formation of 1 mol of
CO2(g) :
C graphite
( ) →
∆f H 0  = – 393.5 kJ mol–1... (iii)
The enthalpy of formation of 1 mol of
H2O(l) is :
H O l
( ) +
( ) →
∆C H 0  = – 285.83 kJ mol–1... (iv)
multiplying eqn. (iii) by  6 and eqn. (iv)
by 3 we get:
2018-19
THERMODYNAMICS
C graphite
( ) →
∆f H 0  = – 2361 kJ mol–1
( ) +
( ) →
∆f H 0  = – 857.49 kJ mol–1
Summing up the above two equations :
C graphite
H O l
( ) +
( ) →
∆f H 0  = – 3218.49 kJ mol–1... (v)
Reversing equation (ii);
H O l
( ) +
( ) →
( ) +
∆f H 0  = – 3267.0 kJ mol–1... (vi)
Adding equations (v) and (vi), we get
C graphite
( ) →
∆f H 0  = – 48.51 kJ mol–1... (iv)
In this case, the enthalpy of atomization is
same as the enthalpy  of sublimation.
(c) Bond Enthalpy (symbol: ∆bondH 0)
Chemical reactions involve the breaking and
making of chemical bonds. Energy is required
to break a bond and energy is released when
a bond is formed. It is possible to relate heat
of reaction to changes in energy associated
with breaking and making of chemical bonds.
With reference to the enthalpy changes
associated with chemical bonds, two different
terms are used in thermodynamics.
Bond dissociation enthalpy
Mean bond enthalpy
Let us discuss these terms with reference
to diatomic and polyatomic molecules.
Diatomic Molecules: Consider the following
process in which the bonds in one mole of
dihydrogen gas (H2) are broken:
H2(g)  →  2H(g) ;  ∆H–HH
0  = 435.0 kJ mol
The enthalpy change involved in this process
is the bond dissociation enthalpy of H–H bond.
The bond dissociation enthalpy is the change
in enthalpy when one mole of covalent bonds
of a gaseous covalent compound is broken to
form products in the gas phase.
Note that it is the same as the enthalpy of
atomization of dihydrogen. This is true for all
diatomic molecules. For example:
Cl2(g)  →  2Cl(g) ;  ∆Cl–ClH
0  = 242 kJ mol
O2(g)  →  2O(g) ;  ∆O=OH
0  = 428 kJ mol
In the case of polyatomic molecules, bond
dissociation enthalpy is different for different
bonds within the same molecule.
Polyatomic Molecules: Let us now consider
a polyatomic molecule like methane, CH4. The
overall thermochemical equation for its
atomization reaction is given below:
∆a H 0  = 1665 kJ mol–1
In methane, all the four C – H bonds are
identical in bond length and energy. However,
the energies required to break the individual
C – H bonds in each successive step differ :
(b) Enthalpy of Atomization
(symbol: ∆aH 0)
Consider the following example of atomization
of dihydrogen
H2(g)  →  2H(g);  ∆aH
0 = 435.0 kJ mol
You can see that H atoms are formed by
breaking H–H bonds in dihydrogen. The
enthalpy change in this process is known as
enthalpy of atomization, ∆aH
0. It is the
enthalpy change on breaking one mole of
bonds completely to obtain atoms in the gas
phase.
In case of diatomic molecules, like
dihydrogen (given above), the enthalpy of
atomization is also the bond dissociation
enthalpy. The other examples of enthalpy of
atomization can be
CH4(g)  →  C(g) + 4H(g); ∆aH
0  = 1665 kJ mol
Note that the products are only atoms of C
and H in gaseous phase. Now see the following
reaction:
Na(s)  →  Na(g) ;  ∆aH
0  = 108.4 kJ mol
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
CH4(g) → CH3(g)+H(g);∆bond H0 = +427 kJ mol–1
CH3(g) → CH2(g)+H(g);∆bond H0 = +439 kJ mol–1
CH2(g) → CH(g)+H(g);∆bond H0 = +452 kJ mol–1
CH(g) → C(g)+H(g);∆bond H0 = +347 kJ mol–1
Therefore,
CH4(g) → C(g)+4H(g);∆a H0 = 1665 kJ mol–1
In such cases we use mean bond enthalpy
of C – H bond.
For example in CH4, ∆C–HH
0  is calculated as:
∆C–HH
0 = ¼ (∆a H0) = ¼ (1665 kJ mol–1)
= 416 kJ mol–1
We find that mean C–H bond enthalpy in
methane is 416 kJ/mol. It has been found that
mean C–H bond enthalpies differ slightly from
compound
compound,
CH3CH2Cl,CH3NO2, etc,  but it does not differ
in a great deal*. Using Hess’s law, bond
enthalpies can be calculated. Bond enthalpy
values of some single and multiple bonds are
given in Table 6.3. The reaction enthalpies are
very important quantities as these arise from
the changes that accompany the breaking of
old bonds and formation of the new bonds.
We can predict enthalpy of a reaction in gas
phase, if we know different bond enthalpies.
The standard enthalpy of reaction, ∆rH0 is
related to bond enthalpies of the reactants and
products in gas phase reactions as:
∆r H0
bond enthalpies
bond enthalpies
reactants
products
(6.17)**
This relationship is particularly more
useful when the required values of ∆f H0 are
not available. The net enthalpy change of a
reaction is the amount of energy required to
break all the bonds in the reactant molecules
minus the amount of energy required to break
all the bonds in the product molecules.
Remember that this relationship is
435.8
Table 6.3(a) Some Mean Single Bond Enthalpies in kJ mol
–1 at 298 K
N = N
C = C
O = O
N ≡ N
C ≡  C
C = N
C = O
C ≡ N
C ≡ O
Table 6.3(b) Some Mean Multiple Bond Enthalpies in kJ mol
–1 at 298 K
** If we use enthalpy of bond formation, (∆f H bond  ), which is the enthalpy change when one mole of a particular type of
bond is formed from gaseous atom, then ∆f H 0 = ∑∆f H 0
bonds of products – ∑∆f H 0
bonds of reactants
Note that symbol  used for bond dissociation enthalpy and mean bond enthalpy is the same.
2018-19
THERMODYNAMICS
approximate and is valid when all substances
(reactants and products) in the reaction are in
gaseous state.
(d)  Lattice Enthalpy
The lattice enthalpy of an ionic compound is
the enthalpy change which occurs when one
mole of an ionic compound dissociates into its
ions in gaseous state.
Na Cl
( ) →
∆latticeH
0 = +788 kJ mol–1
Since it is impossible to determine lattice
enthalpies directly by experiment, we use an
indirect method where we construct an
enthalpy diagram called a Born-Haber Cycle
(Fig. 6.9).
Let us now calculate the lattice enthalpy
of Na+Cl–(s) by following steps given below :
, sublimation of sodium
metal, ∆subH
0 = 108.4 kJ mol–1
, the ionization of
sodium atoms,  ionization enthalpy
∆iH0 = 496 kJ mol–1
, the dissociation of
chlorine, the reaction enthalpy is half the
bond dissociation enthalpy.
2 ∆bondH0 = 121 kJ mol–1
electron gained by
chlorine atoms. The electron gain enthalpy,
∆egH 0  = – 348.6 kJ mol–1.
You have learnt about ionization enthalpy
and electron gain enthalpy in Unit 3. In
fact, these terms have been taken from
thermodynamics. Earlier terms, ionization
energy and electron affinity were in
practice in place of the above terms (see
the box for justification).
Fig. 6.9
Enthalpy diagram for lattice enthalpy
of NaCl
Na Cl
The sequence of steps is shown in Fig. 6.9,
and is known as a Born-Haber cycle. The
Ionization Energy and Electron Affinity
Ionization energy and electron affinity are
defined at absolute zero. At any other
temperature, heat capacities for the
reactants and the products have to be
taken into account. Enthalpies of reactions
M(g)   →   M+(g)   + e–    (for ionization)
M(g)  +  e–    →   M–(g)  (for electron gain)
at temperature, T is
∆rH0(T ) = ∆rH0(0) +
∫∆rCP
The value of Cp for each species in the
above reaction is 5/2 R  (CV = 3/2R)
So,  ∆rCp
0  = + 5/2 R (for ionization)
0  = – 5/2 R (for electron gain)
Therefore,
∆rH0 (ionization enthalpy)
= E0 (ionization energy) + 5/2 RT
∆rH0  (electron gain enthalpy)
= – A( electron affinity) – 5/2 RT
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
The enthalpy of solution of AB(s), ∆solH
0, in
water is, therefore, determined by the selective
values of the lattice enthalpy,∆latticeH
0 and
enthalpy of hydration of ions, ∆hydH
0  as
∆sol H
0 = ∆latticeH
0 + ∆hydH
For most of the ionic compounds, ∆sol H
positive and the dissociation process is
endothermic. Therefore the solubility of most
salts in water increases with rise of
temperature. If the lattice enthalpy is very
high, the dissolution of the compound may not
take place at all. Why do many fluorides tend
to be less soluble than the corresponding
chlorides? Estimates of the magnitudes of
enthalpy changes may be made by using tables
of bond energies (enthalpies) and lattice
energies (enthalpies).
(f)   Enthalpy of Dilution
It is known that enthalpy of solution is the
enthalpy change associated with the addition
of a specified amount of solute to the specified
amount of solvent at a constant temperature
and pressure. This argument can be applied
to any solvent with slight modification.
Enthalpy change for dissolving one mole of
gaseous hydrogen chloride in 10 mol of water
can be represented by the following equation.
For convenience we will use the symbol aq. for
water
HCl(g) + 10 aq. → HCl.10 aq.
∆H = –69.01 kJ / mol
Let us consider the following set of enthalpy
changes:
(S-1) HCl(g) + 25 aq. → HCl.25 aq.
∆H = –72.03 kJ / mol
(S-2) HCl(g) + 40 aq. → HCl.40 aq.
∆H = –72.79 kJ / mol
(S-3) HCl(g) +  ∞ aq. → HCl. ∞ aq.
∆H = –74.85 kJ / mol
The values of ∆H show general dependence
of the enthalpy of solution on amount of solvent.
As more and more solvent is used, the enthalpy
of solution approaches a limiting value, i.e, the
value in  infinitely dilute solution. For
hydrochloric acid this value of ∆H  is given
above in equation (S-3).
importance of the cycle is that, the sum of
the enthalpy changes round a cycle is
zero. Applying Hess’s law, we get,
∆latticeH0 = 411.2 + 108.4 + 121 + 496 – 348.6
∆latticeH0 = + 788kJ
for NaCl(s) d Na+(g) + Cl–(g)
Internal energy is smaller by 2RT ( because
∆ng = 2) and is equal to + 783 kJ mol–1.
Now we use the value of lattice enthalpy to
calculate enthalpy of solution from the
expression:
∆solH0 = ∆latticeH0 + ∆hydH0
For one mole of NaCl(s),
lattice enthalpy  = + 788 kJ mol–1
and ∆hydH
0 = – 784 kJ mol
–1( from the
literature)
∆sol H
0 = + 788 kJ mol
–1 – 784 kJ mol
= + 4 kJ mol–1
The dissolution of NaCl(s) is accompanied
by very little heat change.
(e)   Enthalpy of Solution (symbol : ∆solH
Enthalpy of solution of a substance is the
enthalpy change when one mole of it dissolves
in a specified amount of solvent. The enthalpy
of solution at infinite dilution is the enthalpy
change observed on dissolving the substance
in an infinite amount of solvent when the
interactions between the ions (or solute
molecules) are negligible.
When an ionic compound dissolves in a
solvent, the ions leave their ordered positions on
the crystal lattice. These are now more free in
solution. But solvation of these ions (hydration
in case solvent is water) also occurs at the same
time. This is shown diagrammatically, for an
ionic compound, AB (s)
2018-19
THERMODYNAMICS
If we subtract the first equation (equation
S-1) from the second equation (equation S-2)
in the above set of equations, we obtain–
HCl.25 aq. + 15 aq. → HCl.40 aq.
∆H = [ –72.79 – (–72.03)] kJ / mol
= – 0.76 kJ / mol
This value (–0.76kJ/mol) of ∆H is enthalpy
of dilution. It is the heat withdrawn from the
surroundings when additional solvent is
added to the solution. The enthalpy of dilution
of a solution is dependent on the original
concentration of the solution and the amount
of solvent added.
6.6 SPONTANEITY
The first law of thermodynamics tells us about
the relationship between the heat absorbed
and the work performed on or by a system. It
puts no restrictions on the direction of heat
flow. However, the flow of heat is unidirectional
from higher temperature to lower
temperature. In fact, all naturally occurring
processes whether chemical or physical will
tend to proceed spontaneously in one
direction only. For example, a gas expanding
to fill the available volume, burning carbon
in dioxygen giving carbon dioxide.
But heat will not flow from colder body to
warmer body on its own, the gas in a container
will not spontaneously contract into one
corner or carbon dioxide will not form carbon
and dioxygen spontaneously. These and many
other spontaneously occurring changes show
unidirectional change. We may ask ‘what is the
driving force of spontaneously occurring
changes ? What determines the direction of a
spontaneous change ? In this section, we shall
establish some criterion for these processes
whether these will take place or not.
Let us first understand what do we mean
by spontaneous reaction or change ? You may
think by your common observation that
spontaneous reaction is one which occurs
immediately when contact is made between
the reactants. Take the case of combination of
hydrogen and oxygen. These gases may be
mixed at room temperature and left for many
years without observing any perceptible
change. Although the reaction is taking place
between them, it is at an extremely slow rate.
It is still called spontaneous reaction. So
spontaneity means ‘having the potential to
proceed without the assistance of external
agency’. However, it does not tell about the
rate of the reaction or process. Another aspect
of spontaneous reaction or process, as we see
is that these cannot reverse their direction on
their own. We may summarise it as  follows:
A spontaneous process is an
irreversible process and may only be
reversed by some external agency.
(a) Is Decrease in Enthalpy a Criterion
for Spontaneity ?
If we examine the phenomenon like flow of
water down hill or fall of a stone on to the
ground, we find that there is a net decrease in
potential energy in the direction of change. By
analogy, we may be tempted to state that  a
chemical reaction is spontaneous in a given
direction, because decrease in energy has
taken place, as in the case of exothermic
reactions. For example:
2 N2(g) + 3
2 H2(g) = NH3(g) ;
0 = – 46.1 kJ mol–1
2  H2(g) + 1
2 Cl2(g) = HCl (g) ;
0 = – 92.32 kJ mol–1
H2(g) + 1
2  O2(g) → H2O(l) ;
0 = –285.8 kJ mol–1
The decrease in enthalpy in passing from
reactants to products may be shown for any
exothermic reaction on an enthalpy diagram
as shown in Fig. 6.10(a).
Thus, the postulate that driving force for a
chemical reaction may be due to decrease in
energy sounds ‘reasonable’ as the basis of
evidence so far !
Now let us examine the following reactions:
2  N2(g) + O2(g) → NO2(g);
0 = +33.2 kJ mol–1
C(graphite, s) + 2 S(l) → CS2(l);
0 = +128.5 kJ mol–1
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
These reactions  though endothermic, are
spontaneous. The increase in enthalpy may
be represented on an enthalpy diagram as
shown in Fig. 6.10(b).
Fig. 6.10 (a)
Enthalpy diagram for exothermic
reactions
Fig. 6.10 (b)
Enthalpy diagram for endothermic
reactions
Fig. 6.11  Diffusion of two gases
respectively and separated by a movable
partition [Fig. 6.11 (a)]. When the partition is
withdrawn [Fig.6.11( b)], the gases begin to
diffuse into each other and after a period of
time, diffusion will be complete.
Let us examine the process. Before
partition, if we were to pick up the gas
molecules from left container, we would be
sure that these will be molecules of gas A and
similarly if we were to pick up the gas
molecules from right container, we would be
sure that these will be molecules of gas B. But,
if we were to pick up molecules from container
when partition is removed, we are not sure
whether the molecules picked are of gas A or
gas B. We say that the system has become less
predictable or more chaotic.
We may now formulate another postulate:
in an isolated system, there is always a
tendency for the systems’ energy to  become
more disordered or chaotic and this could be
a criterion for spontaneous change !
At this point, we introduce another
thermodynamic function, entropy denoted as
S. The above mentioned disorder is the
manifestation of entropy. To form a mental
Therefore, it becomes obvious that while
decrease in enthalpy may be a contributory
factor for spontaneity, but it is not true for all
cases.
(b) Entropy and Spontaneity
Then, what drives the spontaneous process in
a given direction ?  Let us examine such a case
in which ∆H = 0 i.e., there is no change in
enthalpy, but still the process is spontaneous.
Let us consider diffusion of two gases into
each other in a closed container which is
isolated from the surroundings  as shown in
Fig. 6.11.
The two gases, say, gas A and gas B are
represented by black dots and white dots
2018-19
THERMODYNAMICS
picture, one can think of entropy as a measure
of the degree of randomness or disorder in the
system. The greater the disorder in an isolated
system, the higher is the entropy.  As far as a
chemical reaction is concerned, this entropy
change  can be attributed to rearrangement of
atoms or ions from one pattern in the reactants
to another (in the products). If the structure
of the products is very much disordered than
that of the reactants, there will be a resultant
increase in entropy. The change in entropy
accompanying a chemical reaction may be
estimated qualitatively by a consideration of
the structures of the species taking part in the
reaction. Decrease of regularity in structure
would mean increase in entropy. For a given
substance, the crystalline solid state is the
state of lowest entropy (most ordered), The
gaseous state is state of highest entropy.
Now let us try to quantify entropy. One way
to calculate the degree of disorder or chaotic
distribution of energy among molecules would
be through statistical method which is beyond
the scope of this treatment. Other way would
be to relate this process to the heat involved in
a process which would make entropy a
thermodynamic concept. Entropy, like any
other thermodynamic property such as
internal energy U and enthalpy H is a state
function and ∆S is independent of path.
Whenever heat is added to the system, it
increases molecular motions causing
increased randomness in the system. Thus
heat (q) has randomising influence on the
system. Can we then equate ∆S with q ? Wait !
Experience suggests us that the distribution
of heat also depends on the temperature at
which heat is added to the system. A system
at higher temperature has greater randomness
in it than one at lower temperature. Thus,
temperature is the measure of average
chaotic motion of particles in the system.
Heat added to a system at lower temperature
causes greater randomness than when the
same quantity of heat is added to it at higher
temperature. This suggests that the entropy
change is inversely proportional to the
temperature. ∆S is related with q and T for a
reversible reaction as :
∆S = q
(6.18)
The total entropy change ( ∆Stotal) for the
system and surroundings of a spontaneous
process is given by
total
system
> 0                    (6.19)
When a system is in equilibrium, the
entropy is maximum, and the change in
entropy, ∆S = 0.
We can say that entropy for a spontaneous
process increases till it reaches maximum and
at equilibrium the change in entropy is zero.
Since entropy is a state property, we can
calculate the change in entropy of a reversible
process by
∆Ssys =
qsys rev
We find that both for reversible and
irreversible expansion for an ideal gas,  under
isothermal conditions, ∆U = 0,  but ∆Stotal  i.e.,
is not zero for irreversible
process. Thus,  ∆U does not discriminate
between reversible and irreversible process,
whereas ∆S does.
Problem 6.10
Predict in which of the following, entropy
increases/decreases :
A liquid crystallizes into a solid.
Temperature of a crystalline solid is
raised from 0 K to 115 K.
NaHCO
Na CO
H O g
( ) →
( ) +
( ) +
( ) →
Solution
After freezing, the molecules attain an
ordered state and therefore, entropy
decreases.
At 0 K, the contituent particles are
static and entropy is minimum. If
temperature is raised to 115 K, these
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
begin to move and oscillate about their
equilibrium positions in the lattice and
system becomes more disordered,
therefore entropy increases.
(iii)
Reactant, NaHCO3 is a solid and it
has low entropy. Among products
there are one solid and two gases.
Therefore, the products represent a
condition of higher entropy.
Here one molecule gives two atoms
i.e., number of particles increases
leading to more disordered state.
Two moles of H atoms have higher
entropy than one mole of dihydrogen
molecule.
Problem 6.11
For oxidation of iron,
( ) +
( ) →
entropy change is – 549.4 JK–1mol–1at
298 K. Inspite of negative entropy change
of this reaction, why is the reaction
spontaneous?
reaction
–1648 × 103 J mol–1)
Solution
One decides the spontaneity of a reaction
by considering
total
) . For calculating
∆Ssurr, we have to consider the heat
absorbed by the surroundings which is
equal to – ∆rH
0. . . . . At temperature T, entropy
change of the surroundings is
1648 10
J mol
= 5530 JK–1mol–1
Thus, total entropy change for this
reaction
total
549 4
JK mol
JK mol
= 4980.6 JK–1 mol–1
This shows that the above reaction is
spontaneous.
(c) Gibbs Energy and Spontaneity
We have seen that for a system, it is the total
entropy change, ∆Stotal which decides the
spontaneity of the process. But most of the
chemical reactions fall into the category of
either closed systems or open systems.
Therefore, for most of the chemical reactions
there are changes in both enthalpy and
entropy. It is clear from the discussion in
previous sections that neither decrease in
enthalpy nor increase in entropy alone can
determine the direction of spontaneous change
for these systems.
For this purpose, we define a new
thermodynamic function the Gibbs energy or
Gibbs function, G, as
G = H – TS                                         (6.20)
Gibbs function, G is an extensive property
and a state function.
The change in Gibbs energy for the system,
∆Gsys can be written as
At constant temperature,
Usually the subscript ‘system’ is dropped
and we simply write this equation as
(6.21)
Thus, Gibbs energy change = enthalpy
change – temperature × entropy change, and
is referred to as the Gibbs equation, one of the
most important equations in chemistry. Here,
we have considered both terms together for
spontaneity: energy (in terms of ∆H) and
entropy (∆S, a measure of disorder) as
indicated earlier. Dimensionally if we analyse,
we find that ∆G has units of energy because,
both ∆H and the T∆S are energy terms, since
T∆S = (K) (J/K) = J.
Now let us consider how ∆G is related to
reaction spontaneity.
2018-19
THERMODYNAMICS
We know,
∆Stotal =
∆Ssys +  ∆Ssurr
If the system is in thermal equilibrium with
the surrounding, then the temperature of the
surrounding is same as that of the system.
Also, increase in enthalpy of the surrounding
is equal to decrease in the enthalpy of the
system.
Therefore,
entropy
change
surroundings,
Ssurr =
total
Rearranging the above equation:
T∆Stotal  = T∆Ssys – ∆Hsys
For spontaneous process, ∆Stotal > 0 , so
T∆Ssys – ∆Hsys > Ο
Using equation 6.21, the above equation can
be written as
–∆G > O
< 0                                   (6.22)
∆Hsys is the enthalpy change of a reaction,
T∆Ssys is the energy which is not available to
do useful work. So ∆G is the net energy
available to do useful work and is thus a
measure of the ‘free energy’. For this reason, it
is also known as the free energy of the reaction.
∆G gives a criteria for spontaneity at
constant pressure and temperature.
If ∆G is negative (< 0), the process is
spontaneous.
(ii) If ∆G is positive (> 0), the process is non
spontaneous.
Note : If a reaction has a positive enthalpy
change and positive entropy change, it can be
spontaneous when T∆S is large enough to
outweigh ∆H. This can happen in two ways;
(a) The positive entropy change of the system
can be ‘small’ in which case T must be large.
(b) The positive entropy change of the system
can be ’large’, in which case T may be small.
The former is one of the reasons why reactions
are often carried out at high temperature.
Table 6.4 summarises the effect of temperature
on spontaneity of reactions.
(d) Entropy and Second Law of
Thermodynamics
We know that for an isolated system the
change in energy remains constant. Therefore,
increase in entropy in such systems is the
natural direction of a spontaneous change.
This, in fact is the second law of
thermodynamics. Like first law of
thermodynamics, second law can also be
stated in several ways. The second law of
thermodynamics explains why spontaneous
exothermic reactions are so common. In
exothermic reactions heat released by the
reaction increases the disorder of the
surroundings and overall entropy change is
positive which makes the reaction
spontaneous.
(e) Absolute Entropy and Third Law of
Thermodynamics
Molecules of a substance may move in a
straight line in any direction, they may spin
like a top and the bonds in the molecules may
stretch and compress. These motions of the
molecule are called translational, rotational
and vibrational motion respectively. When
temperature of the system rises, these motions
become more vigorous and entropy increases.
On the other hand when temperature is
lowered, the entropy decreases. The entropy
of any pure crystalline substance
approaches zero as the temperature
approaches absolute zero. This is called
third law of thermodynamics. This is so
because there is perfect order in a crystal at
absolute zero. The statement is confined to
pure crystalline solids because theoretical
arguments and practical evidences have
shown that entropy of solutions and super
cooled liquids is not zero at 0 K. The
importance of the third law lies in the fact that
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Table 6.4  Effect of Temperature on Spontaneity of Reactions
Description*
Reaction spontaneous at all temperatures
– (at low T )
Reaction spontaneous at low temperature
+ (at high T )
Reaction nonspontaneous at high temperature
+ (at low T )
Reaction nonspontaneous at low temperature
– (at high T )
Reaction spontaneous at high temperature
+ (at all T )
Reaction nonspontaneous at all temperatures
* The term low temperature and high temperature are relative. For a particular reaction, high temperature could even
mean room temperature.
it permits the calculation of absolute values
of entropy of pure substance from thermal
data alone. For a pure substance, this can be
done by summing q
rev  increments from 0 K
to 298 K. Standard entropies can be used to
calculate standard entropy changes by a
Hess’s law type of calculation.
6.7 GIBBS ENERGY CHANGE AND
EQUILIBRIUM
We have seen how a knowledge of the sign and
magnitude of the free energy change of a
chemical reaction allows:
Prediction of the spontaneity of the
chemical reaction.
(ii) Prediction of the useful work that could
be extracted from it.
So far we have considered free energy
changes in irreversible reactions. Let us now
examine the free energy changes in reversible
reactions.
‘Reversible’ under strict thermodynamic
sense is a special way of carrying out a
process such that system is at all times in
perfect equilibrium with its surroundings.
When applied to a chemical reaction, the
term ‘reversible’ indicates that a given
reaction can proceed in either direction
simultaneously, so that a dynamic
equilibrium is set up. This means that the
reactions in both the directions should
proceed with a decrease in free energy, which
seems impossible. It is possible only if at
equilibrium the free energy of the system is
minimum. If it is not, the system would
spontaneously change to configuration of
lower free energy.
So, the criterion for equilibrium
A + B l C + D  ;   is
∆rG = 0
Gibbs energy for a reaction in which all
reactants and products are in standard state,
0 is related to the equilibrium constant of
the reaction as follows:
0  =  ∆rG
0 + RT ln K
or     ∆rG
0  =  – RT ln K
or     ∆rG
0   =  – 2.303 RT log K                     (6.23)
We also know that
(6.24)
For strongly endothermic reactions, the
value of ∆rH
0 may be large and positive. In
such a case, value of K will be much smaller
than 1 and the reaction is unlikely to form
much product. In case of exothermic
reactions, ∆rH
0 is large and negative, and ∆rG
is likely to be large and negative too. In such
cases, K will be much larger than 1. We may
expect strongly exothermic reactions to have
a large K, and hence can go to near
completion. ∆rG
0 also depends upon ∆rS
0, if
the changes in the entropy of reaction is also
taken into account, the value of K or extent
of chemical reaction will also be affected,
2018-19
THERMODYNAMICS
depending upon whether ∆rS
0 is positive or
negative.
Using equation (6.24),
It is possible to obtain an estimate of ∆G
from the measurement of ∆H
V and ∆S
and then calculate K at any temperature
for economic yields of the products.
(ii) If K is measured directly in the
laboratory, value of ∆G
0 at any other
temperature can be calculated.
Using equation (6.24),
2 303 8 314
J mol
=   2.38
Hence K = antilog  2.38 = 2.4 × 102.
Problem 6.14
At 60°C, dinitrogen tetroxide is 50
per cent dissociated. Calculate the
standard free energy change at this
temperature and at one atmosphere.
Solution
N2O4(g)
2NO2(g)
If N2O4 is 50% dissociated, the mole
fraction of both the substances is given
The equilibrium constant Kp is given by
( . ) ( . )
=  1.33 atm.
Since
0 = –RT ln Kp
0 = (– 8.314 JK–1 mol–1) × (333 K)
× (2.303) × (0.1239)
= – 763.8 kJ mol–1
Problem 6.12
Calculate ∆rG
0 for conversion of oxygen
to ozone, 3/2 O2(g) → O3(g) at 298 K. if Kp
for this conversion is 2.47 × 10–29.
Solution
We know ∆rG
0 = – 2.303 RT log Kp and
R = 8.314 JK–1 mol–1
Therefore, ∆rG
– 2.303 (8.314 J K–1 mol–1)
× (298 K) (log 2.47 × 10–29)
= 163000 J mol–1
= 163 kJ mol–1.
Problem 6.13
Find out the value of equilibrium constant
for the following reaction at 298 K.
Standard Gibbs energy change, ∆rG
the given temperature is –13.6 kJ mol–1.
Solution
We know, log  K  =
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
SUMMARY
Thermodynamics deals with energy changes in chemical or physical processes and enables us
to study these changes quantitatively and to make useful predictions. For these purposes, we
divide the universe into the system and the surroundings. Chemical or physical processes
lead to evolution or absorption of heat (q), part of which may be converted into work (w). These
quantities are related through the first law of thermodynamics via ∆U = q + w. ∆U,  change in
internal energy, depends on initial and final states only and is a state function, whereas q and
w depend on the path and are not the state functions. We follow sign conventions of q and w by
giving the positive sign to these quantities when these are added to the system. We can measure
the transfer of heat from one system to another which causes the change in temperature. The
magnitude of rise in temperature depends on the heat capacity (C) of a substance. Therefore,
heat absorbed or evolved is q =  C∆T. Work can be measured by w = –pex∆V, in case of expansion
of gases. Under reversible process, we can put pex = p for infinitesimal changes in the volume
making wrev = – p dV. In this condition, we can use gas equation, pV = nRT.
At constant volume, w = 0, then ∆U = qV , heat transfer at constant volume. But in study of
chemical reactions, we usually have constant pressure. We define another state function
enthalpy. Enthalpy change, ∆H = ∆U + ∆ngRT, can be found directly from the heat changes at
constant pressure, ∆H = qp.
There are varieties of enthalpy changes. Changes of phase such as melting, vaporization
and sublimation usually occur at constant temperature and can be characterized by enthalpy
changes which are always positive. Enthalpy of formation, combustion and other enthalpy
changes can be calculated using Hess’s law. Enthalpy change for chemical reactions can be
determined by
products
reactions
and in gaseous state by
0 =  Σ bond enthalpies of the reactants – Σ bond enthalpies of the products
First law of thermodynamics does not guide us about the direction of chemical reactions
i.e., what is the driving force of a chemical reaction. For isolated systems,
∆U = 0. We define another state function, S, entropy for this purpose. Entropy is a measure of
disorder or randomness. For a spontaneous change, total entropy change is positive. Therefore,
for an isolated system, ∆U = 0, ∆S > 0, so entropy change distinguishes a spontaneous change,
while energy change does not. Entropy changes can be measured by the equation
∆S = qrev
for a reversible process. qrev
is independent of path.
Chemical reactions are generally carried at constant pressure, so we define another state
function Gibbs energy, G, which is related to entropy and enthalpy changes of the system by
the equation:
∆rG =
∆rH – T ∆rS
For a spontaneous change, ∆Gsys < 0 and at equilibrium, ∆Gsys = 0.
Standard Gibbs energy change is related to equilibrium constant by
0 = – RT ln K.
K can be calculated from this equation, if we know ∆rG
0 which can be found from
. Temperature is an important factor in the equation. Many reactions which
are non-spontaneous at low temperature, are made spontaneous at high temperature for systems
having positive entropy of reaction.
2018-19
THERMODYNAMICS
EXERCISES
Choose the correct answer. A thermodynamic state function is a quantity
used to determine heat changes
whose value is independent of path
(iii)
used to determine pressure volume work
whose value depends on temperature only.
For the process to occur under adiabatic conditions, the correct condition is:
∆T = 0
∆p = 0
(iii)
q = 0
w = 0
The enthalpies of all elements in their standard states are:
unity
(iii)
different for each element
0of combustion of methane is – X kJ mol–1. The value of ∆H
(iii)
The enthalpy of combustion of methane, graphite and dihydrogen at 298 K
are, –890.3 kJ mol–1 –393.5 kJ mol–1, and –285.8 kJ mol–1 respectively. Enthalpy
of formation of CH4(g) will be
–74.8 kJ mol–1
–52.27 kJ mol–1
(iii)
+74.8 kJ mol–1
+52.26 kJ mol–1.
A reaction, A + B → C + D + q is found to have a positive entropy change. The
reaction will be
possible at high temperature
possible only at low temperature
(iii)
not possible at any temperature
possible at any temperature
In a process, 701 J of heat is absorbed by a system and 394 J of work is done
by the system. What is the change in internal energy for the process?
The reaction of cyanamide, NH2CN (s), with dioxygen was carried out in a bomb
calorimeter, and ∆U was found to be –742.7 kJ mol–1 at 298 K. Calculate enthalpy
change for the reaction at 298 K.
NH2CN(g) +  3
2 O2(g) → N2(g) + CO2(g) + H2O(l)
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Calculate the number of kJ of heat necessary to raise the temperature of
60.0 g of aluminium from 35°C to 55°C. Molar heat capacity of Al is 24 J mol–1 K–1.
Calculate the enthalpy change on freezing of 1.0 mol of water at10.0°C to ice at
–10.0°C.  ∆fusH = 6.03 kJ mol–1 at 0°C.
Cp [H2O(l)] = 75.3 J mol–1 K–1
Cp [H2O(s)] = 36.8 J mol–1 K–1
Enthalpy of combustion of carbon to CO2 is –393.5 kJ mol–1. Calculate the heat
released upon formation of 35.2 g of CO2 from carbon and dioxygen gas.
Enthalpies of formation of CO(g), CO2(g), N2O(g) and N2O4(g) are –110, – 393, 81
and 9.7 kJ mol–1 respectively. Find the value of ∆rH for the reaction:
N2O4(g) + 3CO(g) → N2O(g) + 3CO2(g)
Given
N2(g) + 3H2(g) → 2NH3(g) ; ∆rH
0 = –92.4 kJ mol–1
What is the standard enthalpy of formation of NH3 gas?
Calculate the standard enthalpy of formation of CH3OH(l) from the following
data:
CH3OH (l) + 3
2  O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O(l) ; ∆rH
0 = –726 kJ mol–1
C(graphite) + O2(g) → CO2(g) ; ∆cH
0 = –393 kJ mol–1
H2(g) + 1
2  O2(g) → H2O(l) ; ∆f H
0 =  –286 kJ mol–1.
Calculate the enthalpy change for the process
CCl4(g) → C(g) + 4 Cl(g)
and calculate bond enthalpy of C – Cl in CCl4(g).
∆vapH
0(CCl4) =
30.5 kJ mol–1.
0 (CCl4) = –135.5 kJ mol–1.
0 (C) = 715.0 kJ mol–1 ,  where ∆aH
0 is enthalpy of atomisation
0 (Cl2) = 242 kJ mol–1
For an isolated system, ∆U = 0, what will be ∆S ?
For the reaction at 298 K,
2A + B → C
∆H = 400 kJ mol–1 and ∆S = 0.2 kJ K–1 mol–1
At what temperature will the reaction become spontaneous considering ∆H
and ∆S to be constant over the temperature range.
For the reaction,
2 Cl(g) → Cl2(g), what are the signs of ∆H and ∆S ?
For the reaction
2 A(g) + B(g) →2D(g)
0 = –10.5 kJ and ∆S
0 = –44.1 JK–1.
Calculate ∆G
0 for the reaction, and predict whether the reaction may occur
spontaneously.
2018-19
THERMODYNAMICS
The equilibrium constant for a reaction is 10. What will be the value of ∆G
R = 8.314 JK–1 mol–1, T = 300 K.
Comment on the thermodynamic stability of NO(g), given
2  N2(g) + 1
2 O2(g) → NO(g)
0 = 90 kJ mol–1
NO(g) + 1
2 O2(g) → NO2(g)
0= –74 kJ mol–1
Calculate the entropy change in surroundings when 1.00 mol of H2O(l) is formed
under standard conditions. ∆f H
0 = –286 kJ mol–1.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
UNIT 7
EQUILIBRIUM
Chemical equilibria are important in numerous biological
and environmental processes. For example, equilibria
involving O2 molecules and the protein hemoglobin play a
crucial role in the transport and delivery of O2 from our
lungs to our muscles. Similar equilibria involving CO
molecules and hemoglobin account for the toxicity of CO.
When a liquid evaporates in a closed container,
molecules with relatively higher kinetic energy escape the
liquid surface into the vapour phase and number of liquid
molecules from the vapour phase strike the liquid surface
and are retained in the liquid phase. It gives rise to a constant
vapour pressure because of an equilibrium in which the
number of molecules leaving the liquid equals the number
returning to liquid from the vapour. We say that the system
has reached equilibrium state at this stage. However, this
is not static equilibrium and there is a lot of activity at the
boundary between the liquid and the vapour. Thus, at
equilibrium, the rate of evaporation is equal to the rate of
condensation. It may be represented by
H2O (l) ⇋ H2O (vap)
The double half arrows indicate that the processes in
both the directions are going on simultaneously. The mixture
of reactants and products in the equilibrium state is called
an equilibrium mixture.
Equilibrium can be established for both physical
processes and chemical reactions. The reaction may be fast
or slow depending on the experimental conditions and the
nature of the reactants. When the reactants in a closed vessel
at a particular temperature react to give products, the
concentrations of the reactants keep on decreasing, while
those of products keep on increasing for some time after
which there is no change in the concentrations of either of
the reactants or products. This stage of the system is the
dynamic equilibrium and the rates of the forward and
After studying this unit you will be
able to
identify dynamic nature of
equilibrium involved in physical
and chemical processes;
state the law of equilibrium;
explain characteristics of
equilibria involved in physical
and chemical processes;
write
expressions
equilibrium constants;
establish a relationship between
Kp and Kc;
explain various factors that
affect the equilibrium state of a
reaction;
classify substances as acids or
bases according to Arrhenius,
Bronsted-Lowry and Lewis
concepts;
classify acids and bases as weak
or strong in terms of their
ionization constants;
explain the dependence of
degree
ionization
concentration of the electrolyte
and that of the common ion;
describe
scale
representing hydrogen ion
concentration;
explain ionisation of water and
its duel role as acid and base;
describe ionic product (Kw ) and
pKw  for water;
appreciate use of buffer
solutions;
calculate solubility product
constant.
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
reverse reactions become equal. It is due to
this dynamic equilibrium stage that there is
no change in the concentrations of various
species in the reaction mixture. Based on the
extent to which the reactions proceed to reach
the state of chemical equilibrium, these may
be classified in three groups.
The reactions that proceed nearly to
completion
negligible
concentrations of the reactants are left. In
some cases, it may not be even possible to
detect these experimentally.
(ii) The reactions in which only small amounts
of products are formed and most of the
reactants
remain
unchanged
equilibrium stage.
(iii) The reactions in which the concentrations
of the reactants and products are
comparable, when the system is in
equilibrium.
The extent of a reaction in equilibrium
varies with the experimental conditions such
as concentrations of reactants, temperature,
etc. Optimisation of the operational conditions
is very important in industry and laboratory
so that equilibrium is favorable in the
direction of the desired product. Some
important aspects of equilibrium involving
physical and chemical processes are dealt in
this unit along with the equilibrium involving
ions in aqueous solutions which is called as
ionic equilibrium.
7.1 EQUILIBRIUM
PHYSICAL
PROCESSES
The characteristics of system at equilibrium
are better understood if we examine some
physical processes. The most familiar
examples are phase transformation
processes, e.g.,
solid
liquid
liquid
solid
7.1.1 Solid-Liquid Equilibrium
Ice and water kept in a perfectly insulated
thermos flask (no exchange of heat between
its contents and the surroundings) at 273K
and the atmospheric pressure are in
equilibrium state and the system shows
interesting characteristic features. We observe
that the mass of ice and water do not change
with time and the temperature remains
constant. However, the equilibrium is not
static. The intense activity can be noticed at
the boundary between ice and water.
Molecules from the liquid water collide against
ice and adhere to it and some molecules of ice
escape into liquid phase. There is no change
of mass of ice and water, as the rates of transfer
of molecules from ice into water and of reverse
transfer from water into ice are equal at
atmospheric pressure and 273 K.
It is obvious that ice and water are in
equilibrium only at particular temperature
and pressure. For any pure substance at
atmospheric pressure, the temperature at
which the solid and liquid phases are at
equilibrium is called the normal melting point
or normal freezing point of the substance.
The system here is in dynamic equilibrium and
we can infer the following:
Both the opposing processes occur
simultaneously.
(ii) Both the processes occur at the same rate
so that the amount of ice and water
remains constant.
7.1.2 Liquid-Vapour Equilibrium
This equilibrium can be better understood if
we consider the example of a transparent box
carrying a U-tube with mercury (manometer).
Drying agent like anhydrous calcium chloride
(or phosphorus penta-oxide) is placed for a
few hours in the box. After removing the
drying agent by tilting the box on one side, a
watch glass (or petri dish) containing water is
quickly placed inside the box. It will be
observed that the mercury level in the right
limb of the manometer slowly increases and
finally attains a constant value, that is, the
pressure inside the box increases and reaches
a constant value. Also the volume of water in
the watch glass decreases (Fig. 7.1). Initially
there was no water vapour (or very less) inside
the box. As water evaporated the pressure in
the box increased due to addition of water
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
molecules into the gaseous phase inside the
box. The rate of evaporation is constant.
However, the rate of increase in pressure
decreases with time due to condensation of
vapour into water. Finally it leads to an
equilibrium condition when there is no net
evaporation. This implies that the number of
water molecules from the gaseous state into
the liquid state also increases till the
equilibrium is attained i.e.,
rate of evaporation= rate of condensation
H2O(l)
H2O (vap)
At equilibrium the pressure exerted by the
water molecules at a given temperature
remains constant and is called the equilibrium
vapour pressure of water (or just vapour
pressure of water); vapour pressure of water
increases with temperature. If the above
experiment is repeated with methyl alcohol,
acetone and ether, it is observed that different
liquids have different equilibrium vapour
pressures at the same temperature, and the
liquid which has a higher vapour pressure is
more volatile and has a lower boiling point.
If we expose three watch glasses
containing separately 1mL each of acetone,
ethyl alcohol, and water to atmosphere and
repeat the experiment with different volumes
of the liquids in a warmer room, it is observed
that in all such cases the liquid eventually
disappears and the time taken for complete
evaporation depends on (i) the nature of the
liquid, (ii) the amount of the liquid and (iii) the
temperature. When the watch glass is open to
the atmosphere, the rate of evaporation
remains constant but the molecules are
dispersed into large volume of the room. As a
consequence the rate of condensation from
vapour to liquid state is much less than the
rate of evaporation. These are open systems
and it is not possible to reach equilibrium in
an open system.
Water and water vapour are in equilibrium
position at atmospheric pressure (1.013 bar)
and at 100°C in a closed vessel. The boiling
point of water is 100°C at 1.013 bar pressure.
For any pure liquid at one atmospheric
pressure (1.013 bar), the temperature at
which the liquid and vapours are at
equilibrium is called normal boiling point of
the liquid. Boiling point of the liquid depends
on the atmospheric pressure. It depends on
the altitude of the place; at high altitude the
boiling point decreases.
7.1.3 Solid – Vapour Equilibrium
Let us now consider the systems where solids
sublime to vapour phase. If we place solid iodine
in a closed vessel, after sometime the vessel gets
filled up with violet vapour and the intensity of
colour increases with time. After certain time the
intensity of colour becomes constant and at this
stage equilibrium is attained. Hence solid iodine
sublimes to give iodine vapour and the iodine
vapour condenses to give solid iodine. The
equilibrium can be represented as,
I2(solid)
I2 (vapour)
Other examples showing this kind of
equilibrium are,
Camphor (solid) ⇋ Camphor (vapour)
NH4Cl (solid) ⇋ NH4Cl (vapour)
Fig.7.1  Measuring equilibrium vapour pressure of water at a constant temperature
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
7.1.4 Equilibrium Involving Dissolution of
Solid or Gases in Liquids
Solids in liquids
We know from our experience that we can
dissolve only a limited amount of salt or sugar
in a given amount of water at room
temperature. If we make a thick sugar syrup
solution by dissolving sugar at a higher
temperature, sugar crystals separate out if we
cool the syrup to the room temperature. We
call it a saturated solution when no more of
solute can be dissolved in it at a given
temperature. The concentration of the solute
in a saturated solution depends upon the
temperature. In a saturated solution, a
dynamic equilibrium exits between the solute
molecules in the solid state and in the solution:
Sugar (solution)      Sugar (solid), and
the rate of dissolution of sugar = rate of
crystallisation of sugar.
Equality of the two rates and dynamic
nature of equilibrium has been confirmed with
the help of radioactive sugar. If we drop some
radioactive sugar into saturated solution of
non-radioactive sugar, then after some time
radioactivity is observed both in the solution
and in the solid sugar. Initially there were no
radioactive sugar molecules in the solution
but due to dynamic nature of equilibrium,
there is exchange between the radioactive and
non-radioactive sugar molecules between the
two phases. The ratio of the radioactive to non-
radioactive molecules in the solution increases
till it attains a constant value.
Gases in liquids
When a soda water bottle is opened, some of
the carbon dioxide gas dissolved in it fizzes
out rapidly. The phenomenon arises due to
difference in solubility of carbon dioxide at
different pressures. There is equilibrium
between the molecules in the gaseous state
and the molecules dissolved in the liquid
under pressure i.e.,
CO2 (gas)
CO2 (in solution)
This equilibrium is governed by Henry’s
law, which states that the mass of a gas
dissolved in a given mass of a solvent at
any temperature is proportional to the
pressure of the gas above the solvent. This
amount decreases with increase of
temperature. The soda water bottle is sealed
under pressure of gas when its solubility in
water is high. As soon as the bottle is opened,
some of the dissolved carbon dioxide gas
escapes to reach a new equilibrium condition
required for the lower pressure, namely its
partial pressure in the atmosphere. This is how
the soda water in bottle when left open to the
air for some time, turns ‘flat’. It can be
generalised that:
For solid
liquid equilibrium, there is
only one temperature (melting point) at
1 atm (1.013 bar) at which the two phases
can coexist. If there is no exchange of heat
with the surroundings, the mass of the two
phases remains constant.
(ii) For liquid
vapour equilibrium, the
vapour pressure is constant at a given
temperature.
(iii) For dissolution of solids in liquids, the
solubility is constant at a given
temperature.
(iv) For dissolution of gases in liquids, the
concentration of a gas in liquid is
proportional
pressure
(concentration) of the gas over the liquid.
These observations are summarised in
Table 7.1
Liquid
Vapour
pH2Oconstant at given
H2O (l)
H2O (g)
temperature
Solid
Liquid
Melting point is fixed at
H2O (s)
H2O (l)
constant pressure
Solute(s)
Solute
Concentration of solute
(solution)
in solution is constant
Sugar(s)
Sugar
at a given temperature
(solution)
Gas(g)
Gas (aq)
[gas(aq)]/[gas(g)]
constant at a given
temperature
CO2(g)
CO2(aq)
[CO2(aq)]/[CO2(g)] is
constant at a given
temperature
Table 7.1
Some Features of Physical
Equilibria
Process
Conclusion
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
7.1.5 General Characteristics of Equilibria
Involving Physical Processes
For the physical processes discussed above,
following characteristics are common to the
system at equilibrium:
Equilibrium is possible only in a closed
system at a given temperature.
(ii) Both the opposing processes occur at the
same rate and there is a dynamic but
stable condition.
(iii) All measurable properties of the system
remain constant.
(iv) When equilibrium is attained for a physical
process, it is characterised by constant
value of one of its parameters at a given
temperature. Table 7.1 lists such
quantities.
(v) The magnitude of such quantities at any
stage indicates the extent to which the
physical process has proceeded before
reaching equilibrium.
7.2 EQUILIBRIUM IN CHEMICAL
PROCESSES – DYNAMIC
EQUILIBRIUM
Analogous to the physical systems chemical
reactions also attain a state of equilibrium.
These reactions can occur both in forward
and backward directions. When the rates of
the forward and reverse reactions become
equal, the concentrations of the reactants
and the products remain constant. This is
the stage of chemical equilibrium. This
equilibrium is dynamic in nature as it
consists of a forward reaction in which the
reactants give product(s) and reverse
reaction in which product(s) gives the
original reactants.
For a better comprehension, let us
consider a general case of a reversible reaction,
A + B
C + D
With passage of time, there is
accumulation of the products C and D and
depletion of the reactants A and B (Fig. 7.2).
This leads to a decrease in the rate of forward
reaction and an increase in he rate of the
reverse reaction,
Fig. 7.2  Attainment of chemical equilibrium.
Eventually, the two reactions occur at the
same rate and the system reaches a state of
equilibrium.
Similarly, the reaction can reach the state of
equilibrium even if we start with only C and D;
that is, no A and B being present initially, as the
equilibrium can be reached from either direction.
The dynamic nature of chemical
equilibrium can be demonstrated in the
synthesis of ammonia by Haber’s process.  In
a series of experiments, Haber started with
known amounts of dinitrogen and dihydrogen
maintained at high temperature and pressure
and at regular intervals determined the
amount of ammonia present. He was
successful in determining also the
concentration of unreacted dihydrogen and
dinitrogen. Fig. 7.4 (page 191) shows that after
a certain time the composition of the mixture
remains the same even though some of the
reactants are still present. This constancy in
composition indicates that the reaction has
reached equilibrium. In order to understand
the dynamic nature of the reaction, synthesis
of ammonia is carried out with exactly the
same starting conditions (of partial pressure
and temperature) but using D2 (deuterium)
in place of H2.  The reaction mixtures starting
either with H2 or D2 reach equilibrium with
the same composition, except that D2 and ND3
are present instead of H2 and NH3.  After
equilibrium is attained, these two mixtures
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
Dynamic Equilibrium – A Student’s Activity
Equilibrium whether in a physical or in a chemical system, is always of dynamic
nature. This can be demonstrated by the use of radioactive isotopes. This is not feasible
in a school laboratory. However this concept can be easily comprehended by performing
the following activity. The activity can be performed in a group of 5 or 6 students.
Take two 100mL measuring cylinders (marked as 1 and 2) and two glass tubes
each of 30 cm length. Diameter of the tubes may be same or different in the range of
3-5mm. Fill nearly half of the measuring cylinder-1 with coloured water (for this
purpose add a crystal of potassium permanganate to water) and keep second cylinder
(number 2) empty.
Put one tube in cylinder 1 and second in cylinder 2. Immerse one tube in cylinder
1, close its upper tip with a finger and transfer the coloured water contained in its
lower portion to cylinder 2. Using second tube, kept in 2nd cylinder, transfer the coloured
water in a similar manner from cylinder 2 to cylinder 1. In this way keep on transferring
coloured water using the two glass tubes from cylinder 1 to 2 and from 2 to 1 till you
notice that the level of coloured water in both the cylinders becomes constant.
If you continue intertransferring coloured solution between the cylinders, there will
not be any further change in the levels of coloured water in two cylinders. If we take
analogy of ‘level’ of coloured water with ‘concentration’ of reactants and products in the
two cylinders, we can say the process of transfer, which continues even after the constancy
of level, is indicative of dynamic nature of the process. If we repeat the experiment taking
two tubes of different diameters we find that at equilibrium the level of coloured water in
two cylinders is different. How far diameters are responsible for change in levels in two
cylinders? Empty cylinder (2) is an indicator of no product in it at the beginning.
Fig.7.3
Demonstrating dynamic nature of equilibrium. (a) initial stage (b) final stage after the
equilibrium is attained.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
2NH3(g)
N2(g) + 3H2(g)
Similarly let us consider the  reaction,
H2(g) + I2(g)
2HI(g). If we start with equal
initial concentration of H2 and I2, the reaction
proceeds in the forward direction and the
concentration of H2 and I2 decreases while that
of HI increases, until all of these become
constant at equilibrium (Fig. 7.5).  We can also
start with HI alone and make the reaction to
proceed in the reverse direction; the
concentration of HI will decrease and
concentration of H2 and I2 will increase until
they all become constant when equilibrium is
reached (Fig.7.5).  If total number of H and I
atoms are same in a given volume, the same
equilibrium mixture is obtained whether we
start it from pure reactants or pure product.
(H2, N2, NH3 and D2, N2, ND3) are mixed
together and left for a while.  Later, when this
mixture is analysed, it is found that the
concentration of ammonia is just the same as
before. However, when this mixture is
analysed by a mass spectrometer, it is found
that ammonia and all deuterium containing
forms of ammonia (NH3, NH2D, NHD2 and ND3)
and dihydrogen and its deutrated forms
(H2, HD and D2) are present. Thus one can
conclude that scrambling of H and D atoms
in the molecules must result from a
continuation of the forward and reverse
reactions in the mixture. If the reaction had
simply stopped when they reached
equilibrium, then there would have been no
mixing of isotopes in this way.
Use of isotope (deuterium) in the formation
of ammonia clearly indicates that chemical
reactions reach a state of dynamic
equilibrium in which the rates of forward
and reverse reactions are equal and there
is no net change in composition.
Equilibrium can be attained from both
sides, whether we start reaction by taking,
H2(g) and N2(g) and get NH3(g) or by taking
NH3(g) and decomposing it into N2(g) and
H2(g).
N2(g) + 3H2(g)
2NH3(g)
Fig 7.4  Depiction of equilibrium for the reaction
Fig.7.5
Chemical equilibrium in the reaction
H2(g) + I2(g) ⇋ 2HI(g) can be attained
from either direction
7.3 LAW OF CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM
AND EQUILIBRIUM CONSTANT
A mixture of reactants and products in the
equilibrium state is called an equilibrium
mixture. In this section we shall address a
number of important questions about the
composition of equilibrium mixtures: What is
the relationship between the concentrations of
reactants and products in an equilibrium
mixture? How can we determine equilibrium
concentrations from initial concentrations?
( ) +
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
What factors can be exploited to alter the
composition of an equilibrium mixture? The
last question in particular is important when
choosing conditions for synthesis of industrial
chemicals such as H2, NH3, CaO etc.
To answer these questions, let us consider
a general reversible reaction:
A + B
C + D
where A and B are the reactants, C and D are
the products in the balanced chemical
equation. On the basis of experimental studies
of many reversible reactions, the Norwegian
chemists Cato Maximillian Guldberg and Peter
Waage proposed in 1864 that the
concentrations in an equilibrium mixture are
related by the following equilibrium
equation,
Kc = [ ][ ]
[ ][ ]
(7.1) where Kc is the equilibrium constant
and the expression on the right side is called
the equilibrium constant expression.
The equilibrium equation is also known as
the law of mass action because in the early
days of chemistry, concentration was called
“active mass”. In order to appreciate their work
better, let us consider reaction between
gaseous H2 and I2 carried out in a sealed vessel
at 731K.
H2(g)   +   I2(g)
2HI(g)
1 mol    1 mol           2 mol
Six sets of experiments with varying initial
conditions were performed, starting with only
gaseous H2 and I2 in a sealed reaction vessel
in first four experiments (1, 2, 3 and 4) and
only HI in other two experiments (5 and 6).
Experiment 1, 2, 3 and 4 were performed
taking different concentrations of H2 and / or
I2, and with time it was observed that intensity
of the purple colour remained constant and
equilibrium was attained. Similarly, for
experiments 5 and 6, the equilibrium was
attained from the opposite direction.
Data obtained from all six sets of
experiments are given in Table 7.2.
It is evident from the experiments 1, 2, 3
and 4 that number of moles of dihydrogen
reacted = number of moles of iodine reacted =
½ (number of moles of HI formed). Also,
experiments 5 and 6 indicate that,
[H2(g)]eq = [I2(g)]eq
Knowing the above facts, in order to
establish
relationship
between
concentrations of the reactants and products,
several combinations can be tried. Let us
consider the simple expression,
[HI(g)]eq / [H2(g)]eq [I2(g)]eq
It can be seen from Table 7.3 that if we
put the equilibrium concentrations of the
reactants and products, the above expression
Table 7.2  Initial and Equilibrium Concentrations of H2, I2 and HI
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
is far from  constant. However, if we consider
the expression,
[HI(g)]2
eq / [H2(g)]eq [I2(g)]eq
we find that this expression gives constant
value (as shown in Table 7.3) in all the six
cases. It can be seen that in this expression
the power of the concentration for reactants
and products are actually the stoichiometric
coefficients in the equation for the chemical
reaction. Thus, for the reaction H2(g) + I2(g)
2HI(g), following equation 7.1, the equilibrium
constant Kc is written as,
Kc  = [HI(g)]eq
2 / [H2(g)]eq [I2(g)]eq
(7.2)
Generally the subscript ‘eq’ (used for
equilibrium) is omitted from the concentration
terms. It is taken for granted that the
concentrations in the expression for Kc are
equilibrium values. We, therefore, write,
Kc  = [HI(g)]2 / [H2(g)] [I2(g)]
(7.3)
The subscript ‘c’ indicates that Kc is
expressed in concentrations of mol L–1.
At a given temperature, the product of
concentrations of the reaction products
raised to the respective stoichiometric
coefficient in the balanced chemical
equation divided by the product of
concentrations of the reactants raised to
their individual stoichiometric coefficients
has a constant value. This is known as
the Equilibrium Law or Law of Chemical
Equilibrium.
The equilibrium constant for a general
reaction,
a A   +  b B
c C  +  d D
is expressed as,
Kc  = [C]c[D]d / [A]a[B]b
(7.4)
where [A], [B], [C] and [D] are the equilibrium
concentrations of the reactants and products.
Equilibrium constant for the reaction,
4NH3(g) + 5O2(g)
4NO(g) + 6H2O(g) is written
Kc  = [NO]4[H2O]6 / [NH3]4 [O2]5
Molar concentration of different species is
indicated by enclosing these in square bracket
and, as mentioned above, it is implied that these
are equilibrium concentrations. While writing
expression for equilibrium constant, symbol for
phases (s, l, g) are generally ignored.
Let us write equilibrium constant for the
reaction, H2(g) + I2(g)
2HI(g)
(7.5)
as,  Kc = [HI]2 / [H2] [I2] = x
(7.6)
The equilibrium constant for the reverse
reaction, 2HI(g)
H2(g) + I2(g), at the same
temperature is,
c = [H2] [I2] / [HI]2 = 1/ x = 1 / Kc
(7.7)
Thus, K′
c = 1 / Kc
(7.8)
Equilibrium constant for the reverse
reaction is the inverse of the equilibrium
constant for the reaction in the forward
direction.
If we change the stoichiometric coefficients
in a chemical equation by multiplying
throughout by a factor then we must make
sure that the expression for equilibrium
constant also reflects that change. For
example, if the  reaction (7.5) is written as,
½ H2(g) + ½ I2(g)
HI(g)
(7.9)
the equilibrium constant for the above reaction
is given by
K″c   =  [HI] / [H2]1/2[I2]1/2 = {[HI]2 / [H2][I2]}1/2
= x1/2 = Kc
(7.10)
On multiplying the equation (7.5) by n, we get
Table 7.3
Expression
Involving
Equilibrium Concentration of
Reactants
H2(g) + I2(g)       2HI(g)
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
nH2(g) +  nI2(g) D
2nHI(g)
(7.11)
Therefore, equilibrium constant for the
reaction is equal to Kc
n. These findings are
summarised in Table 7.4. It should be noted
that because the equilibrium constants Kc  and
c have different numerical values, it is
important to specify the form of the balanced
chemical equation when quoting the value of
an equilibrium constant.
800K. What will be Kc for the reaction
N2(g) + O2(g)
2NO(g)
Solution
For the reaction equilibrium constant,
Kc can be written as,
Kc  =
=  0.622
7.4 HOMOGENEOUS EQUILIBRIA
In a homogeneous system, all the reactants
and products are in the same phase. For
example, in the gaseous reaction,
N2(g) + 3H2(g)
2NH3(g), reactants and
products are in the homogeneous phase.
Similarly, for the reactions,
CH3COOC2H5 (aq) + H2O (l)
CH3COOH (aq)
+ C2H5OH (aq)
and, Fe3+ (aq) + SCN–(aq)
Fe(SCN)2+ (aq)
all the reactants and products are in
homogeneous solution phase. We shall now
consider equilibrium constant for some
homogeneous reactions.
7.4.1 Equilibrium Constant in Gaseous
Systems
So far we have expressed equilibrium constant
of the reactions in terms of molar
concentration of the reactants and products,
and used symbol, Kc for it. For reactions
involving gases, however, it is usually more
convenient to express the equilibrium
constant in terms of partial pressure.
The ideal gas equation is written as,
pV = nRT
Here, p is the pressure in Pa, n is the number
of moles of the gas, V is the volume in m3 and
T is the temperature in Kelvin
Problem 7.1
The following concentrations were
obtained for the formation of NH3 from N2
and H2 at equilibrium at 500K.
[N2] = 1.5 × 10–2M. [H2] = 3.0 ×10–2 M and
[NH3] = 1.2 ×10–2M. Calculate equilibrium
constant.
Solution
The equilibrium constant for the reaction,
N2(g) + 3H2(g)
2NH3(g) can be written
Kc  =
= 0.106 × 104 = 1.06 × 103
Problem 7.2
At equilibrium, the concentrations of
N2=3.0 × 10–3M, O2 = 4.2 × 10–3M and
NO= 2.8 × 10–3M in a sealed vessel at
Table 7.4
Relations between Equilibrium
Constants for a General Reaction
and its Multiples.
Chemical equation
Equilibrium
constant
a A + b B
c C + dD
c C + d D
a A + b B
c =(1/Kc )
na A + nb B
ncC + ndD
c  = (Kc
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Therefore,
n/V is concentration expressed  in mol/m3
If concentration c, is in mol/L or mol/dm3,
and p is in bar then
p = cRT,
We can also write p = [gas]RT.
Here, R= 0.0831 bar litre/mol K
At constant temperature, the pressure of
the gas is proportional to its concentration i.e.,
p ∝ [gas]
For reaction in equilibrium
H2(g) +  I2(g)
2HI(g)
We can write either
(7.12)
Further, since  p
Therefore,
Kc              (7.13)
In this example, Kp = Kc i.e., both
equilibrium constants are equal. However, this
is not always the case. For example in reaction
N2(g)  +  3H2(g)
2NH3(g)
K p =
(7.14)
Similarly, for a general reaction
a A  +  b B      c C  +  d D
= [ ] [ ] (
[ ] [ ] (
= [ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ] (
= [ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ] (
(7.15)
where ∆n =  (number of moles of gaseous
products) – (number of moles of gaseous
reactants) in the balanced chemical equation.
It is necessary that while calculating the value
of Kp, pressure should be expressed in bar
because standard state for pressure is 1 bar.
We know from Unit 1 that :
1pascal, Pa=1Nm–2, and 1bar = 105 Pa
Kp values for a few selected reactions at
different temperatures are  given in Table 7.5
Table 7.5
Equilibrium Constants, Kp for a
Few Selected Reactions
Problem 7.3
PCl5, PCl3 and Cl2 are at equilibrium at
500 K and having concentration 1.59M
PCl3, 1.59M Cl2 and 1.41 M PCl5.
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
Calculate Kc for the reaction,
PCl3 + Cl2
Solution
The equilibrium constant Kc for the above
reaction can be written as,
Problem 7.4
The value of Kc = 4.24 at 800K for the reaction,
CO (g) + H2O (g)
CO2 (g) + H2 (g)
Calculate equilibrium concentrations of
CO2, H2, CO and H2O at 800 K, if only CO
and H2O are present initially at
concentrations of 0.10M each.
Solution
For the reaction,
CO (g)  +    H2O (g)
CO2 (g) + H2 (g)
Initial concentration:
0.1M        0.1M            0
Let x mole per litre of each of the product
be formed.
At equilibrium:
(0.1-x) M     (0.1-x) M      x M      x M
where x is the amount of CO2 and H2 at
equilibrium.
Hence, equilibrium constant can be
written as,
Kc = x2/(0.1-x)2 = 4.24
x2 = 4.24(0.01 + x2-0.2x)
x2 = 0.0424 + 4.24x2-0.848x
3.24x2 – 0.848x + 0.0424 = 0
a = 3.24, b = – 0.848, c = 0.0424
(for quadratic equation ax2 + bx + c = 0,
x =  0.848±√(0.848)2– 4(3.24)(0.0424)/
(3.24×2)
x = (0.848 ± 0.4118)/ 6.48
x1 = (0.848 – 0.4118)/6.48 = 0.067
x2 = (0.848 + 0.4118)/6.48  = 0.194
the value 0.194 should be neglected
because it will give concentration of the
reactant which is more than initial
concentration.
Hence the equilibrium concentrations are,
[CO2] = [H2-] = x = 0.067 M
[CO] = [H2O] = 0.1 – 0.067 = 0.033 M
Problem 7.5
For the equilibrium,
2NOCl(g)
2NO(g)  +  Cl2(g)
the value of the equilibrium constant, Kc
is 3.75 × 10–6 at 1069 K. Calculate the Kp
for the reaction at this temperature?
Solution
We know that,
Kp = Kc(RT)∆n
For the above reaction,
∆n = (2+1) – 2 = 1
Kp = 3.75 ×10–6 (0.0831 × 1069)
Kp = 0.033
7.5 HETEROGENEOUS EQUILIBRIA
Equilibrium in a system having more than one
phase is called heterogeneous equilibrium.
The equilibrium between water vapour and
liquid water in a closed container is an
example of heterogeneous equilibrium.
H2O(l)
H2O(g)
In this example, there is a gas phase and a
liquid phase. In the same way, equilibrium
between a solid and its saturated solution,
Ca(OH)2 (s) + (aq)
Ca2+ (aq) + 2OH–(aq)
is a heterogeneous equilibrium.
Heterogeneous equilibria often involve pure
solids or liquids. We can simplify equilibrium
expressions for the heterogeneous equilibria
involving a pure liquid or a pure solid, as the
molar concentration of a pure solid or liquid
is constant (i.e., independent of the amount
present). In other words if a substance ‘X’ is
involved, then [X(s)] and [X(l)] are constant,
whatever the amount of ‘X’ is taken. Contrary
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
to this, [X(g)] and [X(aq)] will vary as the
amount of X in a given volume varies. Let us
take thermal dissociation of calcium carbonate
which is an interesting and important example
of heterogeneous chemical equilibrium.
CaCO3 (s)
CaO (s) + CO2 (g)      (7.16)
On the basis of the stoichiometric equation,
we can write,
CaO s
Since [CaCO3(s)] and [CaO(s)] are both
constant, therefore modified equilibrium
constant for the thermal decomposition of
calcium carbonate will be
K´c = [CO2(g)]
(7.17)
or Kp = pCO2
(7.18)
This shows that at a particular
temperature, there is a constant concentration
or pressure of CO2 in equilibrium with CaO(s)
and CaCO3(s). Experimentally it has been
found that at 1100 K, the pressure of CO2 in
equilibrium with CaCO3(s) and CaO(s), is
2.0 ×105 Pa. Therefore, equilibrium constant
at 1100K for the above reaction is:
Kp = PCO2 = 2 × 105 Pa/105 Pa = 2.00
Similarly, in the equilibrium between
nickel, carbon monoxide and nickel carbonyl
(used in the purification of nickel),
Ni (s) + 4 CO (g)
Ni(CO)4 (g),
the equilibrium constant is written as
Ni CO
It must be remembered that for the
existence of heterogeneous equilibrium pure
solids or liquids must also be present
(however small the amount may be) at
equilibrium, but their concentrations or
partial pressures do not appear in the
expression of the equilibrium constant. In the
reaction,
Ag2O(s) + 2HNO3(aq)
2AgNO3(aq) +H2O(l)
Kc  = AgNO3
Problem 7.6
The value of Kp for the reaction,
CO2 (g) + C (s)
2CO (g)
is 3.0 at 1000 K. If initially PCO2 = 0.48 bar
and PCO = 0 bar and pure graphite is
present, calculate the equilibrium partial
pressures of CO and CO2.
Solution
For the reaction,
let ‘x’ be the decrease in pressure of CO2,
CO2(g)  +  C(s)
2CO(g)
Initial
pressure: 0.48 bar
Units of Equilibrium Constant
The value of equilibrium constant Kc can
be calculated by substituting the
concentration terms in mol/L and for Kp
partial pressure is substituted in Pa, kPa,
bar or atm. This results in units of
equilibrium constant based on molarity or
pressure, unless the exponents of both the
numerator and denominator are same.
For the reactions,
H2(g) + I2(g)
2HI, Kc and Kp have no unit.
N2O4(g)
2NO2 (g), Kc has unit mol/L and
Kp has unit bar
Equilibrium constants can also be
expressed as dimensionless quantities if
the standard state of reactants and
products are specified. For a pure gas, the
standard state is 1bar. Therefore a pressure
of 4 bar in standard state can be expressed
as 4 bar/1 bar = 4, which is a
dimensionless number. Standard state (c0)
for a solute is 1 molar solution and all
concentrations can be measured with
respect to it. The numerical value of
equilibrium constant depends on the
standard state chosen. Thus, in this
system both Kp and Kc are dimensionless
quantities but have different numerical
values due to different standard states.
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
At equilibrium:
(0.48 – x)bar
2x bar
K p = p
Kp = (2x)2/(0.48 – x) = 3
4x2 = 3(0.48 – x)
4x2 = 1.44 – x
4x2 + 3x – 1.44 = 0
a = 4, b = 3, c = –1.44
= [–3 ± √(3)2– 4(4)(–1.44)]/2 × 4
=  (–3 ± 5.66)/8
= (–3 + 5.66)/ 8  (as value of x cannot be
negative hence we neglect that value)
x = 2.66/8 = 0.33
The equilibrium partial pressures are,
pCO2= 2x = 2 × 0.33 = 0.66 bar
pCO2= 0.48 – x = 0.48 – 0.33 = 0.15 bar
5. The equilibrium constant K for a reaction
is related to the equilibrium constant of the
corresponding reaction, whose equation is
obtained by multiplying or dividing the
equation for the original reaction by a small
integer.
Let us consider applications of equilibrium
constant to:
predict the extent of a reaction on the basis
of its magnitude,
predict the direction of the reaction, and
calculate equilibrium concentrations.
7.6.1 Predicting the Extent of a Reaction
The numerical value of the equilibrium
constant for a reaction indicates the extent of
the reaction. But it is important to note that
an equilibrium constant does not give any
information about the rate at which the
equilibrium is reached. The magnitude of Kc
or Kp is directly proportional to the
concentrations of products (as these appear
in the numerator of equilibrium constant
expression) and inversely proportional to the
concentrations of the reactants (these appear
in the denominator). This implies that a high
value of K is suggestive of a high concentration
of products and vice-versa.
We can make the following generalisations
concerning the composition of
equilibrium mixtures:
If Kc > 103, products predominate over
reactants, i.e., if Kc is very large, the reaction
proceeds nearly to completion. Consider
the following examples:
(a) The reaction of H2 with O2 at 500 K has a
very large equilibrium
c o n s t a n t ,
Kc = 2.4 × 1047.
(b) H2(g) + Cl2(g)
2HCl(g) at 300K has
Kc = 4.0 × 1031.
(c) H2(g) + Br2(g)
2HBr (g) at 300 K,
Kc = 5.4 × 1018
If Kc < 10–3, reactants predominate over
products, i.e., if Kc is very small, the reaction
proceeds rarely. Consider the following
examples:
7.6 APPLICATIONS OF EQUILIBRIUM
CONSTANTS
Before considering the applications of
equilibrium constants, let us summarise the
important features of equilibrium constants as
follows:
1. Expression for equilibrium constant is
applicable only when concentrations of the
reactants and products have attained
constant value at equilibrium state.
2. The value of equilibrium constant is
independent of initial concentrations of the
reactants and products.
3. Equilibrium constant is temperature
dependent having one unique value for a
particular reaction represented by a
balanced equation at a given temperature.
4. The equilibrium constant for the reverse
reaction is equal to the inverse of the
equilibrium constant for the forward
reaction.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
(a) The decomposition of H2O into H2 and O2
at 500 K has a very small equilibrium
constant, Kc = 4.1 × 10–48
(b) N2(g)   +  O2(g)
2NO(g),
at 298 K  has Kc = 4.8 ×10–31.
If Kc is in the range of 10 –3 to 103,
appreciable concentrations of both
reactants and products are present.
Consider the following examples:
(a) For reaction of H2 with I2 to give HI,
Kc = 57.0 at 700K.
(b) Also, gas phase decomposition of N2O4 to
NO2 is another reaction with a value
of Kc = 4.64 × 10 –3 at 25°C which is neither
too small nor too large. Hence,
equilibrium mixtures contain appreciable
concentrations of both N2O4 and NO2.
These generarlisations are illustrated in
Fig. 7.6
If Qc = Kc, the reaction mixture is already
at equilibrium.
Consider the gaseous reaction of H2
with I2,
H2(g) + I2(g)
2HI(g); Kc = 57.0 at 700 K.
Suppose we have molar concentrations
[H2]t=0.10M, [I2]t = 0.20 M and [HI]t = 0.40 M.
(the subscript t on the concentration symbols
means that the concentrations were measured
at some arbitrary time t, not necessarily at
equilibrium).
Thus, the reaction quotient, Qc at this stage
of the reaction is given by,
Qc = [HI]t
2 / [H2]t [I2]t  = (0.40)2/ (0.10)×(0.20)
= 8.0
Now, in this case, Qc (8.0) does not equal
Kc (57.0), so the mixture of H2(g), I2(g) and HI(g)
is not at equilibrium; that is, more H2(g) and
I2(g) will react to form more HI(g) and their
concentrations will decrease till Qc = Kc.
The reaction quotient, Qc is useful in
predicting the direction of reaction by
comparing the values of Qc and Kc.
Thus, we can make the following
generalisations concerning the direction of the
reaction (Fig. 7.7) :
Fig.7.6  Dependence of extent of reaction on Kc
7.6.2 Predicting the Direction of the
Reaction
The equilibrium constant helps in predicting
the direction in which a given reaction will
proceed at any stage. For this purpose, we
calculate the reaction quotient Q. The
reaction quotient, Q (Q c with molar
concentrations and QP with partial pressures)
is defined in the same way as the equilibrium
constant Kc except that the concentrations in
Qc are not necessarily equilibrium values.
For a general reaction:
a A + b B
c C + d D
(7.19)
Qc = [C]c[D]d / [A]a[B]b
(7.20)
Then,
If Qc > Kc, the reaction will proceed in the
direction of reactants (reverse reaction).
If Qc < Kc, the reaction will proceed in the
direction of the products (forward reaction).
Fig. 7.7  Predicting the direction of the reaction
If Qc < Kc, net reaction goes from left to right
If Qc > Kc, net reaction goes from right to
left.
If Qc = Kc, no net reaction occurs.
Problem 7.7
The value of Kc for the reaction
B + C is 2 × 10–3. At a given time,
the composition of reaction mixture is
[A] = [B] = [C] = 3 × 10–4 M. In which
direction the reaction will proceed?
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
The total pressure at equilbrium was
found to be 9.15 bar. Calculate Kc, Kp and
partial pressure at equilibrium.
Solution
We know pV = nRT
Total volume (V ) = 1 L
Molecular mass of N2O4  = 92 g
Number of moles   = 13.8g/92 g =  0.15
of the gas (n)
Gas constant (R) = 0.083 bar L mol–1K–1
Temperature (T ) = 400 K
pV = nRT
p × 1L = 0.15 mol × 0.083 bar L mol–1K–1
× 400 K
p = 4.98 bar
N2O4               2NO2
Initial pressure:   4.98 bar               0
At equilibrium:  (4.98 – x) bar     2x bar
Hence,
ptotal at equilibrium = pN2O4 + pNO2
9.15 = (4.98 – x)  +  2x
9.15 = 4.98  +  x
x = 9.15 – 4.98  =  4.17 bar
Partial pressures at equilibrium are,
pN2O4 = 4.98 – 4.17 = 0.81bar
pNO2 = 2x = 2 × 4.17 = 8.34 bar
= (8.34)2/0.81 = 85.87
Kp   = Kc(RT)∆n
85.87 = Kc(0.083 × 400)1
Kc = 2.586 = 2.6
Problem 7.9
3.00 mol of PCl5 kept in 1L closed reaction
vessel was allowed to attain equilibrium
at 380K. Calculate composition of the
mixture at equilibrium. Kc= 1.80
Solution
PCl3  +   Cl2
Initial
concentration:  3.0
Solution
For the reaction the reaction quotient Qc
is given by,
Qc = [B][C]/ [A]2
as [A] = [B] = [C] = 3 × 10–4M
Qc = (3 ×10–4)(3 × 10–4) / (3 ×10–4)2 = 1
as Qc > Kc so the reaction will proceed in
the reverse direction.
7.6.3 Calculating  Equilibrium
Concentrations
In case of a problem in which we know the
initial concentrations but do not know any of
the equilibrium concentrations, the following
three steps shall be followed:
Step 1. Write the balanced equation for the
reaction.
Step 2. Under the balanced equation, make a
table that lists for each substance involved in
the reaction:
(a) the initial concentration,
(b) the change in concentration on going to
equilibrium, and
(c) the equilibrium concentration.
In constructing the table, define x as the
concentration (mol/L) of one of the substances
that reacts on going to equilibrium, then use
the stoichiometry of the reaction to determine
the concentrations of the other substances in
terms of x.
Step 3. Substitute the equilibrium
concentrations into the equilibrium equation
for the reaction and solve for x. If you are to
solve a quadratic equation choose the
mathematical solution that makes chemical
sense.
Step 4. Calculate the equilibrium
concentrations from the calculated value of x.
Step 5. Check your results by substituting
them into the equilibrium equation.
Problem 7.8
13.8g of N2O4 was placed in a 1L reaction
vessel at 400K and allowed to attain
equilibrium
N2O4 (g)
2NO2 (g)
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Let x mol per litre of PCl5 be dissociated,
At equilibrium:
(3-x)
Kc = [PCl3][Cl2]/[PCl5]
1.8 = x2/ (3 – x)
x2 + 1.8x – 5.4 = 0
x = [–1.8 ± √(1.8)2 – 4(–5.4)]/2
x = [–1.8 ± √3.24 + 21.6]/2
x = [–1.8 ± 4.98]/2
x = [–1.8 + 4.98]/2 = 1.59
[PCl5] = 3.0 – x = 3 –1.59 = 1.41 M
[PCl3] = [Cl2] = x = 1.59 M
7.7 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
EQUILIBRIUM CONSTANT K,
REACTION QUOTIENT Q AND
GIBBS ENERGY G
The value of Kc for a reaction does not depend
on the rate of the reaction. However, as you
have studied in Unit 6, it is directly related
to the thermodynamics of the reaction and
in particular, to the change in Gibbs energy,
∆G. If,
∆G is negative, then the reaction is
spontaneous and proceeds in the forward
direction.
∆G is positive, then reaction is considered
non-spontaneous. Instead, as reverse
reaction would have a negative ∆G, the
products of the forward reaction shall be
converted to the reactants.
∆G is 0, reaction has achieved equilibrium;
at this point, there is no longer any free
energy left to drive the reaction.
A mathematical expression of this
thermodynamic view of equilibrium can be
described by the following equation:
∆G  = ∆G
0 + RT lnQ                                    (7.21)
where, G
0 is standard Gibbs energy.
At equilibrium, when ∆G = 0 and Q = Kc,
the equation (7.21) becomes,
∆G = ∆G
0 + RT ln K = 0
0 = – RT lnK                                      (7.22)
lnK = – ∆G
0 / RT
Taking antilog of both sides, we get,
K = e–∆G0/RT
(7.23)
Hence, using the equation (7.23), the
reaction spontaneity can be interpreted in
terms of the value of ∆G
If ∆G
0 < 0, then –∆G
0/RT is positive, and
>1, making K >1, which implies
a spontaneous reaction or the reaction
which proceeds in the forward direction to
such an extent that the products are
present predominantly.
If ∆G
0 > 0, then –∆G
0/RT is negative, and
< 1, that is , K < 1, which implies
a non-spontaneous reaction or a reaction
which proceeds in the forward direction to
such a small degree that only a very minute
quantity of product is formed.
Problem 7.10
The value of  ∆G
0 for the phosphorylation
of glucose in glycolysis is 13.8 kJ/mol.
Find the value of Kc at 298 K.
Solution
0 = 13.8 kJ/mol = 13.8 × 103J/mol
Also, ∆G
0 = – RT lnKc
Hence, ln Kc = –13.8 × 103J/mol
(8.314 J mol–1K–1 × 298 K)
ln Kc = – 5.569
Kc = e–5.569
Kc = 3.81 × 10–3
Problem 7.11
Hydrolysis of sucrose gives,
Sucrose + H2O
Glucose + Fructose
Equilibrium constant Kc for the reaction
is 2 ×1013 at 300K. Calculate ∆G
300K.
Solution
0 = – RT lnKc
0 = – 8.314J mol–1K–1×
300K × ln(2×1013)
0 = – 7.64 ×104 J mol–1
7.8 FACTORS AFFECTING EQUILIBRIA
One of the principal goals of chemical synthesis
is to maximise the conversion of the reactants
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
Fig. 7.8
Effect of addition of H2 on change of
concentration for the reactants and
products
reaction,
H2(g) + I2 (g)
2HI(g)
to products while minimizing the expenditure
of energy. This implies maximum yield of
products at mild temperature and pressure
conditions. If it does not happen, then the
experimental conditions need to be adjusted.
For example, in the Haber process for the
synthesis of ammonia from N2 and H2, the
choice of experimental conditions is of real
economic importance. Annual world
production of ammonia is about hundred
million tones, primarily for use as fertilizers.
Equilibrium constant, Kc is independent of
initial concentrations. But if a system at
equilibrium is subjected to a change in the
concentration of one or more of the reacting
substances, then the system is no longer at
equilibrium; and net reaction takes place in
some direction until the system returns to
equilibrium once again. Similarly, a change in
temperature or pressure of the system may
also alter the equilibrium. In order to decide
what course the reaction adopts and make a
qualitative prediction about the effect of a
change in conditions on equilibrium we use
Le Chatelier’s principle. It states that a
change in any of the factors that
determine the equilibrium conditions of a
system will cause the system to change
in such a manner so as to reduce or to
counteract the effect of the change. This
is applicable to all physical and chemical
equilibria.
We shall now be discussing factors which
can influence the equilibrium.
7.8.1 Effect of Concentration Change
In general, when equilibrium is disturbed by
the addition/removal of any reactant/
products, Le Chatelier’s principle predicts that:
The concentration stress of an added
reactant/product is relieved by net reaction
in the direction that consumes the added
substance.
The concentration stress of a removed
reactant/product is relieved by net reaction
in the direction that replenishes the
removed substance.
or in other words,
“When the concentration of any of the
reactants or products in a reaction at
equilibrium is changed, the composition
of the equilibrium mixture changes so as
to minimize the effect of concentration
changes”.
Let us take the reaction,
H2(g) + I2(g)
2HI(g)
If H2 is added to the reaction mixture at
equilibrium, then the equilibrium of the
reaction is disturbed. In order to restore it, the
reaction proceeds in a direction wherein H2 is
consumed, i.e.,  more of H2 and I2 react to form
HI and finally the equilibrium shifts in right
(forward) direction (Fig.7.8). This is in
accordance with the Le Chatelier’s principle
which implies that in case of addition of a
reactant/product, a new equilibrium will be
set up in which the concentration of the
reactant/product should be less than what it
was after the addition but more than what it
was in the original mixture.
The same point can be explained in terms
of the reaction quotient, Qc,
Qc = [HI]
2/ [H2][I2]
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Addition of hydrogen at equilibrium results
in value of Qc being less than Kc . Thus, in order
to attain equilibrium again reaction moves in
the forward direction. Similarly, we can say
that removal of a product also boosts the
forward reaction and increases the
concentration of the products and this has
great commercial application in cases of
reactions, where the product is a gas or a
volatile substance. In case of manufacture of
ammonia, ammonia is liquified and removed
from the reaction mixture so that reaction
keeps moving in forward direction. Similarly,
in the large scale production of CaO (used as
important building material) from CaCO3,
constant removal of CO2 from the kiln drives
the reaction to completion. It should be
remembered that continuous removal of a
product maintains Qc at a value less than Kc
and reaction continues to move in the forward
direction.
Effect of Concentration – An experiment
This can be demonstrated by the following
reaction:
Fe3+(aq)+ SCN–(aq)
[Fe(SCN)]2+(aq)        (7.24)
yellow      colourless      deep red
(7.25)
A reddish colour appears on adding two
drops of 0.002 M potassium thiocynate
solution to 1 mL of 0.2 M iron(III) nitrate
solution due to the formation of [Fe(SCN)]2+.
The intensity of the red colour becomes
constant on attaining equilibrium. This
equilibrium can be shifted in either forward
or reverse directions depending on our choice
of adding a reactant or a product. The
equilibrium can be shifted in the opposite
direction by adding reagents that remove Fe3+
or SCN – ions. For example, oxalic acid
(H2C2O4), reacts with Fe3+ ions to form the
stable complex ion [Fe(C 2O 4) 3] 3–, thus
decreasing the concentration of free Fe3+(aq).
In accordance with the Le Chatelier’s principle,
the concentration stress of removed Fe3+ is
relieved by dissociation of [Fe(SCN)]2+ to
replenish the Fe 3+ ions. Because the
concentration of [Fe(SCN)]2+ decreases, the
intensity of red colour decreases.
Addition of aq. HgCl2 also decreases red
colour because Hg2+ reacts with SCN– ions to
form stable complex ion [Hg(SCN)4]2–. Removal
of free SCN– (aq) shifts the equilibrium in
equation (7.24) from right to left to replenish
SCN – ions.  Addition of potassium thiocyanate
on the other hand increases the colour
intensity of the solution as it shift the
equilibrium to right.
7.8.2 Effect of Pressure Change
A pressure change obtained by changing the
volume can affect the yield of products in case
of a gaseous reaction where the total number
of moles of gaseous reactants and total
number of moles of gaseous products are
different. In applying Le Chatelier’s principle
to a heterogeneous equilibrium the effect of
pressure changes on solids and liquids can
be ignored because the volume (and
concentration) of a solution/liquid is nearly
independent of pressure.
Consider the reaction,
CO(g) + 3H2(g)
CH4(g) + H2O(g)
Here, 4 mol of gaseous reactants (CO + 3H2)
become 2 mol of gaseous products (CH4 +
H2O).  Suppose equilibrium mixture (for above
reaction) kept in a cylinder fitted with a piston
at constant temperature is compressed to one
half of its original volume. Then, total pressure
doubled
(according
pV = constant). The partial pressure and
therefore, concentration of reactants and
products have changed and the mixture is no
longer at equilibrium. The direction in which
the reaction goes to re-establish equilibrium
can be predicted by applying the Le Chatelier’s
principle. Since pressure has doubled, the
equilibrium now shifts in the forward
direction, a direction in which the number of
moles of the gas or pressure decreases (we
know pressure is proportional to moles of the
gas). This can also be understood by using
reaction quotient, Qc. Let [CO], [H2], [CH4] and
[H2O] be the molar concentrations at
equilibrium for methanation reaction. When
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
Fig. 7.9 Effect of temperature on equilibrium for
the reaction, 2NO2 (g)
N2O4 (g)
volume of the reaction mixture is halved, the
partial pressure and the concentration are
doubled. We obtain the reaction quotient by
replacing each equilibrium concentration by
double its value.
H O g
As Qc < Kc , the reaction proceeds in the
forward direction.
In reaction C(s) + CO2(g)
2CO(g), when
pressure is increased, the reaction goes in the
reverse direction because the number of moles
of gas increases in the forward direction.
7.8.3 Effect of Inert Gas Addition
If the volume is kept constant and an inert gas
such as argon is added which does not take
part in the reaction, the equilibrium remains
undisturbed. It is because the addition of an
inert gas at constant volume does not change
the partial pressures or the molar
concentrations of the substance involved in the
reaction. The reaction quotient changes only
if the added gas is a reactant or product
involved in the reaction.
7.8.4 Effect of Temperature Change
Whenever an equilibrium is disturbed by a
change in the concentration, pressure or
volume, the composition of the equilibrium
mixture changes because the reaction
quotient, Qc no longer equals the equilibrium
constant, Kc. However, when a change in
temperature occurs, the value of equilibrium
constant, Kc  is changed.
In general, the temperature dependence of
the equilibrium constant depends on the sign
of ∆H for the reaction.
The equilibrium constant for an exothermic
reaction (negative ∆H) decreases as the
temperature increases.
The equilibrium constant for an
endothermic reaction (positive ∆H)
increases as the temperature increases.
Temperature changes affect the
equilibrium constant and rates of reactions.
Production of ammonia according to the
reaction,
N2(g) + 3H2(g)
2NH3(g) ;
∆H= – 92.38 kJ mol–1
is an exothermic process. According to
Le Chatelier’s principle, raising the
temperature shifts the equilibrium to left and
decreases the equilibrium concentration of
ammonia. In other words, low temperature is
favourable for high yield of ammonia, but
practically very low temperatures slow down
the reaction and thus a catalyst is used.
Effect of Temperature – An experiment
Effect of temperature on equilibrium can be
demonstrated by taking NO2 gas (brown in
colour) which dimerises into N2O4 gas
(colourless).
2NO2(g)
N2O4(g); ∆H = –57.2 kJ mol–1
NO2 gas prepared by addition of Cu
turnings to conc. HNO3 is collected in two
5 mL test tubes (ensuring same intensity of
colour of gas in each tube) and stopper sealed
with araldite. Three 250 mL beakers 1, 2 and
3 containing freezing mixture, water at room
temperature and hot water (363K),
respectively, are taken (Fig. 7.9). Both the test
tubes are placed in beaker 2 for 8-10 minutes.
After this one is placed in beaker 1 and the
other in beaker  3. The effect of temperature
on direction of reaction is depicted very well
in this experiment. At low temperatures in
beaker 1, the forward reaction of formation of
N2O4 is preferred, as reaction is exothermic, and
thus, intensity of brown colour due to NO2
decreases. While in beaker  3, high
temperature favours the reverse reaction of
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
formation of NO2 and thus, the brown colour
intensifies.
Effect of temperature can also be seen in
an endothermic reaction,
[Co(H2O) 6]
3+(aq) + 4Cl–(aq)
[CoCl4 ]
2–(aq) +
6H2O(l)
colourless
At room temperature, the equilibrium
mixture is blue due to [CoCl4]2–. When cooled
in a freezing mixture, the colour of the mixture
turns pink due to [Co(H2O)6]3+.
7.8.5 Effect of a Catalyst
A catalyst increases the rate of the chemical
reaction by making available a new low energy
pathway for the conversion of reactants to
products. It increases the rate of forward and
reverse reactions that pass through the same
transition state and does not affect
equilibrium. Catalyst lowers the activation
energy for the forward and reverse reactions
by exactly the same amount. Catalyst does not
affect the equilibrium composition of a
reaction mixture. It does not appear in the
balanced chemical equation or in the
equilibrium constant expression.
Let us consider the formation of NH3 from
dinitrogen and dihydrogen which is highly
exothermic reaction and proceeds with
decrease in total number of moles formed as
compared to the reactants. Equilibrium
constant decreases with increase in
temperature. At low temperature rate
decreases and it takes long time to reach at
equilibrium, whereas high temperatures give
satisfactory rates but poor yields.
German chemist, Fritz Haber discovered
that a catalyst consisting of iron catalyse the
reaction to occur at a satisfactory rate at
temperatures, where the equilibrium
concentration of NH3 is reasonably favourable.
Since the number of moles formed in the
reaction is less than those of reactants, the
yield of NH3 can be improved by increasing
the pressure.
Optimum conditions of temperature and
pressure for the synthesis of NH3 using
catalyst are around 500°C and 200 atm.
Similarly, in manufacture of sulphuric
acid by contact process,
2SO2(g) + O2(g)
2SO3(g);  Kc = 1.7 × 1026
though the value of K is suggestive of reaction
going to completion, but practically the oxidation
of SO2 to SO3 is very slow. Thus, platinum or
divanadium penta-oxide (V2O5) is used as
catalyst to increase the rate of the reaction.
Note: If a reaction has an exceedingly small
K, a catalyst would be of little help.
7.9 IONIC EQUILIBRIUM IN SOLUTION
Under the effect of change of concentration on
the direction of equilibrium, you have
incidently come across with the following
equilibrium which involves ions:
Fe3+(aq) + SCN–(aq)
[Fe(SCN)]2+(aq)
There are numerous equilibria that involve
ions only. In the following sections we will
study the equilibria involving ions. It is well
known that the aqueous solution of sugar
does not conduct electricity. However, when
common salt (sodium chloride) is added to
water it conducts electricity. Also, the
conductance of electricity increases with an
increase in concentration of common salt.
Michael Faraday classified the substances into
two categories based on their ability to conduct
electricity. One category of substances
conduct electricity in their aqueous solutions
and are called electrolytes while the other do
not and are thus, referred to as non-
electrolytes. Faraday further classified
electrolytes into strong and weak electrolytes.
Strong electrolytes on dissolution in water are
ionized almost completely, while the weak
electrolytes are only partially dissociated.
For example, an aqueous solution of
sodium chloride is comprised entirely of
sodium ions and chloride ions, while that
of acetic acid mainly contains unionized
acetic acid molecules and only some acetate
ions and hydronium ions. This is because
there is almost 100% ionization in case of
sodium chloride as compared to less
than 5% ionization of acetic acid which is
a weak electrolyte. It should be noted
that in weak electrolytes, equilibrium is
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
Fig.7.10
Dissolution of sodium chloride in water.
Na+ and Cl – ions are stablised by their
hydration with polar water molecules.
established between ions and the unionized
molecules. This type of equilibrium involving
ions in aqueous solution is called ionic
equilibrium. Acids, bases and salts come
under the category of electrolytes and may act
as either strong or weak electrolytes.
ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS
Acids, bases and salts find widespread
occurrence in nature. Hydrochloric acid
present in the gastric juice is secreted by the
lining of our stomach in a significant amount
of 1.2-1.5 L/day and is essential for digestive
processes. Acetic acid is known to be the main
constituent of vinegar. Lemon and orange
juices contain citric and ascorbic acids, and
tartaric acid is found in tamarind paste. As
most of the acids taste sour, the word “acid”
has been derived from a latin word “acidus”
meaning sour. Acids are known to turn blue
litmus paper into red and liberate dihydrogen
on reacting with some metals. Similarly, bases
are known to turn red litmus paper blue, taste
bitter and feel soapy. A common example of a
base is washing soda used for washing
purposes. When acids and bases are mixed in
the right proportion they react with each other
to give salts. Some commonly known
examples of salts are sodium chloride, barium
sulphate, sodium nitrate.  Sodium chloride
(common salt ) is an important component of
our diet and is formed by reaction between
hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide. It
exists in solid state as a cluster of positively
charged sodium ions and negatively charged
chloride ions which are held together due to
electrostatic interactions between oppositely
charged species (Fig.7.10). The electrostatic
forces between two charges are inversely
proportional to dielectric constant of the
medium. Water, a universal solvent, possesses
a very high dielectric constant of 80. Thus,
when sodium chloride is dissolved in water,
the electrostatic interactions are reduced by a
factor of 80 and this facilitates the ions to move
freely in the solution. Also, they are well-
separated due to hydration with water
molecules.
Faraday was born near London into a family of very limited means. At the age of 14 he
was an apprentice to a kind bookbinder who allowed Faraday to read the books he
was binding. Through a fortunate chance he became laboratory assistant to Davy, and
during 1813-4, Faraday accompanied him to the Continent.  During this trip he gained
much from the experience of coming into contact with many of the leading scientists of
the time.  In 1825, he succeeded Davy as Director of the Royal Institution laboratories,
and in 1833 he also became the first Fullerian Professor of Chemistry. Faraday’s first
important work was on analytical chemistry. After 1821 much of his work was on
electricity and magnetism and different electromagnetic phenomena.  His ideas have led to the establishment
of modern field theory.  He discovered his two laws of electrolysis in 1834. Faraday was a very modest
and kind hearted person.  He declined all honours and avoided scientific controversies. He preferred to
work alone and never had any assistant. He disseminated science in a variety of ways including his
Friday evening discourses, which he founded at the Royal Institution.  He has been very famous for his
Christmas lecture on the ‘Chemical History of a Candle’.  He published nearly 450 scientific papers.
Michael Faraday
(1791–1867)
Comparing, the ionization of hydrochloric
acid with that of acetic acid in water we find
that though both of them are polar covalent
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
molecules, former is completely ionized into
its constituent ions, while the latter is only
partially ionized (< 5%). The extent to which
ionization occurs depends upon the strength
of the bond and the extent of solvation of ions
produced. The terms dissociation and
ionization have earlier been used with different
meaning. Dissociation refers to the process of
separation of ions in water already existing as
such in the solid state of the solute, as in
sodium chloride. On the other hand, ionization
corresponds to a process in which a neutral
molecule splits into charged ions in the
solution. Here, we shall not distinguish
between the two and use the two terms
interchangeably.
7.10.1 Arrhenius Concept of Acids and
Bases
According to Arrhenius theory, acids are
substances that dissociates in water to give
hydrogen ions H +(aq) and bases are
substances that produce hydroxyl ions
OH –(aq). The ionization of an acid HX (aq) can
be represented by the following equations:
HX (aq) → H+(aq) + X
– (aq)
HX(aq) + H2O(l) → H3O+(aq) + X
–(aq)
A bare proton, H+ is very reactive and
cannot exist freely in aqueous solutions. Thus,
it bonds to the oxygen atom of a solvent water
molecule to give trigonal pyramidal
hydronium ion, H3O+ {[H (H2O)]+} (see box).
In this chapter we shall use H+(aq) and H3O+(aq)
interchangeably to mean the same i.e., a
hydrated proton.
Similarly, a base molecule like MOH
ionizes in aqueous solution according to the
equation:
MOH(aq) → M+(aq) + OH–(aq)
The hydroxyl ion also exists in the hydrated
form in the aqueous solution. Arrhenius
concept of acid and base, however, suffers
from the limitation of being applicable only to
aqueous solutions and also, does not account
for the basicity of substances like, ammonia
which do not possess a hydroxyl group.
7.10.2 The Brönsted-Lowry Acids and
Bases
The Danish chemist, Johannes Brönsted and
the English chemist, Thomas M. Lowry gave a
more general definition of acids and bases.
According to Brönsted-Lowry theory, acid is
a substance that is capable of donating a
hydrogen ion H+ and bases are substances
capable of accepting a hydrogen ion, H+. In
short, acids are proton donors and bases are
proton acceptors.
Consider the example of dissolution of NH3
in H2O represented by the following equation:
Hydronium and Hydroxyl Ions
Hydrogen ion by itself is a bare proton with
very small size (~10–15 m radius) and
intense electric field, binds itself with the
water molecule at one of the two available
lone pairs on it giving H3O+. This species
has been detected in many compounds
(e.g., H3O+Cl
–) in the solid state. In aqueous
solution the hydronium ion is further
hydrated to give species like H5O2
+, H7O3
+ and
+. Similarly the hydroxyl ion is hydrated
to give several ionic species like H3O2
–, H5O3
and H7O4
– etc.
The basic solution is formed due to the
presence of hydroxyl ions. In this reaction,
water molecule acts as proton donor and
ammonia molecule acts as proton acceptor
and are thus, called Lowry-Brönsted acid and
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
Svante Arrhenius
(1859-1927)
Arrhenius was born near Uppsala, Sweden.  He presented his thesis, on the conductivities
of electrolyte solutions, to the University of Uppsala in 1884.  For the next five years he
travelled extensively and visited a number of research centers in Europe. In 1895 he was
appointed professor of physics at the newly formed University of Stockholm, serving its
rector from 1897 to 1902.  From 1905 until his death he was Director of physical chemistry
at the Nobel Institute in Stockholm.  He continued to work for many years on electrolytic
solutions.  In 1899 he discussed the temperature dependence of reaction rates on the
basis of an equation, now usually known as Arrhenius equation.
He worked in a variety of fields, and made important contributions to
immunochemistry, cosmology, the origin of life, and the causes of ice age. He was the
first to discuss the ‘green house effect’ calling by that name. He received Nobel Prize in
Chemistry in 1903 for his theory of electrolytic dissociation and its use in the development
of chemistry.
base, respectively. In the reverse reaction, H+
is transferred from NH4
+ to OH–. In this case,
+ acts as a Bronsted acid while OH– acted
as a Brönsted base. The acid-base pair that
differs only by one proton is called a conjugate
acid-base pair. Therefore, OH– is called the
conjugate base of an acid H2O and NH4
called conjugate acid of the base NH3. If
Brönsted acid is a strong acid then its
conjugate base is a weak base and vice-
versa. It may be noted that conjugate acid
has one extra proton and each conjugate base
has one less proton.
Consider the example of ionization of
hydrochloric acid in water. HCl(aq) acts as an
acid by donating a proton to H2O molecule
which acts as a base.
ammonia it acts as an acid by donating a
proton.
Problem 7.12
What will be the conjugate bases for the
following Brönsted acids: HF, H2SO4  and
Solution
The conjugate bases should have one
proton less in each case and therefore the
corresponding conjugate bases are: F–,
– and CO3
2– respectively.
Problem 7.13
Write the conjugate acids for the following
Brönsted bases: NH2
–, NH3 and HCOO
Solution
The conjugate acid should have one extra
proton in each case and therefore the
corresponding conjugate acids are: NH3,
+ and HCOOH respectively.
Problem 7.14
The species: H2O, HCO3
–, HSO4
– and NH3
can act both as Bronsted acids and bases.
For each case give the corresponding
conjugate acid and conjugate base.
Solution
The answer is given in the following Table:
Species
Conjugate
Conjugate
H2CO3
H2SO4
It can be seen in the above equation, that
water acts as a base because it accepts the
proton. The species H3O+ is produced when
water accepts a proton from HCl. Therefore,
Cl– is a conjugate base of HCl and HCl is the
conjugate acid of base Cl–. Similarly, H2O is a
conjugate base of an acid H3O+ and H3O+ is a
conjugate acid of base H2O.
It is interesting to observe the dual role of
water as an acid and a base. In case of reaction
with HCl water acts as a base while in case of
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
7.10.3 Lewis Acids and Bases
G.N. Lewis in 1923 defined an acid as a
species which accepts electron pair and base
which donates an electron pair. As far as
bases are concerned, there is not much
difference between Brönsted-Lowry and Lewis
concepts, as the base provides a lone pair in
both the cases. However, in Lewis concept
many acids do not have proton. A typical
example is reaction of electron deficient species
BF3 with NH3.
BF3 does not have a proton but still acts
as an acid and reacts with NH3 by accepting
its lone pair of electrons. The reaction can be
represented by,
BF3 + :NH3 → BF3:NH3
Electron deficient species  like AlCl3, Co3+,
Mg2+, etc.  can act as Lewis acids while species
like H2O, NH3, OH
– etc. which can donate a pair
of electrons, can act as Lewis bases.
Problem 7.15
Classify the following species into Lewis
acids and Lewis bases and show how
these act as such:
(a) HO–
(b)F –
(c) H+
(d) BCl3
Solution
Hydroxyl ion is a Lewis base as it can
donate an electron lone pair (:OH
Flouride ion acts as a Lewis base as
it can donate any one of its four
electron lone pairs.
A proton is a Lewis acid as it can
accept a lone pair of electrons from
bases like hydroxyl ion and fluoride
BCl3 acts as a Lewis acid as it can
accept a lone pair of electrons from
species like ammonia or amine
molecules.
IONIZATION OF ACIDS AND BASES
Arrhenius concept of acids and bases becomes
useful in case of ionization of acids and bases
as mostly ionizations in chemical and
biological systems occur in aqueous medium.
Strong acids like perchloric acid (HClO4),
hydrochloric acid (HCl), hydrobromic acid
(HBr), hyrdoiodic acid (HI), nitric acid (HNO3)
and sulphuric acid (H2SO4) are termed strong
because they are almost completely
dissociated into their constituent ions in an
aqueous medium, thereby acting as proton
(H+) donors. Similarly, strong bases like
lithium hydroxide (LiOH), sodium hydroxide
(NaOH), potassium hydroxide (KOH), caesium
hydroxide (CsOH) and barium hydroxide
Ba(OH)2 are almost completely dissociated into
ions in an aqueous medium giving hydroxyl
ions, OH–. According to Arrhenius concept
they are strong acids and bases as they are
able to completely dissociate and produce H3O
and OH
– ions respectively in the medium.
Alternatively, the strength of an acid or base
may also be gauged in terms of Brönsted-
Lowry concept of acids and bases, wherein a
strong acid means a good proton donor and a
strong base implies a good proton acceptor.
Consider, the acid-base dissociation
equilibrium of a weak acid HA,
HA(aq)  +  H2O(l)
H3O+(aq)  +  A–(aq)
conjugate    conjugate
acid         base               acid            base
In section 7.10.2 we saw that acid (or base)
dissociation equilibrium is dynamic involving
a transfer of proton in forward and reverse
directions. Now, the question arises that if the
equilibrium is dynamic then with passage of
time which direction is favoured? What is the
driving force behind it? In order to answer
these questions we shall deal into the issue of
comparing the strengths of the two acids (or
bases) involved in the dissociation equilibrium.
Consider the two acids HA and H3O+ present
in the above mentioned acid-dissociation
equilibrium. We have to see which amongst
them is a stronger proton donor. Whichever
exceeds in its tendency of donating a proton
over the other shall be termed as the stronger
acid and the equilibrium will shift in the
direction of weaker acid. Say, if HA is a
stronger acid than H3O+, then HA will donate
protons and not H3O+, and the solution will
mainly contain A– and H3O + ions. The
equilibrium moves in the direction of
formation of weaker acid and weaker base
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
because the stronger acid donates a proton
to the stronger base.
It follows that as a strong acid dissociates
completely in water, the resulting base formed
would be very weak i.e., strong acids have
very weak conjugate bases. Strong acids like
perchloric acid (HClO4), hydrochloric acid
(HCl), hydrobromic acid (HBr), hydroiodic acid
(HI), nitric acid (HNO3) and sulphuric acid
(H2SO4) will give conjugate base ions ClO4
–, Cl,
Br–, I–, NO3
– and HSO4
– , which are much weaker
bases than H2O. Similarly a very strong base
would give a very weak conjugate acid. On the
other hand, a weak acid say HA is only partially
dissociated in aqueous medium and thus, the
solution mainly contains undissociated HA
molecules. Typical weak acids are nitrous acid
(HNO2), hydrofluoric acid (HF) and acetic acid
(CH3COOH). It should be noted that the weak
acids have very strong conjugate bases. For
example, NH2
2– and H– are very good proton
acceptors and thus, much stronger bases than
Certain water soluble organic compounds
like phenolphthalein and bromothymol blue
behave as weak acids and exhibit different
colours in their acid (HIn) and conjugate base
– ) forms.
HIn(aq)  +   H2O(l)
+(aq)   +   In
–(aq)
conjugate  conjugate
indicator
acid           base
colour A
colourB
Such compounds are useful as indicators
in acid-base titrations, and finding out H
+ ion
concentration.
7.11.1 The Ionization Constant of Water
and its Ionic Product
Some substances like water are unique in their
ability of acting both as an acid and a base.
We have seen this in case of water in section
7.10.2. In presence of an acid, HA it accepts a
proton and acts as the base while in the
presence of a base, B
– it acts as an acid by
donating a proton.  In pure water, one H2O
molecule donates proton and acts as an acid
and another water molecules accepts a proton
and acts as a base at the same time.  The
following equilibrium exists:
H2O(l)  +  H2O(l)
H3O+(aq)  +   OH–(aq)
acid        base         conjugate          conjugate
acid                  base
The dissociation constant is represented by,
K = [H3O+] [OH
–] / [H2O]                    (7.26)
The concentration of water is omitted from
the denominator as water is a pure liquid and
its concentration remains constant. [H2O] is
incorporated within the equilibrium constant
to give a new constant, Kw, which is called the
ionic product of water.
Kw = [H+][OH–]
(7.27)
The concentration of H+ has been found
out experimentally as 1.0 × 10–7 M at 298 K.
And, as dissociation of water produces equal
number of H+ and OH– ions, the concentration
of hydroxyl ions, [OH–] = [H+] = 1.0 × 10–7 M.
Thus, the value of Kw at 298K,
Kw = [H3O+][OH
–] = (1 × 10–7)2 = 1 × 10–14 M2
(7.28)
The value of Kw is temperature dependent
as it is an equilibrium constant.
The density of pure water is 1000 g / L
and its molar mass is 18.0 g /mol. From this
the molarity of pure water can be given as,
[H2O] = (1000 g /L)(1 mol/18.0 g) = 55.55 M.
Therefore, the ratio of dissociated water to that
of undissociated water can be given as:
10–7 / (55.55) = 1.8 × 10–9 or  ~ 2 in 10–9 (thus,
equilibrium lies mainly towards undissociated
water)
We can distinguish acidic, neutral and
basic aqueous solutions by the relative values
of the H3O+ and OH– concentrations:
Acidic: [H3O+] > [OH
Neutral: [H3O+] = [OH
Basic : [H3O+] < [OH
7.11.2 The pH Scale
Hydronium ion concentration in molarity is
more conveniently expressed on a logarithmic
scale known as the pH scale. The pH of a
solution is defined as the negative logarithm
to base 10 of the activity aH+
)  of hydrogen
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
ion. In dilute solutions (< 0.01 M), activity of
hydrogen ion (H+) is equal in magnitude to
molarity represented by [H+]. It should
be noted that activity has no units and is
defined as:
= [H+] / mol L–1
From the definition of pH, the following
can be written,
pH = – log aH+ = – log {[H+] / mol L–1}
Thus, an acidic solution of HCl (10–2 M)
will have a pH = 2. Similarly, a basic solution
of NaOH having [OH
–] =10
–4 M and [H3O+] =
10–10 M will have a pH = 10. At 25 °C, pure
water has a concentration of hydrogen ions,
[H+] = 10–7 M. Hence, the pH of pure water is
given as:
pH = –log(10–7) = 7
Acidic solutions possess a concentration
of hydrogen ions, [H+] > 10–7 M, while basic
solutions possess a concentration of hydrogen
ions, [H+] < 10–7 M. thus, we can summarise
Acidic solution has pH < 7
Basic solution has pH > 7
Neutral solution has pH = 7
Now again, consider the equation (7.28) at
298 K
Kw = [H3O+] [OH
–] = 10–14
Taking negative logarithm on both sides
of equation, we obtain
–log Kw = – log {[H3O+] [OH
= – log [H3O+] – log [OH
= – log 10 –14
pKw  =   pH   +    pOH   =   14
(7.29)
Note that although Kw may change with
temperature the variations in pH with
temperature are so small that we often
ignore it.
pKw is a very important quantity for
aqueous solutions and controls the relative
concentrations of hydrogen and hydroxyl ions
as their product is a constant. It should be
noted that as the pH scale is logarithmic, a
change in pH by just one unit also means
change in [H+] by a factor of 10. Similarly, when
the hydrogen ion concentration, [H+] changes
by a factor of 100, the value of pH changes by
2 units. Now you can realise why the change
in pH with temperature is often ignored.
Measurement of pH of a solution is very
essential as its value should be known when
dealing with biological and cosmetic
applications. The pH of a solution can be found
roughly with the help of pH paper that has
different colour in solutions of different pH.
Now-a-days pH paper is available with four
strips on it. The different strips have different
colours (Fig. 7.11) at the same pH. The pH in
the range of 1-14 can be determined with an
accuracy of ~0.5 using pH paper.
Fig.7.11 pH-paper with four strips that may
have different colours at the same pH
For greater accuracy pH meters are used.
pH meter is a device that measures the
pH-dependent electrical potential of the test
solution within 0.001 precision. pH meters of
the size of a writing pen are now available in
the market. The pH of some very common
substances are given in Table 7.5 (page 212).
Problem 7.16
The concentration of hydrogen ion in a
sample of soft drink is 3.8 × 10–3M. what
is its pH ?
Solution
pH = – log[3.8 × 10–3]
= – {log[3.8] + log[10–3]}
= – {(0.58) + (– 3.0)} = – { – 2.42} = 2.42
Therefore, the pH of the soft drink is 2.42
and it can be inferred that it is acidic.
Problem 7.17
Calculate pH of a 1.0 × 10
–8 M solution
of HCl.
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
Table 7.6
The Ionization Constants of Some
Selected Weak Acids (at 298K)
Ionization Constant,
Hydrofluoric Acid (HF)
3.5 × 10–4
Nitrous Acid (HNO2)
4.5 × 10–4
Formic Acid (HCOOH)
1.8 × 10–4
Niacin (C5H4NCOOH)
1.5 × 10–5
Acetic Acid (CH3COOH)
1.74 × 10–5
Benzoic Acid (C6H5COOH)
6.5 × 10–5
Hypochlorous Acid (HCIO)
3.0 × 10–8
Hydrocyanic Acid (HCN)
4.9 × 10–10
Phenol (C6H5OH)
1.3 × 10–10
Solution
2H2O (l)
H3O+ (aq)  +  OH
–(aq)
Kw = [OH
–][H3O+]
= 10–14
Let, x = [OH
–] = [H3O+] from H2O.  The H3O+
concentration is generated (i) from
the ionization of HCl dissolved i.e.,
HCl(aq)  + H2O(l)
+ (aq)  +  Cl
–(aq),
and (ii) from ionization of H2O. In these
very dilute solutions, both sources of
H3O+ must be considered:
[H3O+] = 10–8 + x
Kw = (10–8 + x)(x) = 10–14
or x2 + 10–8 x – 10–14 = 0
[OH– ] = x = 9.5 × 10–8
So, pOH = 7.02 and pH = 6.98
7.11.3 Ionization Constants of Weak Acids
Consider a weak acid HX that is partially
ionized in the aqueous solution. The
equilibrium can be expressed by:
HX(aq) + H2O(l)
H3O+(aq) + X–(aq)
Initial
concentration (M)
c                                0               0
Let α be the extent of ionization
Change (M)
+cα          +cα
Equilibrium concentration (M)
cα               cα
Here, c = initial concentration of the
undissociated acid, HX at time, t = 0. α = extent
up to which HX is ionized into ions. Using
these notations, we can derive the equilibrium
constant for the above discussed acid-
dissociation equilibrium:
Ka = c2α2 / c(1-α) = cα2 / 1-α
Ka is called the dissociation or ionization
constant of acid HX. It can be represented
alternatively in terms of molar concentration
as follows,
Ka = [H+][X –] / [HX]
(7.30)
At a given temperature T, Ka is a
measure of the strength of the acid HX
i.e., larger the value of Ka, the stronger is
the acid. Ka is a dimensionless quantity
with the understanding that the standard
state concentration of all species is 1M.
The values of the ionization constants of
some selected weak acids are given in
Table 7.6.
Table 7.5  The pH of Some Common Substances
Name of the Fluid
Name of the Fluid
Saturated solution of NaOH
Black Coffee
0.1 M NaOH solution
Tomato juice
Lime water
Soft drinks and vinegar
Milk of magnesia
Lemon juice
Egg white, sea water
Gastric juice
Human blood
1M HCl solution
Concentrated HCl
~–1.0
Human Saliva
The pH scale for the hydrogen ion
concentration has been so useful that besides
pKw, it has been extended to other species and
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
quantities. Thus, we have:
pKa = –log (Ka)                                   (7.31)
Knowing the ionization constant, Ka of an
acid and its initial concentration, c, it is
possible to calculate the equilibrium
concentration of all species and also the degree
of ionization of the acid and the pH of the
solution.
A general step-wise approach can be
adopted to evaluate the pH of the weak
electrolyte as follows:
Step 1. The species present before dissociation
identified
Brönsted-Lowry
acids / bases.
Step 2. Balanced equations for all possible
reactions i.e., with a species acting both as
acid as well as base are written.
Step 3. The reaction with the higher Ka is
identified as the primary reaction whilst the
other is a subsidiary reaction.
Step 4.  Enlist in a tabular form the following
values for each of the species in the primary
reaction
(a) Initial concentration, c.
(b) Change in concentration on proceeding to
equilibrium in terms of α, degree of
ionization.
(c) Equilibrium concentration.
Step 5. Substitute equilibrium concentrations
into equilibrium constant equation for
principal reaction and solve for α.
Step 6.  Calculate the concentration of species
in principal reaction.
Step 7.  Calculate pH = – log[H3O+]
The above mentioned methodology has
been elucidated in the following examples.
Problem 7.18
The ionization constant of HF is
3.2 × 10–4. Calculate the degree of
dissociation of HF in its 0.02 M solution.
Calculate the concentration of all species
present (H3O+, F– and HF) in the solution
and its pH.
Solution
The following proton transfer reactions are
possible:
1) HF + H2O
H3O+ + F–
Ka = 3.2 × 10–4
2) H2O + H2O
H3O+ + OH–
Kw = 1.0 × 10–14
As Ka >> Kw, [1] is the principle reaction.
HF  +     H2O
H3O+   +     F–
Initial
concentration (M)
0.02                         0             0
Change (M)
–0.02α                +0.02α    +0.02α
Equilibrium
concentration  (M)
0.02 – 0.02 α       0.02 α    0.02α
Substituting equilibrium concentrations
in the equilibrium reaction for principal
reaction gives:
Ka = (0.02α)2 / (0.02 – 0.02α)
= 0.02 α2 / (1 –α) = 3.2 × 10–4
We obtain the following quadratic
equation:
α2 + 1.6 × 10–2α – 1.6 × 10–2 = 0
The quadratic equation in α can be solved
and the two values of the roots are:
α = + 0.12 and – 0.12
The negative root is not acceptable and
hence,
α = 0.12
This means that the degree of ionization,
α = 0.12, then equilibrium concentrations
of other species viz., HF, F – and H3O+ are
given by:
[H3O+] = [F –] = cα = 0.02 × 0.12
= 2.4 × 10–3 M
[HF] = c(1 – α) = 0.02 (1 – 0.12)
= 17.6 × 10-3 M
pH = – log[H+] = –log(2.4 × 10–3) = 2.62
Problem 7.19
The pH of 0.1M monobasic acid is 4.50.
Calculate the concentration of species H
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
Table 7.7
The Values of the Ionization
Constant of Some Weak Bases at
298 K
Dimethylamine, (CH3)2NH
5.4 × 10–4
Triethylamine, (C2H5)3N
6.45 × 10–5
Ammonia, NH3 or NH4OH
1.77 × 10–5
Quinine, (A plant product)
1.10 × 10–6
Pyridine, C5H5N
1.77 × 10–9
Aniline, C6H5NH2
4.27 × 10–10
Urea, CO (NH2)2
1.3 × 10–14
A– and HA at equilibrium. Also, determine
the value of Ka and pKa of the monobasic
acid.
Solution
pH = – log [H+]
Therefore, [H+] = 10 –pH = 10 –4.50
= 3.16 × 10–5
[H+] = [A–] = 3.16 × 10–5
Thus,
Ka = [H+][A-] / [HA]
[HA]eqlbm = 0.1 – (3.16 × 10-5) ∫  0.1
Ka = (3.16 × 10–5)2 / 0.1 = 1.0 × 10–8
pKa = – log(10–8) = 8
Alternatively, “Percent dissociation” is
another useful method for measure of
strength of a weak acid and is given as:
Percent dissociation
= [HA]dissociated/[HA]initial × 100%            (7.32)
Problem 7.20
Calculate the pH of 0.08M solution of
hypochlorous acid, HOCl. The ionization
constant of the acid is 2.5 × 10 –5.
Determine the percent dissociation of
HOCl.
Solution
HOCl(aq) + H2O (l)
H3O+(aq) + ClO–(aq)
Initial concentration  (M)
0               0
Change to reach
equilibrium concentration
equilibrium concentartion  (M)
0.08 – x
Ka = {[H3O+][ClO–] / [HOCl]}
=  x2 / (0.08 –x)
As x << 0.08, therefore 0.08 – x ∫ 0.08
x2 / 0.08 = 2.5 × 10–5
x2 = 2.0 × 10–6, thus, x = 1.41 × 10–3
[H+] = 1.41 × 10–3 M.
Therefore,
Percent dissociation
= {[HOCl]dissociated / [HOCl]initial }× 100
= 1.41 × 10–3 × 102/ 0.08 = 1.76 %.
pH = –log(1.41 × 10–3) = 2.85.
7.11.4 Ionization of Weak Bases
The ionization of base MOH can be represented
by equation:
MOH(aq)
M+(aq) + OH–(aq)
In a weak base there is partial ionization
of MOH into M+ and OH–, the case is similar to
that of acid-dissociation equilibrium. The
equilibrium constant for base ionization is
called base ionization constant and is
represented by Kb. It can be expressed in terms
of concentration in molarity of various species
in equilibrium by the following equation:
Kb = [M+][OH–] / [MOH]
(7.33)
Alternatively, if c = initial concentration of
base and α = degree of ionization of base i.e.
the extent to which the base ionizes. When
equilibrium is reached, the equilibrium
constant can be written as:
Kb = (cα)2 / c (1-α) = cα2 / (1-α)
The values of the ionization constants of
some selected weak bases, Kb are given in
Table 7.7.
Many organic compounds like amines are
weak bases. Amines are derivatives of
ammonia in which one or more hydrogen
atoms are replaced by another group. For
example, methylamine, codeine, quinine and
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
nicotine all behave as very weak bases due to
their very small Kb. Ammonia produces OH–
in aqueous solution:
NH3(aq) + H2O(l)
+(aq) + OH–(aq)
The pH scale for the hydrogen ion
concentration has been extended to get:
pKb = –log (Kb)
(7.34)
Problem 7.21
The pH of 0.004M hydrazine solution is
9.7. Calculate its ionization constant Kb
and pKb.
Solution
NH2NH2  +  H2O
NH2NH3
+   +   OH–
From the pH we can calculate the
hydrogen ion concentration. Knowing
hydrogen ion concentration and the ionic
product of water we can calculate the
concentration of hydroxyl ions. Thus we
have:
[H+] = antilog (–pH)
=  antilog (–9.7) = 1.67 ×10–10
[OH–] = Kw / [H+] = 1 × 10–14 / 1.67 × 10–10
= 5.98 × 10–5
The concentration of the corresponding
hydrazinium ion is also the same as that
of hydroxyl ion. The concentration of both
these ions is very small so the
concentration of the undissociated base
can be taken equal to 0.004M.
Thus,
Kb = [NH2NH3
+][OH–] / [NH2NH2]
= (5.98 × 10–5)2 / 0.004 = 8.96 × 10–7
pKb = –logKb = –log(8.96 × 10–7) = 6.04.
Problem 7.22
Calculate the pH of the solution in which
0.2M NH4Cl and 0.1M NH3 are present. The
pKb of ammonia solution is 4.75.
Solution
NH3   +   H2O
+     +      OH–
The ionization constant of NH3,
Kb = antilog (–pKb) i.e.
Kb = 10–4.75 = 1.77 × 10–5 M
NH3   +   H2O
+     +      OH
Initial concentration (M)
Change to reach
equilibrium (M)
–x                          +x                  +x
At equilibrium (M)
0.10 – x                 0.20 + x             x
Kb = [NH4
+][OH–] / [NH3]
= (0.20 + x)(x) / (0.1 – x) = 1.77 × 10–5
As Kb is small, we can neglect x in
comparison to 0.1M and 0.2M. Thus,
[OH–] = x = 0.88 × 10–5
Therefore, [H+] = 1.12 × 10–9
pH = – log[H+] = 8.95.
7.11.5 Relation between Ka and Kb
As seen earlier in this chapter, Ka and Kb
represent the strength of an acid and a base,
respectively. In case of a conjugate acid-base
pair, they are related in a simple manner so
that if one is known, the other can be deduced.
Considering the example of NH4
+ and NH3
we see,
+(aq) + H2O(l)
H3O+(aq) + NH3(aq)
Ka = [H3O+][ NH3] / [NH4
+] = 5.6 × 10–10
NH3(aq) + H2O(l)
+(aq) + OH–(aq)
Kb =[ NH4
+][ OH–] / NH3 = 1.8 × 10–5
Net: 2 H2O(l)
H3O+(aq) + OH–(aq)
Kw = [H3O+][ OH– ] = 1.0 × 10
–14 M
Where, Ka represents the strength of NH4
an acid and Kb represents the strength of NH3
as a base.
It can be seen from the net reaction that
the equilibrium constant is equal to the
product of equilibrium constants Ka and Kb
for the reactions added. Thus,
Ka × Kb = {[H3O+][ NH3] / [NH4
+ ]} × {[NH4
–] / [NH3]}
= [H3O+][ OH–] = Kw
= (5.6x10–10) × (1.8 × 10–5) = 1.0 × 10–14 M
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
This can be extended to make a
generalisation. The equilibrium constant for
a net reaction obtained after adding two
(or more) reactions equals the product of
the equilibrium constants for individual
reactions:
KNET = K1 × K2 × ……                                   (3.35)
Similarly, in case of a conjugate acid-base
pair,
Ka × Kb = Kw                                                             (7.36)
Knowing one, the other can be obtained. It
should be noted that a strong acid will have
a weak conjugate base and vice-versa.
Alternatively, the above expression
K w = Ka × K b, can also be obtained by
considering the base-dissociation equilibrium
reaction:
B(aq) + H2O(l)         BH+(aq) + OH–(aq)
Kb = [BH+][OH–] / [B]
As the concentration of water remains
constant it has been omitted from the
denominator and incorporated within the
dissociation constant. Then multiplying and
dividing the above expression by [H+], we get:
Kb = [BH+][OH–][H+] / [B][H+]
={[ OH–][H+]}{[BH+] / [B][H+]}
= Kw / Ka
or  Ka × Kb = Kw
It may be noted that if we take negative
logarithm of both sides of the equation, then
pK values of the conjugate acid and base are
related to each other by the equation:
pKa + pKb = pKw = 14 (at 298K)
Problem 7.23
Determine the degree of ionization and pH
of a 0.05M of ammonia solution. The
ionization constant of ammonia can be
taken from Table 7.7. Also, calculate the
ionization constant of the conjugate acid
of ammonia.
Solution
The ionization of NH 3 in water is
represented by equation:
NH3  +  H2O           NH4
+    +    OH–
We use equation (7.33) to calculate
hydroxyl ion concentration,
[OH–] = c α = 0.05 α
Kb = 0.05 α2 / (1 – α)
The value of α is small, therefore the
quadratic equation can be simplified by
neglecting α in comparison to 1 in the
denominator on right hand side of the
equation,
Thus,
Kb = c α2  or   α = √ (1.77 × 10–5 / 0.05)
= 0.018.
[OH–] = c α = 0.05 × 0.018 = 9.4 × 10–4M.
[H+] = Kw / [OH–] = 10–14 / (9.4 × 10–4)
= 1.06 × 10–11
pH = –log(1.06 × 10–11) = 10.97.
Now, using the relation for conjugate
acid-base pair,
Ka × Kb = Kw
using the value of Kb of NH3 from
Table 7.7.
We can determine the concentration of
conjugate acid NH4
Ka = Kw / Kb = 10–14 / 1.77 × 10–5
= 5.64 × 10–10.
7.11.6 Di- and Polybasic Acids and Di- and
Polyacidic Bases
Some of the acids like oxalic acid, sulphuric
acid and phosphoric acids have more than one
ionizable proton per molecule of the acid.
Such acids are known as polybasic or
polyprotic acids.
The ionization reactions for example for a
dibasic acid H2X are represented by the
equations:
H2X(aq)
+(aq) + HX
–(aq)
–(aq)
+(aq) + X
2–(aq)
And the corresponding equilibrium
constants are given below:
Ka1= {[H
+][HX
–]} / [H2X] and
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Ka2 = {[H+][X2-]} / [HX-]
Here, Ka1and Ka2are called the first and second
ionization constants respectively of the acid H2
X. Similarly, for tribasic acids like H3PO4 we
have three ionization constants. The values of
the ionization constants for some common
polyprotic acids are given in Table 7.8.
In general, when strength of H-A bond
decreases, that is, the energy required to break
the bond decreases, HA becomes a stronger
acid. Also, when the H-A bond becomes more
polar i.e., the electronegativity difference
between the atoms H and A increases and
there is marked charge separation, cleavage
of the bond becomes easier thereby increasing
the acidity.
But it should be noted that while
comparing elements in the same group of the
periodic table, H-A bond strength is a more
important factor in determining acidity than
its polar nature. As the size of A increases
down the group, H-A bond strength decreases
and so the acid strength increases. For
example,
Size increases
HF << HCl << HBr << HI
Acid strength increases
Similarly, H2S is stronger acid than H2O.
But, when we discuss elements in the same
row of the periodic table, H-A bond polarity
becomes the deciding factor for determining
the acid strength. As the electronegativity of A
increases, the strength of the acid also
increases. For example,
Electronegativity of A increases
CH4 < NH3 < H2O < HF
Acid strength increases
7.11.8
Common Ion Effect in the
Ionization of Acids and Bases
Consider an example of acetic acid dissociation
equilibrium represented as:
CH3COOH(aq)
H+(aq) +  CH3COO– (aq)
or  HAc(aq)
H+ (aq) + Ac– (aq)
Ka = [H+][Ac– ] / [HAc]
Addition of acetate ions to an acetic acid
solution results in decreasing the
concentration of hydrogen ions, [H+]. Also, if
H+ ions are added from an external source then
the equilibrium moves in the direction of
undissociated acetic acid i.e., in a direction of
reducing the concentration of hydrogen ions,
[H+]. This phenomenon is an example of
Table 7.8
The Ionization Constants of Some
Common Polyprotic Acids (298K)
It can be seen that higher order ionization
constants (Ka2, Ka3) are smaller than the lower
order ionization constant (Ka1) of a polyprotic
acid. The reason for this is that it is more
difficult to remove a positively charged proton
from a negative ion due to electrostatic forces.
This can be seen in the case of removing a
proton from the uncharged H 2CO3 as
compared from a negatively charged HCO3
Similarly, it is more difficult to remove a proton
from a doubly charged HPO4
2– anion as
compared to H2PO4
Polyprotic acid solutions contain a mixture
of acids like H2A, HA– and A
2– in case of a
diprotic acid. H2A being a strong acid, the
primary reaction involves the dissociation of
H2 A, and H3O+ in the solution comes mainly
from the first dissociation step.
7.11.7 Factors Affecting Acid Strength
Having discussed quantitatively the strengths
of acids and bases, we come to a stage where
we can calculate the pH of a given acid
solution. But, the curiosity rises about why
should some acids be stronger than others?
What factors are responsible for making them
stronger? The answer lies in its being a
complex phenomenon. But, broadly speaking
we can say that the extent of dissociation of
an acid depends on the strength and polarity
of the H-A bond.
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
common ion effect. It can be defined as a
shift in equilibrium on adding a substance
that provides more of an ionic species already
present in the dissociation equilibrium. Thus,
we can say that common ion effect is a
phenomenon based on the Le Chatelier’s
principle discussed in section 7.8.
In order to evaluate the pH of the solution
resulting on addition of 0.05M acetate ion to
0.05M acetic acid solution, we shall consider
the acetic acid dissociation equilibrium once
again,
HAc(aq)
H+(aq)   +  Ac–(aq)
Initial concentration (M)
0          0.05
Let x be the extent of ionization of acetic
acid.
Change in concentration (M)
+x          +x
Equilibrium concentration (M)
0.05-x       x
0.05+x
Therefore,
Ka= [H+][Ac– ]/[H Ac] = {(0.05+x)(x)}/(0.05-x)
As Ka is small for a very weak acid, x<<0.05.
Hence, (0.05 + x) ≈ (0.05 – x) ≈  0.05
Thus,
1.8 × 10–5 = (x) (0.05 + x) / (0.05 – x)
= x(0.05) / (0.05) = x = [H+] = 1.8 × 10–5M
pH = – log(1.8 × 10–5) = 4.74
Problem 7.24
Calculate the pH of a 0.10M ammonia
solution. Calculate the pH after 50.0 mL
of this solution is treated with 25.0 mL of
0.10M HCl. The dissociation constant of
ammonia, Kb = 1.77 × 10–5
Solution
NH3     +      H2O      →     NH4
+    +    OH–
Kb = [NH4
+][OH–] / [NH3] = 1.77 × 10–5
Before neutralization,
+] = [OH–] = x
[NH3] = 0.10 – x  ∫ 0.10
x2 / 0.10 = 1.77 × 10–5
Thus, x = 1.33 × 10–3 = [OH–]
Therefore,[H+] = Kw / [OH–] = 10–14 /
(1.33 × 10–3) = 7.51 × 10–12
pH = –log(7.5 × 10–12) = 11.12
On addition of 25 mL of 0.1M HCl
solution (i.e., 2.5 mmol of HCl) to 50 mL
of 0.1M ammonia solution (i.e., 5 mmol
of NH3), 2.5 mmol of ammonia molecules
are neutralized. The resulting 75 mL
solution contains the remaining
unneutralized 2.5 mmol of NH3 molecules
and 2.5 mmol of NH4
NH3    +    HCl    →    NH4
+ +  Cl–
2.5           2.5              0          0
At equilibrium
0              0             2.5         2.5
The resulting 75 mL of solution contains
2.5 mmol of NH4
+ ions (i.e.,  0.033 M) and
2.5 mmol (i.e.,  0.033 M ) of uneutralised
NH3 molecules. This NH3 exists in the
following equilibrium:
NH4OH
+   +     OH–
0.033M – y               y              y
where, y  =  [OH–]  =  [NH4
The final 75 mL solution after
neutralisation
already
contains
2.5 m mol NH4
+ ions (i.e. 0.033M), thus
total concentration of NH4
+ ions is given as:
+] = 0.033 + y
As y is small, [NH4OH] ∫ 0.033 M and
+] ∫ 0.033M.
We know,
Kb = [NH4
+][OH–] / [NH4OH]
= y(0.033)/(0.033) = 1.77 × 10–5 M
Thus, y = 1.77 × 10–5 = [OH–]
[H+] = 10–14 / 1.77 × 10–5 = 0.56 × 10–9
Hence, pH = 9.24
7.11.9 Hydrolysis of Salts and the pH of
their Solutions
Salts formed by the reactions between acids
and bases in definite proportions, undergo
ionization in water. The cations/anions formed
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
on ionization of salts either exist as hydrated
ions in aqueous solutions or interact with
water to reform corresponding acids/bases
depending upon the nature of salts. The later
process of interaction between water and
cations/anions or both of salts is called
hydrolysis. The pH of the solution gets affected
by this interaction. The cations (e.g., Na
2+, Ba
2+, etc.) of strong bases and anions
(e.g., Cl
–, Br
–, NO3
–, ClO4
– etc.) of strong acids
simply get hydrated but do not hydrolyse, and
therefore the solutions of salts formed from
strong acids and bases are neutral i.e., their
pH is 7. However, the other category of salts
do undergo hydrolysis.
We now consider the hydrolysis of the salts
of the following types :
salts of weak acid and strong base e.g.,
CH3COONa.
(ii) salts of strong acid and weak base e.g.,
NH4Cl, and
(iii) salts of weak acid and weak base, e.g.,
CH3COONH4.
In the first case, CH3COONa being a salt of
weak acid, CH3COOH and strong base, NaOH
gets completely ionised in aqueous solution.
CH3COONa(aq)   →  CH3COO– (aq)+  Na+(aq)
Acetate ion thus formed undergoes
hydrolysis in water to give acetic acid and OH–
CH3COO
–(aq)+H2O(l)
CH3COOH(aq)+OH
–(aq)
Acetic acid being a weak acid
(Ka = 1.8 × 10–5) remains mainly unionised in
solution. This results in increase of OH
– ion
concentration in solution making it alkaline.
The pH of such a solution is more than 7.
Similarly, NH4Cl formed from weak base,
NH4OH and strong acid, HCl, in water
dissociates completely.
NH4Cl(aq) → NH
4(aq)  +Cl– (aq)
Ammonium ions undergo hydrolysis with
water to form NH4OH and H+ ions
4 (aq) + H2O (1)
NH4OH(aq) + H+(aq)
Ammonium hydroxide is a weak base
(Kb = 1.77 × 10–5) and therefore remains almost
unionised in solution. This results in
increased of H+ ion concentration in solution
making the solution acidic. Thus, the pH of
NH4Cl solution in water is less than 7.
Consider the hydrolysis of CH3COONH4 salt
formed from weak acid and weak base. The
ions formed undergo hydrolysis as follow:
CH3COO– + NH4
+ +  H2O
CH3COOH +
NH4OH
CH3COOH and NH4OH, also remain into
partially dissociated form:
CH3COOH
CH3COO
–  +  H+
NH4OH
+    +   OH–
H+  +  OH–
Without going into detailed calculation, it
can be said that degree of hydrolysis is
independent of concentration of solution, and
pH of such solutions is determined by their pK
values:
pH = 7 + ½ (pKa – pKb)                             (7.38)
The pH of solution can be greater than 7,
if the difference is positive and it will be less
than 7, if the difference is negative.
Problem 7.25
The pKa of acetic acid and pKb of
ammonium hydroxide are 4.76 and 4.75
respectively. Calculate the pH of
ammonium acetate solution.
Solution
pH = 7 + ½ [pKa – pKb]
= 7 + ½ [4.76 – 4.75]
= 7 + ½ [0.01]  = 7 + 0.005  = 7.005
7.12 BUFFER SOLUTIONS
Many body fluids e.g., blood or urine have
definite pH and any deviation in their pH
indicates malfunctioning of the body.  The
control of pH is also very important in many
chemical and biochemical processes. Many
medical and cosmetic formulations require
that these be kept and administered at a
particular pH. The solutions which resist
change in pH on dilution or with the
addition of small amounts of acid or alkali
are called Buffer Solutions. Buffer solutions
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
of known pH can be prepared from the
knowledge of pKa of the acid or pKb of base
and by controlling the ratio of the salt and acid
or salt and base. A mixture of acetic acid and
sodium acetate acts as buffer solution around
pH 4.75 and a mixture of ammonium chloride
and ammonium hydroxide acts as a buffer
around pH 9.25. You will learn more about
buffer solutions in higher classes.
7.12.1 Designing Buffer Solution
Knowledge of pKa, pKb and equilibrium
constant help us to prepare the buffer solution
of known pH. Let us see how we can do this.
Preparation of Acidic Buffer
To prepare a buffer of  acidic pH we use weak
acid and its salt formed with strong base. We
develop the equation relating the pH, the
equilibrium constant, Ka  of weak acid and ratio
of concentration of weak acid and its conjugate
base. For the general case where the weak acid
HA ionises in water,
HA + H2O ⇌ H3O+ + A–
For which we can write the expression
Rearranging the expression we have,
Taking logarithm on both the sides and
rearranging the terms we get —
(7.39)
(7.40)
The expression (7.40) is known as
Henderson–Hasselbalch equation. The
quantity
is the ratio of concentration of
conjugate base (anion) of the acid and the acid
present in the mixture. Since acid is a weak
acid, it ionises to a very little extent and
concentration of [HA] is negligibly different from
concentration of acid taken to form buffer. Also,
most of the conjugate base, [A—], comes from
the ionisation of salt of the acid. Therefore, the
concentration of conjugate base will be
negligibly different from the concentration of
salt. Thus, equation (7.40) takes the form:
[Salt]
[Acid]
+ log
In the equation (7.39), if the concentration
of [A—] is equal to the concentration of [HA],
then pH = pKa because value of log 1 is zero.
Thus if we take molar concentration of acid and
salt (conjugate base) same, the pH of the buffer
solution will be equal to the pKa of the acid. So
for preparing the buffer solution of the required
pH we select that acid whose pKa is close to the
required pH. For acetic acid pKa value is 4.76,
therefore pH of the buffer solution formed by
acetic acid and sodium acetate taken in equal
molar concentration will be around 4.76.
A similar analysis of a buffer made with a
weak base and its conjugate acid leads to the
result,
pOH=p
+log [Conjugate acid,BH+]
[Base,B]
(7.41)
pH of the buffer solution can be calculated
by using the equation pH + pOH =14.
We know that pH + pOH = pKw  and
pKa + pKb = pKw. On putting these values in
equation (7.41) it takes the form as follows:
- pH =p
[Conjugate acid,BH ]
[Base,B]
pH= p
[Conjugate acid,BH ]
[Base,B]
(7.42)
If molar concentration of base and its
conjugate acid (cation) is same then pH of the
buffer solution will be same as pKa for the base.
pKa value for ammonia is 9.25; therefore a
buffer of pH close to 9.25 can be obtained by
taking ammonia solution and ammonium
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
chloride solution of same molar concentration.
For a buffer solution formed by ammonium
chloride and ammonium hydroxide, equation
(7.42) becomes:
[Conjugate acid,BH ]
[Base,B]
pH of the buffer solution is not affected by
dilution because ratio under the logarithmic
term remains unchanged.
7.13 SOLUBILITY
EQUILIBRIA
SPARINGLY SOLUBLE SALTS
We have already known that the solubility of
ionic solids in water varies a great deal. Some
of these (like calcium chloride) are so soluble
that they are hygroscopic in nature and even
absorb water vapour from atmosphere. Others
(such as lithium fluoride) have so little solubility
that they are commonly termed as insoluble.
The solubility depends on a number of factors
important amongst which are the lattice
enthalpy of the salt and the solvation enthalpy
of the ions in a solution. For a salt to dissolve
in a solvent the strong forces of attraction
between its ions (lattice enthalpy) must be
overcome by the ion-solvent interactions. The
solvation enthalpy of ions is referred to in terms
of solvation which is always negative i.e. energy
is released in the process of solvation. The
amount of solvation enthalpy depends on the
nature of the solvent. In case of a non-polar
(covalent) solvent, solvation enthalpy is small
and hence, not sufficient to overcome lattice
enthalpy of the salt. Consequently, the salt does
not dissolve in non-polar solvent. As a general
rule , for a salt to be able to dissolve in a
particular solvent its solvation enthalpy must
be greater than its lattice enthalpy so that the
latter may be overcome by former. Each salt has
its characteristic solubility which depends on
temperature. We classify salts on the basis of
their solubility in the following three categories.
Category I
Soluble
Solubility > 0.1M
Category II
Slightly
0.01M<Solubility< 0.1M
Soluble
Category III
Sparingly
Solubility < 0.01M
Soluble
We shall now consider the equilibrium
between the sparingly soluble ionic salt and
its saturated aqueous solution.
7.13.1 Solubility Product Constant
Let us now have a solid like barium sulphate
in contact with its saturated aqueous solution.
The equilibrium between the undisolved solid
and the ions in a saturated solution can be
represented by the equation:
BaSO4(s)
Ba2+(aq) + SO4
2–(aq),
The equilibrium constant is given by the
equation:
K = {[Ba2+][SO4
2–]} / [BaSO4]
For a pure solid substance the
concentration remains constant and we can
write
Ksp = K[BaSO4] = [Ba2+][SO4
(7.43)
We call Ksp the solubility product constant
or simply solubility product. The experimental
value of Ksp in above equation at 298K is
1.1 × 10
–10. This means that for solid barium
sulphate in equilibrium with its saturated
solution, the product of the concentrations of
barium and sulphate ions is equal to its
solubility
product
constant.
concentrations of the two ions will be equal to
the molar solubility of the barium sulphate. If
molar solubility is S, then
1.1 × 10–10 = (S)(S) = S2
or                         S = 1.05 × 10–5.
Thus, molar solubility of barium sulphate
will be equal to 1.05 × 10–5 mol L–1.
A salt may give on dissociation two or more
than two anions and cations carrying different
charges. For example, consider a salt like
zirconium phosphate of molecular formula
(Zr4+)3(PO4
3–)4. It dissociates into 3 zirconium
cations of charge +4 and 4 phosphate anions
of charge –3. If the molar solubility of
zirconium phosphate is S, then it can be seen
from the stoichiometry of the compound that
[Zr4+] = 3S and [PO4
3–] = 4S
and Ksp = (3S)3 (4S)4 = 6912 (S)7
or S = {Ksp / (33 × 44)}1/7 = (Ksp / 6912)1/7
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
A solid salt of the general formula
−with molar solubility S in equilibrium
with its saturated solution may be represented
by the equation:
MxXy(s)
p+(aq) + yX
q– (aq)
(where x × p+ = y × q–)
And its solubility product constant is given
Ksp   = [M
y = (xS)
x(yS)
(7.44)
= xx . yy . S(x + y)
S(x + y) = Ksp / xx . yy
S = (Ksp / xx . yy)1 / x + y                                         (7.45)
The term Ksp in equation is given by Qsp
(section 7.6.2) when the concentration of one
or more species is not the concentration under
equilibrium. Obviously under equilibrium
conditions Ksp = Qsp but otherwise it gives the
direction of the processes of precipitation or
dissolution. The solubility product constants
of a number of common salts at 298K are given
in Table 7.9.
Table 7.9 The Solubility Product Constants,
Ksp of Some Common Ionic Salts at
298K.
Problem 7.26
Calculate the solubility of A2X3 in pure
water, assuming that neither kind of ion
reacts with water. The solubility product
of A2X3, Ksp = 1.1 × 10–23.
Solution
A2X3 → 2A3+ + 3X2–
Ksp = [A3+]2 [X2–]3 = 1.1 × 10–23
If  S = solubility of A2X3, then
[A3+] = 2S;  [X2–] = 3S
therefore, Ksp = (2S)2(3S)3 = 108S5
= 1.1 × 10–23
thus, S5 = 1 × 10–25
S = 1.0 × 10–5 mol/L.
Problem 7.27
The values of Ksp of two sparingly soluble
salts Ni(OH)2 and AgCN are 2.0 × 10–15
and 6 × 0–17 respectively. Which salt is
more soluble? Explain.
Solution
Ag+ + CN–
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Ksp =  [Ag+][CN–] = 6 × 10–17
Ni(OH)2
Ni2+ + 2OH–
Ksp = [Ni2+][OH–]2 = 2 × 10–15
Let [Ag+] = S1, then [CN-] = S1
Let [Ni2+] = S2, then [OH–] = 2S2
2 = 6 × 10–17 , S1 = 7.8 × 10–9
(S2)(2S2)2 = 2 × 10–15, S2 = 0.58 × 10–4
Ni(OH)2 is more soluble than AgCN.
7.13.2 Common Ion Effect on Solubility
of Ionic Salts
It is expected from Le Chatelier’s principle that
if we increase the concentration of any one of
the ions, it should combine with the ion of its
opposite charge and some of the salt will be
precipitated till once again Ksp = Qsp. Similarly,
if the concentration of one of the ions is
decreased, more salt will dissolve to increase
the concentration of both the ions till once
again Ksp = Qsp. This is applicable even to
soluble salts like sodium chloride except that
due to higher concentrations of the ions, we
use their activities instead of their molarities
in the expression for Qsp. Thus if we take a
saturated solution of sodium chloride and
pass HCl gas through it, then sodium chloride
is precipitated due to increased concentration
(activity) of chloride ion available from the
dissociation of HCl. Sodium chloride thus
obtained is of very high purity and we can get
rid of impurities like sodium and magnesium
sulphates. The common ion effect is also used
for almost complete precipitation of a particular
ion as its sparingly soluble salt, with very low
value of solubility product for gravimetric
estimation. Thus we can precipitate silver ion
as silver chloride, ferric ion as its hydroxide
(or hydrated ferric oxide) and barium ion as
its sulphate for quantitative estimations.
Dissolution of S mol/L of Ni(OH)2 provides
S mol/L of Ni2+ and 2S mol/L of OH–, but
the total concentration of OH– = (0.10 +
2S) mol/L because the solution already
contains 0.10 mol/L of OH– from NaOH.
Ksp = 2.0 × 10–15 = [Ni2+] [OH–]2
= (S) (0.10 + 2S)2
As Ksp is small, 2S << 0.10,
thus, (0.10 + 2S) ≈ 0.10
Hence,
2.0 × 10–15 = S (0.10)2
S = 2.0 × 10–13 M = [Ni2+]
The solubility of salts of weak acids like
phosphates increases at lower pH. This is
because at lower pH the concentration of the
anion decreases due to its protonation. This
in turn increase the solubility of the salt so
that Ksp = Qsp. We have to satisfy two equilibria
simultaneously i.e.,
Ksp = [M+] [X–],
[X –] / [HX] = Ka / [H+]
Taking inverse of both side and adding 1
we get
] + 
Now, again taking inverse, we get
[X–] / {[X–] + [HX]} = f = Ka / (Ka + [H+]) and it
can be seen that ‘f’ decreases as pH decreases. If
S is the solubility of the salt at a given pH then
Ksp = [S] [f S] = S2 {Ka / (Ka + [H+])} and
S = {Ksp ([H+] + Ka ) / Ka }1/2
(7.46)
Thus solubility S increases with increase
in [H+] or decrease in pH.
Problem 7.28
Calculate the molar solubility of Ni(OH)2
in 0.10 M NaOH. The ionic product of
Ni(OH)2 is 2.0 × 10–15.
Solution
Let the solubility of Ni(OH)2 be equal to S.
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
SUMMARY
When the number of molecules leaving the liquid to vapour equals the number of
molecules returning to the liquid from vapour, equilibrium is said to be attained and is
dynamic in nature. Equilibrium can be established for both physical and chemical
processes and at this stage rate of forward and reverse reactions are equal. Equilibrium
constant, Kc is expressed as the concentration of products divided by reactants, each
term raised to the stoichiometric coefficient.
For reaction, a A + b B        c C +d D
Kc = [C]c[D]d/[A]a[B]b
Equilibrium constant has constant value at a fixed temperature and at this stage
all the macroscopic properties such as concentration, pressure, etc. become constant.
For a gaseous reaction equilibrium constant is expressed as Kp and is written by replacing
concentration terms by partial pressures in Kc expression. The direction of reaction can
be predicted by reaction quotient Qc which is equal to Kc at equilibrium. Le Chatelier’s
principle states that the change in any factor such as temperature, pressure,
concentration, etc. will cause the equilibrium to shift in such a direction so as to reduce
or counteract the effect of the change. It can be used to study the effect of various
factors such as temperature, concentration, pressure, catalyst and inert gases on the
direction of equilibrium and to control the yield of products by controlling these factors.
Catalyst does not effect the equilibrium composition of a reaction mixture but increases
the rate of chemical reaction by making available a new lower energy pathway for
conversion of reactants to products and vice-versa.
All substances that conduct electricity in aqueous solutions are called electrolytes.
Acids, bases and salts are electrolytes and the conduction of electricity by their aqueous
solutions is due to anions and cations produced by the dissociation or ionization of
electrolytes in aqueous solution. The strong electrolytes are completely dissociated. In
weak electrolytes there is equilibrium between the ions and the unionized electrolyte
molecules. According to Arrhenius, acids give hydrogen ions while bases produce
hydroxyl ions in their aqueous solutions. Brönsted-Lowry on the other hand, defined
an acid as a proton donor and a base as a proton acceptor. When a Brönsted-Lowry
acid reacts with a base, it produces its conjugate base and a conjugate acid corresponding
to the base with which it reacts. Thus a conjugate pair of acid-base differs only by one
proton. Lewis further generalised the definition of an acid as an electron pair acceptor
and a base as an electron pair donor. The expressions for ionization (equilibrium)
constants of weak acids (Ka) and weak bases (Kb) are developed using Arrhenius definition.
The degree of ionization and its dependence on concentration and common ion are
discussed. The pH scale (pH = -log[H+]) for the hydrogen ion concentration (activity) has
been introduced and extended to other quantities (pOH = – log[OH–]) ; pKa = –log[Ka] ;
pKb = –log[Kb]; and pKw = –log[Kw] etc.). The ionization of water has been considered and
we note that the equation: pH + pOH = pKw is always satisfied. The salts of strong acid
and weak base, weak acid and strong base, and weak acid and weak base undergo
hydrolysis in aqueous solution.The definition of buffer solutions,  and their importance
are discussed briefly. The solubility equilibrium of sparingly soluble salts is discussed
and the equilibrium constant is introduced as solubility product constant (Ksp). Its
relationship with solubility of the salt is established. The conditions of precipitation of
the salt from their solutions or their dissolution in water are worked out. The role of
common ion and the solubility of sparingly soluble salts is also discussed.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES FOR STUDENTS REGARDING THIS UNIT
(a) The student may use pH paper in determining the pH of fresh juices of various
vegetables and fruits, soft drinks, body fluids and also that of water samples available.
(b) The pH paper may also be used to determine the pH of different salt solutions and
from that he/she may determine if these are formed from strong/weak acids and
bases.
(c) They may prepare some buffer solutions by mixing the solutions of sodium acetate
and acetic acid and determine their pH using pH paper.
(d) They may be provided with different indicators to observe their colours in solutions
of varying pH.
(e) They may perform some acid-base titrations using indicators.
They may observe common ion effect on the solubility of sparingly soluble salts.
(g) If pH meter is available in their school, they may measure the pH with it and compare
the results obtained with that of the pH paper.
EXERCISES
A liquid is in equilibrium with its vapour in a sealed container at a fixed
temperature. The volume of the container is suddenly increased.
What is the initial effect of the change on vapour pressure?
How do rates of evaporation and condensation change initially?
What happens when equilibrium is restored finally and what will be the final
vapour pressure?
What is Kc for the following equilibrium when the equilibrium concentration of
each substance is: [SO2]= 0.60M, [O2] = 0.82M and [SO3] = 1.90M ?
2SO2(g) + O2(g)
2SO3(g)
At a certain temperature and total pressure of 105Pa, iodine vapour contains 40%
by volume of I atoms
I2 (g)
2I (g)
Calculate Kp for the equilibrium.
Write the expression for the equilibrium constant, Kc for each of the following
reactions:
2NOCl (g)
2NO (g) + Cl2 (g)
2Cu(NO3)2 (s)
2CuO (s) + 4NO2 (g) + O2 (g)
(iii)
CH3COOC2H5(aq) + H2O(l)
CH3COOH (aq) + C2H5OH (aq)
Fe3+ (aq) + 3OH– (aq)
Fe(OH)3 (s)
I2 (s) + 5F2
Find out the value of Kc for each of the following equilibria from the value of Kp:
2NOCl (g)
2NO (g) + Cl2 (g);  Kp= 1.8 × 10–2 at 500 K
CaCO3 (s)
CaO(s) + CO2(g);  Kp= 167 at 1073 K
For the following equilibrium, Kc= 6.3 × 1014 at 1000 K
NO (g) + O3 (g)
NO2 (g) + O2 (g)
Both the forward and reverse reactions in the equilibrium are elementary
bimolecular reactions. What is Kc, for the reverse reaction?
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
Explain why pure liquids and solids can be ignored while writing the equilibrium
constant expression?
Reaction between N2 and O2– takes place as follows:
2N2 (g) + O2 (g)
2N2O (g)
If a mixture of 0.482 mol N2 and 0.933 mol of O2 is placed in a 10 L reaction
vessel and allowed to form N2O at a temperature for which Kc= 2.0 × 10–37,
determine the composition of equilibrium mixture.
Nitric oxide reacts with Br2 and gives nitrosyl bromide as per reaction given
below:
2NO (g) + Br2 (g)
2NOBr (g)
When 0.087 mol of NO and 0.0437 mol of Br2 are mixed in a closed container at
constant temperature, 0.0518 mol of NOBr is obtained at equilibrium. Calculate
equilibrium amount of NO and Br2 .
At 450K, Kp= 2.0 × 1010/bar for the given reaction at equilibrium.
2SO2(g) + O2(g)
2SO3 (g)
What is Kc at this temperature ?
A sample of HI(g) is placed in flask at a pressure of 0.2 atm. At equilibrium the
partial pressure of HI(g) is 0.04 atm. What is Kp for the given equilibrium ?
2HI (g)
H2 (g) + I2 (g)
A mixture of 1.57 mol of N2, 1.92 mol of H2 and 8.13 mol of NH3 is introduced into
a 20 L reaction vessel at 500 K. At this temperature, the equilibrium constant,
Kc for the reaction N2 (g) + 3H2 (g)
2NH3 (g) is 1.7 × 102. Is the reaction mixture
at equilibrium? If not, what is the direction of the net reaction?
The equilibrium constant expression for a gas reaction is,
Kc = [
Write the balanced chemical equation corresponding to this expression.
One mole of H2O and one mole of CO are taken in 10 L vessel and heated to
725 K. At equilibrium 40% of water (by mass) reacts with CO according to the
equation,
H2O (g) + CO (g)
H2 (g) + CO2 (g)
Calculate the equilibrium constant for the reaction.
At 700 K, equilibrium constant for the reaction:
H2 (g) + I2 (g)
2HI (g)
is 54.8. If 0.5 mol L–1 of HI(g) is present at equilibrium at 700 K, what are the
concentration of H2(g) and I2(g) assuming that we initially started with HI(g) and
allowed it to reach equilibrium at 700K?
What is the equilibrium concentration of each of the substances in the
equilibrium when the initial concentration of ICl was 0.78 M ?
2ICl (g)
I2 (g) + Cl2 (g);   Kc = 0.14
Kp = 0.04 atm at 899 K for the equilibrium shown below. What is the equilibrium
concentration of C2H6 when it is placed in a flask at 4.0 atm pressure and allowed
to come to equilibrium?
C2H6 (g)
C2H4 (g) + H2 (g)
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Ethyl acetate is formed by the reaction between ethanol and acetic acid and the
equilibrium is represented as:
CH3COOH (l) + C2H5OH (l)
CH3COOC2H5 (l) + H2O (l)
Write the concentration ratio (reaction quotient), Qc,  for this reaction (note:
water is not in excess and is not a solvent in this reaction)
(ii) At 293 K, if one starts with 1.00 mol of acetic acid and 0.18 mol of ethanol,
there is 0.171 mol of ethyl acetate in the final equilibrium mixture. Calculate
the equilibrium constant.
(iii) Starting with 0.5 mol of ethanol and 1.0 mol of acetic acid and maintaining
it at 293 K, 0.214 mol of ethyl acetate is found after sometime. Has equilibrium
been reached?
A sample of pure PCl5 was introduced into an evacuated vessel at 473 K. After
equilibrium was attained, concentration of PCl 5 was found to be
0.5 × 10–1 mol L–1. If value of Kc is 8.3 × 10–3, what are the concentrations of PCl3
and Cl2 at equilibrium?
PCl5 (g)
PCl3 (g)  +   Cl2(g)
One of the reaction that takes place in producing steel from iron ore is the
reduction of iron(II) oxide by carbon monoxide to give iron metal and CO2.
FeO (s) + CO (g)
Fe (s) + CO2 (g);
Kp = 0.265 atm at 1050K
What are the equilibrium partial pressures of CO and CO2 at 1050 K if the
initial partial pressures are:  pCO= 1.4 atm and
= 0.80 atm?
Equilibrium constant, Kc for the reaction
N2 (g) + 3H2 (g)
2NH3 (g) at 500 K is 0.061
At a particular time, the analysis shows that composition of the reaction mixture
is 3.0 mol L–1 N2, 2.0 mol L–1 H2 and 0.5 mol L–1 NH3. Is the reaction at equilibrium?
If not in which direction does the reaction tend to proceed to reach equilibrium?
Bromine monochloride, BrCl decomposes into bromine and chlorine and reaches
the equilibrium:
2BrCl (g)
Br2 (g) + Cl2 (g)
for which Kc= 32 at 500 K. If initially pure BrCl is present at a concentration of
3.3 × 10–3 mol L–1, what is its molar concentration in the mixture at equilibrium?
At 1127 K and 1 atm pressure, a gaseous mixture of CO and CO2 in equilibrium
with soild carbon has 90.55% CO by mass
C (s) + CO2 (g)
2CO (g)
Calculate Kc for this reaction at the above temperature.
Calculate a) ∆G
0 and b) the equilibrium constant for the formation of NO2 from
NO and O2 at 298K
NO (g) + ½ O2 (g)
NO2 (g)
where
0 (NO2) = 52.0 kJ/mol
0 (NO) = 87.0 kJ/mol
0 (O2) = 0 kJ/mol
Does the number of moles of reaction products increase, decrease or remain
same when each of the following equilibria is subjected to a decrease in pressure
by increasing the volume?
PCl5 (g)
PCl3 (g) + Cl2 (g)
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
CaO (s) + CO2 (g)          CaCO3 (s)
3Fe (s) + 4H2O (g)          Fe3O4 (s) + 4H2 (g)
Which of the following reactions will get affected by increasing the pressure?
Also, mention whether change will cause the reaction to go into forward or
backward direction.
COCl2 (g)
CO (g) + Cl2 (g)
CH4 (g) + 2S2 (g)
CS2 (g) + 2H2S (g)
(iii)
CO2 (g) + C (s)
2CO (g)
2H2 (g) + CO (g)
CH3OH (g)
CaCO3 (s)
CaO (s) + CO2 (g)
4 NH3 (g) + 5O2 (g)
4NO (g)  +  6H2O(g)
The equilibrium constant for the following reaction is 1.6 ×105 at 1024K
H2(g) + Br2(g)
2HBr(g)
Find the equilibrium pressure of all gases if 10.0 bar of HBr is introduced into a
sealed container at 1024K.
Dihydrogen gas is obtained from natural gas by partial oxidation with steam as
per following endothermic reaction:
CH4 (g) + H2O (g)
CO (g) + 3H2 (g)
Write as expression for Kp for the above reaction.
How will the values of Kp and composition of equilibrium mixture be affected
increasing the pressure
increasing the temperature
(iii) using a catalyst ?
Describe the effect of :
addition of H2
addition of CH3OH
removal of CO
removal of CH3OH
on the equilibrium of the reaction:
2H2(g) + CO (g)
CH3OH (g)
At 473 K, equilibrium constant Kc for decomposition of phosphorus pentachloride,
PCl5 is 8.3 ×10-3. If decomposition is depicted as,
PCl5 (g)
PCl3 (g) + Cl2 (g)
0 = 124.0 kJ mol–1
write an expression for Kc for the reaction.
what is the value of Kc for the reverse reaction at the same temperature ?
what would be the effect on Kc if (i) more PCl5 is added (ii) pressure is increased
(iii) the temperature is increased ?
Dihydrogen gas used in Haber’s process is produced by reacting methane from
natural gas with high temperature steam. The first stage of two stage reaction
involves the formation of CO and H2. In second stage, CO formed in first stage is
reacted with more steam in water gas shift reaction,
CO (g) + H2O (g)
CO2 (g) + H2 (g)
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
If a reaction vessel at 400 °C is charged with an equimolar mixture of CO and
steam such that pco = pH2O = 4.0 bar, what will be the partial pressure of H2 at
equilibrium? Kp= 10.1 at 400°C
Predict which of the following reaction will have appreciable concentration of
reactants and products:
a) Cl2 (g)
2Cl (g)
Kc = 5 ×10–39
b) Cl2 (g) + 2NO (g)
2NOCl (g)
Kc = 3.7 × 108
c) Cl2 (g) + 2NO2 (g)
2NO2Cl (g)
Kc = 1.8
The value of Kc for the reaction 3O2 (g)
2O3 (g) is 2.0 ×10–50 at 25°C. If the
equilibrium concentration of O2 in air at 25°C is 1.6 ×10–2, what is the
concentration of O3?
The reaction, CO(g) + 3H2(g)
CH4(g) + H2O(g)
is at equilibrium at 1300 K in a 1L flask. It also contain 0.30 mol of CO, 0.10 mol
of H2 and 0.02 mol of H2O and an unknown amount of CH4 in the flask. Determine
the concentration of CH4 in the mixture. The equilibrium constant, Kc for the
reaction at the given temperature is 3.90.
What is meant by the conjugate acid-base pair? Find the conjugate acid/base
for the following species:
HNO2, CN–, HClO4, F –, OH–, CO3
2–, and S2–
Which of the followings are Lewis acids? H2O, BF3, H+, and NH4
What will be the conjugate bases for the Brönsted acids: HF, H2SO4 and HCO–
Write the conjugate acids for the following Brönsted bases: NH2
–, NH3 and HCOO–.
The species: H2O, HCO3
–, HSO4
– and NH3 can act both as Brönsted acids and
bases. For each case give the corresponding conjugate acid and base.
Classify the following species into Lewis acids and Lewis bases and show how
these act as Lewis acid/base: (a) OH– (b) F– (c) H+ (d) BCl3 .
The concentration of hydrogen ion in a sample of soft drink is 3.8 × 10–3 M. what
is its pH?
The pH of a sample of vinegar is 3.76. Calculate the concentration of hydrogen
ion in it.
The ionization constant of HF, HCOOH and HCN at 298K are 6.8 × 10–4,
1.8 × 10–4 and 4.8 × 10–9 respectively. Calculate the ionization constants of the
corresponding conjugate base.
The ionization constant of phenol is 1.0 × 10–10. What is the concentration of
phenolate ion in 0.05 M solution of phenol? What will be its degree of ionization
if the solution is also 0.01M in sodium phenolate?
The first ionization constant of H2S is 9.1 × 10–8. Calculate the concentration of
– ion in its 0.1M solution. How will this concentration be affected if the solution
is 0.1M in HCl also ? If the second dissociation constant of H2S is
1.2 × 10–13, calculate the concentration of S2– under both conditions.
The ionization constant of acetic acid is 1.74 × 10–5. Calculate the degree of
dissociation of acetic acid in its 0.05 M solution. Calculate the concentration of
acetate ion in the solution and its pH.
It has been found that the pH of a 0.01M solution of an organic acid is 4.15.
Calculate the concentration of the anion, the ionization constant of the acid
and its pKa.
2018-19
EQUILIBRIUM
Assuming complete dissociation, calculate the pH of the following solutions:
(a) 0.003 M HCl (b) 0.005 M NaOH (c) 0.002 M HBr (d) 0.002 M KOH
Calculate the pH of the following solutions:
2 g of TlOH dissolved in water to give 2 litre of solution.
0.3 g of Ca(OH)2 dissolved in water to give 500 mL of solution.
0.3 g of NaOH dissolved in water to give 200 mL of solution.
1mL of 13.6 M HCl is diluted with water to give 1 litre of solution.
The degree of ionization of a 0.1M bromoacetic acid solution is 0.132. Calculate
the pH of the solution and the pKa of bromoacetic acid.
The pH of 0.005M codeine (C18H21NO3) solution is 9.95. Calculate its ionization
constant and pKb.
What is the pH of 0.001M aniline solution ? The ionization constant of aniline
can be taken from Table 7.7. Calculate the degree of ionization of aniline in the
solution. Also calculate the ionization constant of the conjugate acid of aniline.
Calculate the degree of ionization of 0.05M acetic acid if its pKa value is 4.74.
How is the degree of dissociation affected when its solution also contains
(a) 0.01M (b) 0.1M in HCl ?
The ionization constant of dimethylamine is 5.4 × 10–4. Calculate its degree of
ionization in its 0.02M solution. What percentage of dimethylamine is ionized if
the solution is also 0.1M in NaOH?
Calculate the hydrogen ion concentration in the following biological fluids whose
pH are given below:
(a) Human muscle-fluid, 6.83
Human stomach fluid, 1.2
(c) Human blood, 7.38
Human saliva, 6.4.
The pH of milk, black coffee, tomato juice, lemon juice and egg white are 6.8,
5.0, 4.2, 2.2 and 7.8 respectively. Calculate corresponding hydrogen ion
concentration in each.
If 0.561 g of KOH is dissolved in water to give 200 mL of solution at 298 K.
Calculate the concentrations of potassium, hydrogen and hydroxyl ions. What
is its pH?
The solubility of Sr(OH)2 at 298 K is 19.23 g/L of solution. Calculate the
concentrations of strontium and hydroxyl ions and the pH of the solution.
The ionization constant of propanoic acid is 1.32 × 10–5. Calculate the degree of
ionization of the acid in its 0.05M solution and also its pH. What will be its
degree of ionization if the solution is 0.01M in HCl also?
The pH of 0.1M solution of cyanic acid (HCNO) is 2.34. Calculate the ionization
constant of the acid and its degree of ionization in the solution.
The ionization constant of nitrous acid is 4.5 × 10–4. Calculate the pH of 0.04 M
sodium nitrite solution and also its degree of hydrolysis.
A 0.02M solution of pyridinium hydrochloride has pH = 3.44. Calculate the
ionization constant of pyridine.
Predict if the solutions of the following salts are neutral, acidic or basic:
NaCl, KBr, NaCN, NH4NO3, NaNO2 and KF
The ionization constant of chloroacetic acid is 1.35 × 10–3. What will be the pH of
0.1M acid and its 0.1M sodium salt solution?
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Ionic product of water at 310 K is 2.7 × 10–14. What is the pH of neutral water at
this temperature?
Calculate the pH of the resultant mixtures:
a)   10 mL of 0.2M Ca(OH)2 + 25 mL of 0.1M HCl
b)   10 mL of 0.01M H2SO4 + 10 mL of 0.01M Ca(OH)2
c)   10 mL of 0.1M H2SO4 + 10 mL of 0.1M KOH
Determine the solubilities of silver chromate, barium chromate, ferric hydroxide,
lead chloride and mercurous iodide at 298K from their solubility product
constants given in Table 7.9. Determine also the molarities of individual ions.
The solubility product constant of Ag2CrO4 and AgBr are 1.1 × 10–12 and
5.0 × 10–13 respectively. Calculate the ratio of the molarities of their saturated
solutions.
Equal volumes of 0.002 M solutions of sodium iodate and cupric chlorate are
mixed together. Will it lead to precipitation of copper iodate? (For cupric iodate
Ksp = 7.4 × 10–8 ).
The ionization constant of benzoic acid is 6.46 × 10–5 and Ksp for silver benzoate
is 2.5 × 10–13. How many times is silver benzoate more soluble in a buffer of pH
3.19 compared to its solubility in pure water?
What is the maximum concentration of equimolar solutions of ferrous sulphate
and sodium sulphide so that when mixed in equal volumes, there is no
precipitation of iron sulphide? (For iron sulphide, Ksp = 6.3 × 10–18).
What is the minimum volume of water required to dissolve 1g of calcium sulphate
at 298 K? (For calcium sulphate, Ksp is 9.1 × 10–6).
The concentration of sulphide ion in 0.1M HCl solution saturated with hydrogen
sulphide is 1.0 × 10–19 M. If 10 mL of this is added to 5 mL of 0.04 M solution of
the following: FeSO4, MnCl2, ZnCl2 and CdCl2. in which of these solutions
precipitation will take place?
2018-19
ANSWERS
UNIT 1
~ 15 × 10–4 g , 1.25 × 10–4 m
4.8 × 10–3
2.34 × 105
(iii) 8.008 × 103
(iv) 5.000 × 102
(v) 6.0012
(iii) 4
(iv) 3
(v) 4
(vi) 5
(iii) 0.0460
(iv) 2810
(a) law of multiple proportion
(i) Ans : (106 mm, 1015 pm)
(ii) Ans : (10–6 kg, 106 ng)
(iii) Ans : (10–3 L, 10–3 dm3)
6.00 × 10–1 m =0.600 m
B is limiting
A is limiting
(iii) Stoichiometric mixture –No
(iv) B is limiting
(v) A is limiting
2.43 × 103 g
(iii) Hydrogen will remain unreacted; 5.72 × 102g
Ten volumes
2.87 × 10–11m
1.515 × 10–11 m
(iii)
2.5365 × 10–2kg
1.99265 × 10–23g
(iii)
39.948 g mol–1
3.131 × 1025  atoms
13 atoms
(iii)
7.8286 × 1024 atoms
Empirical formula CH, molar mass 26.0 g mol–1, molecular formula C2H2
0.94 g CaCO3
8.40 g HCl
UNIT 2
1.099 × 1027
electrons (ii) 5.48 × 10–7 kg, 9.65 × 104C
6.022 × 1024electrons
(ii) (a)  2.4088 × 1021 neutrons(b)  4.0347 × 10–6 kg
(iii) (a)  1.2044 × 1022 protons
(b)  2.015  × 10–5 kg
7,6: 8,8: 12,12: 30,26: 50, 38
(ii) U
(iii) Be
5.17 × 1014 s–1, 1.72 × 106m–1
1.988 × 10–18 J
(ii) 3.98 × 10–15 J
Answer to Some Selected Problems
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
6.0 × 10–2 m,  5.0 × 109 s–1 and  16.66 m–1
2.012 × 1016 photons
(i) 4.97 × 10–19 J (3.10 eV); (ii) 0.97 eV
(iii) 5.84 × 105 m s–1
494 kJ mol–1
7.18 × 1019s–1
4.41 × 1014s–1, 2.91 × 10–19J
486 nm
8.72 × 10–20J
15 emission lines
8.72 × 10–20J
(ii) 1.3225 nm
1.523 × 106 m–1
2.08 × 10–11 ergs, 950 
3647
3.55 × 10–11m
8967
Na+, Mg2+, Ca2+; Ar, S2– and  K+
(i)  (a)  1s2   (b)  1s2 2s2 2p6;   (c)  1s22s22p6   (d)  1s22s22p6
n = 5
n = 3; l = 2; ml = –2, –1, 0, +1, +2 (any one value)
(i) 29 protons
1, 2, 15
(i)   l
–1,0,+1
–2,–1,0,+1,+2
(ii) l  = 2; m1=–2, –1,0,+1,+2
(iii) 2s, 2p
(a) 1s,   (b)  3p,  (c)  4d  and  (d)  4f
(a), (c) and (e) are not possible
(a) 16 electrons   (b)  2 electrons
n = 2 to n = 1
8.72 × 10–18J per atom
1.33 × 109
0.06 nm
(a) 1.3 × 102 pm
(b) 6.15 × 107 pm
More number of K–particles will pass as the nucleus of the lighter atoms is small,
smaller number of K–particles will be deflected as a number of positve charges is
less than on the lighter nuclei.
For a given element the number of prontons is the same for the isotopes, whereas
the mass number can be different for the given atomic number.
2018-19
ANSWERS
17 Cl−
Cosmic rays  > X–rays > amber colour > microwave > FM
3.3 × 106 J
(a) 4.87 × 1014 s–1
(b) 9.0 × 109 m
(c) 32.27 × 10–20 J
(d) 6.2 × 1018 quanta
8.28  × 10–10 J
3.45 × 10–22 J
(a) Threshold wave length (b) Threshold frequency of radiation
652.46 nm
4.598 ×1014 s–1
(c) Kinetic energy of ejected photoelectron
9.29 ×10–20 J, Velocity of photoelectron 4.516 × 105 ms–1
530.9 nm
4.48 eV
7.6 × 103 eV
infrared, 5
434 nm
455 pm
494.5 ms–1
332 pm
1.516 × 10–38 m
Cannot be defined as the actual magnitude is smaller than uncertainity.
(v) < (ii) = (iv) < (vi) = (iii) < (i)
(ii) 4d
(iii) 3p
(a) 3
(b) 2
(c) 6
(d) 4
(e) zero
UNIT 5
2.5 bar
0.8 bar
70 g/mol
MB = 4MA
203.2 mL
8.314 × 104 Pa
1.8 bar
3g/dm3
1249.8 g mol–1
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
4.2154 × 1023 electrons
1.90956 × 106 year
56.025 bar
3811.1 kg
5.05 L
40 g mol–1
0.8 bar
UNIT 6
(iii)
(iii)
q = + 701 J
w = – 394 J, since work is done by the system
∆U =  307 J
–743.939 kJ
1.067 kJ
∆H = –7.151 kJ mol–1
– 314.8 kJ
∆rH = –778 kJ
– 46.2 kJ mol–1
– 239 kJ mol–1
326 kJ mol–1
∆S > 0
2000 K
∆H is negative (bond energy is released) and ∆S is negative (There is less
randomness among the molecules than among the atoms)
0.164 kJ,  the reaction is not spontaneous.
–5.744 kJ mol–1
NO(g) is unstable, but NO2(g) is formed.
qsurr = + 286 kJ mol–1
∆Ssurr  = 959.73 J K–1
UNIT 7
12.229
2.67 x 104
(i) 4.33 × 10–4 (ii) 1.90
1.59 × 10–15
[N2] = 0.0482 molL–1, [O2] = 0.0933 molL–1, [N2O] = 6.6 × 10–21 molL–1
2018-19
ANSWERS
0.0352mol of NO and 0.0178mol of Br2
7.47 × 1011 M–1
Qc = 2.379 × 103. No, reaction is not at equilibrium.
0.068 molL–1 each of H2 and I2
[I2] = [Cl2] = 0.167 M, [ICl] = 0.446 M
[C2H6]eq = 3.62 atm
(i) [CH3COOC2H5][H2O] / [CH3COOH][C2H5OH]
(ii) 3.92  (iii) value of Qc is less than Kc therefore equilibrium is not attained.
0.02molL–1 for both.
[PCO] = 1.739atm, [PCO2] = 0.461atm.
No, the reaction proceeds to form more products.
3 × 10–4 molL–1
0.149
a) – 35.0kJ, b) 1.365 × 106
[PH2]eq = [PBr2]eq = 2.5 × 10–2bar, [PHBr] = 10.0 bar
b) 120.48
[H2]eq = 0.96 bar
2.86 × 10–28 M
5.85x10–2
–, HCN, ClO4, HF, H2O, HCO3
–, HS–
BF3, H+, NH4
F–, HSO4
–, CO3
NH3, NH4
+, HCOOH
1.7 x 10–4M
–= 1.5 x 10–11, HCOO–= 5.6 × 10–11, CN–= 2.08 x 10–6
[phenolate ion]= 2.2 × 10–6, α = 4.47 × 10–5 , α in sodium phenolate = 10–8
[HS–]= 9.54 x 10–5, in 0.1M HCl [HS–] = 9.1 × 10–8M, [S2–] = 1.2 × 10–13M, in 0.1M
HCl [S2–]= 1.09 × 10–19M
[Ac–]= 0.00093, pH= 3.03
[A–] = 7.08 x10–5M, Ka= 5.08 × 10–7, pKa= 6.29
a) 2.52 b) 11.70 c) 2.70 d) 11.30
a) 11.65 b) 12.21 c) 12.57 c) 1.87
pH = 1.88, pKa = 2.70
Kb = 1.6 × 10–6, pKb = 5.8
α = 6.53 × 10–4, Ka = 2.35 × 10–5
a) 0.0018 b) 0.00018
α = 0.0054
a) 1.48 × 10–7M,    b) 0.063     c) 4.17 × 10–8M     d) 3.98 × 10–7
a) 1.5 × 10–7M,      b) 10–5M,    c) 6.31 × 10–5M     d) 6.31 × 10–3M
[K+] = [OH–] = 0.05M, [H+] = 2.0 × 10–13M
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
[Sr2+] = 0.1581M, [OH–] = 0.3162M , pH = 13.50
α = 1.63 × 10–2, pH = 3.09. In presence of 0.01M HCl, α = 1.32 × 10–3
Ka = 2.09 × 10–4 and degree of ionization = 0.0457
pH = 7.97. Degree of hydrolysis = 2.36 × 10–5
Kb = 1.5 × 10–9
NaCl, KBr solutions are neutral, NaCN, NaNO2 and KF solutions are basic and
NH4NO3 solution is acidic.
(a) pH of acid solution= 1.9
(b) pH of its salt solution= 7.9
pH = 6.78
a) 12.6    b) 7.00    c) 1.3
Silver chromate S= 0.65 × 10–4M; Molarity of Ag+ = 1.30 x 10–4M
Molarity of CrO4
2– = 0.65 × 10–4M; Barium Chromate S = 1.1 × 10–5M; Molarity of
Ba2+ and CrO4
2– each is 1.1 × 10–5M; Ferric Hydroxide S = 1.39 × 10–10M;
Molarity of Fe3+ = 1.39 × 10–10M; Molarity of [OH–] = 4.17 × 10–10M
Lead Chloride S = 1.59 × 10–2M; Molarity of Pb2+ = 1.59 × 10–2M
Molarity of Cl– = 3.18 × 10–2M; Mercurous Iodide S = 2.24 × 10–10M;
Molarity of Hg2
2+ = 2.24 × 10–10M and molarity of I
– = 4.48 × 10–10M
Silver chromate is more soluble and the ratio of their molarities = 91.9
No precipitate
Silver benzoate is 3.317 times more soluble at lower pH
The highest molarity for the solution is 2.5 × 10–9M
2.43 litre of water
Precipitation will take place in cadmium chloride solution
2018-19
APPENDICES
Metre (m): The metre is the length of path travelled by light in vacuum during a time
interval of 1/299 792 458 of a second (17th CGPM, 1983).
Kilogram (kg): The kilogram is the unit of mass; it is equal to the mass of the
international prototype of the kilogram (3rd CGPM, 1901).
Second (s): The second is the duration of 9192631770 periods of the radiation
corresponding to the transition between the two hyperfine levels of the ground state
of the caesium-133 atom (13th CGPM, 1967).
Ampere (A): The ampere is that constant current which, if maintained in two straight
parallel conductors of infinite length, of negligible circular cross-section, and placed
1 metre apart in vacuum, would produce between these conductors a force equal to
2 × 10-7 Newton per metre of length (9th CGPM, 1948).
Kelvin (K):  The kelvin, unit of thermodynamic temperature, is the fraction 1/273.16
of the thermodynamic temperature of the triple point of water (13th CGPM, 1967).
Mole (mol): The mole is the amount of substance of a system which contains as
many elementary entities as there are atoms in 0.012 kilogram of carbon-12.  When
the mole is used, the elementary entities must be specified and may be atoms,
molecules, ions, electrons, other particles, or specified groups of such particles
(14th CGPM, 1971).
Candela (cd): The candela is the luminous intensity, in a given direction, of a source
that emits monochromatic radiation of frequency 540 ×  1012 hertz and that has a
radiant intensity in that direction of (1/683) watt per steradian (16th CGPM, 1979).
(The symbols listed here are internationally agreed and should not be changed in
other languages or scripts).
Definitions of the SI Base Units
Appendix I
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Element
Symbol
Atomic
Molar
Number
mass/
(g mol–1)
Actinium
227.03
Aluminium
26.98
Americium
(243)
Antimony
121.75
Argon
39.95
Arsenic
74.92
Astatine
Barium
137.34
Berkelium
(247)
Beryllium
Bismuth
208.98
Bohrium
(264)
Boron
10.81
Bromine
79.91
Cadmium
112.40
Caesium
132.91
Calcium
40.08
Californium
251.08
Carbon
12.01
Cerium
140.12
Chlorine
35.45
Chromium
52.00
Cobalt
58.93
Copper
63.54
Curium
247.07
Dubnium
(263)
Dysprosium
162.50
Einsteinium
(252)
Erbium
167.26
Europium
151.96
Fermium
(257.10)
Fluorine
19.00
Francium
(223)
Gadolinium
157.25
Gallium
69.72
Germanium
72.61
196.97
Hafnium
178.49
Hassium
(269)
Helium
Holmium
164.93
Hydrogen
1.0079
Indium
114.82
Iodine
126.90
Iridium
192.2
55.85
Krypton
83.80
Lanthanum
138.91
Lawrencium
(262.1)
207.19
Lithium
Lutetium
174.96
Magnesium
24.31
Manganese
54.94
Meitneium
(268)
Mendelevium
258.10
Mercury
200.59
Molybdenum
95.94
Neodymium
144.24
20.18
Neptunium
(237.05)
Nickel
58.71
Niobium
92.91
Nitrogen
14.0067
Nobelium
(259)
Osmium
190.2
Oxygen
16.00
Palladium
106.4
Phosphorus
30.97
Platinum
195.09
Plutonium
(244)
Polonium
Potassium
39.10
Praseodymium
140.91
Promethium
(145)
Protactinium
231.04
Radium
(226)
Radon
(222)
Rhenium
186.2
Rhodium
102.91
Rubidium
85.47
Ruthenium
101.07
Rutherfordium
(261)
Samarium
150.35
Scandium
44.96
Seaborgium
(266)
Selenium
78.96
Silicon
28.08
Silver
107.87
Sodium
22.99
Strontium
87.62
Sulphur
32.06
Tantalum
180.95
Technetium
(98.91)
Tellurium
127.60
Terbium
158.92
Thallium
204.37
Thorium
232.04
Thulium
168.93
118.69
Titanium
47.88
Tungsten
183.85
Ununbium
(277)
Ununnilium
(269)
Unununium
(272)
Uranium
238.03
Vanadium
50.94
Xenon
131.30
Ytterbium
173.04
Yttrium
88.91
65.37
Zirconium
91.22
Element
Symbol
Atomic
Molar
Number
mass/
(g mol–1)
The value given in parenthesis is the molar mass of the isotope of largest known half-life.
Elements, their Atomic Number and Molar Mass
Appendix II
2018-19
APPENDICES
Specific and Molar Heat Capacities for Some Substances at 298 K and
one Atmospheric Pressure
Substance
Specific Heat Capacity
Molar Heat Capacity
(J/g)
(J/mol)
0.720
water (liquid)
4.184
ammonia (gas)
hydrogen chloride
0.797
hydrogen bromide
0.360
ammonia (liquid)
ethyl alcohol (liquid)
113.16
ethylene glycol (liquid)
152.52
water (solid)
37.08
carbon tetrachloride (liquid)
0.861
132.59
chlorofluorocarbon (CCl
0.5980
72.35
ozone
0.817
chlorine
0.477
bromine
0.473
0.460
copper
0.385
aluminium
0.902
24.35
0.128
graphite
0.720
Molar Heat Capacities for Some Gases (J/mol)
Cp - Cv
Cp / Cv
Monatomic*
helium
argon
iodine
mercury
Diatomic†
hydrogen
oxygen
nitrogen
hydrogen chloride
carbon monoxide
Triatomic†
nitrous oxide
carbon dioxide
Polyatomic†
ethane
*Translational kinetic energy only.
†Translational, vibrational and rotational energy.
Appendix III
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Physical Constants
Quantity
Symbol
Traditional Units
SI Units
Acceleration of gravity
980.6 cm/s
9.806 m/s
Atomic mass unit (1/12
1.6606 × 10-24 g
1.6606 × 10-27 kg
the mass of 12C atom)
Avogadro  constant
6.022 ×1023
6.022 × 1023
particles/mol
particles/mol
Bohr radius
0.52918 
5.2918 × 10-11 m
5.2918 × 10-9 cm
Boltzmann constant
1.3807 × 10-16 erg/K
1.3807 × 10-23 J/K
Charge-to-mass
1.758820 ×l08 coulomb/g 1.7588 × 1011 C/kg
ratio of electron
Electronic charge
1.602176 × 10-19 coulomb
1.60219 × 10-19 C
4.8033 × 10-19 esu
Electron rest mass
9.109382 ×10-28 g
9.10952 ×10-31 kg
0.00054859 u
Faraday constant
96,487 coulombs/eq
96,487 C/mol e-
23.06 kcal/volt. eq
96,487 J/V.mol e-
Gas constant
0 8206
L atm
mol K
8 3145
kPa dm
mol K
mol K
8.3145 J/mol.K
Molar volume (STP)
22.710981 L/mol
22.710981 × 10-3 m3/mol
22.710981 dm3/mol
Neutron rest mass
1.674927 × 10-24 g
1.67495 × 10-27  kg
1.008665 u
Planck constant
6.6262 × 10-27 ergs
6.6262 ×  10-34 J s
Proton rest mass
1.6726216 ×10-24 g
1.6726 ×10-27 kg
1.007277 u
Rydberg constant
3.289 × 1015 cycles/s
1.0974 × 107 m-1
2.1799 × 10-11 erg
2.1799 × 10-18 J
Speed of light
2.9979 ×1010 cm/s
2.9979 × 108 m/s
(in a vacuum)
(186,281 miles/second)
π = 3.1416
2.303 R = 4.576 cal/mol  K = 19.15 J/mol K
e = 2.71828
2.303 RT (at 25°C) = 1364 cal/mol = 5709 J/mol
ln X = 2.303 log X
Appendix IV
2018-19
APPENDICES
Common Unit of Mass and Weight
1 pound = 453.59 grams
1 pound  = 453.59 grams = 0.45359 kilogram
1 kilogram = 1000 grams = 2.205 pounds
1 gram = 10 decigrams = 100 centigrams
=  1000 milligrams
1 gram = 6.022 × 1023 atomic mass units or u
1 atomic mass unit = 1.6606 × 10–24 gram
1 metric tonne = 1000 kilograms
= 2205 pounds
Common Unit of Volume
1 quart = 0.9463 litre
1 litre  = 1.056 quarts
1 litre = 1 cubic decimetre = 1000 cubic
centimetres = 0.001 cubic metre
1 millilitre = 1 cubic centimetre = 0.001 litre
= 1.056 × 10-3 quart
1 cubic foot = 28.316 litres = 29.902 quarts
= 7.475 gallons
Common Units of Energy
1 joule = 1 × 107  ergs
1 thermochemical calorie**
=  4.184 joules
= 4.184  × 107 ergs
= 4.129 × 10–2 litre-atmospheres
= 2.612 × 1019 electron volts
1 ergs = 1 × 10–7 joule = 2.3901 × 10–8 calorie
1 electron volt = 1.6022 × 10–19 joule
= 1.6022 × 10–12 erg
= 96.487 kJ/mol†
1 litre-atmosphere = 24.217 calories
= 101.32 joules
= 1.0132 ×109 ergs
1 British thermal unit = 1055.06  joules
= 1.05506 ×1010 ergs
= 252.2 calories
Common Units of Length
1 inch = 2.54 centimetres (exactly)
1 mile = 5280 feet = 1.609 kilometres
1 yard = 36 inches = 0.9144 metre
1 metre = 100 centimetres = 39.37 inches
= 3.281 feet
= 1.094 yards
1 kilometre = 1000 metres  = 1094 yards
= 0.6215 mile
1 Angstrom = 1.0 × 10–8 centimetre
= 0.10 nanometre
=  1.0 × 10–10 metre
= 3.937 × 10–9 inch
Common Units of Force* and Pressure
1 atmosphere = 760 millimetres of mercury
= 1.013 × 105 pascals
=  14.70 pounds per square inch
1 bar = 105 pascals
1 torr = 1 millimetre of mercury
1 pascal = 1 kg/ms2 = 1 N/m2
Temperature
SI Base Unit: Kelvin (K)
K  = -273.15°C
K  =  °C + 273.15
°F = 1.8(°C) + 32
Force: 1 newton (N) = 1 kg m/s2, i.e.,the force that, when applied for 1 second, gives a
1-kilogram mass a velocity of 1 metre per second.
** The amount of heat required to raise the temperature of one gram of water from 14.50C to
15.50C.
Note that the other units are per particle and must be multiplied by 6.022 ×1023 to be strictly
comparable.
Some Useful Conversion Factors
Appendix V
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
INORGANIC SUBSTANCES
Substance
Enthalpy of formation,
Gibbs Energy of formation,
Entropy,*
∆fH/ (kJ mol–1)
∆fG/ (kJ mol–1)
S/(J K–1 mol–1)
Aluminium
Al(s)
28.33
Al3+(aq)
– 524.7
–481.2
–321.7
Al2O3(s)
–1675.7
–1582.3
50.92
Al(OH)3(s)
–1276
AlCl3(s)
–704.2
–628.8
110.67
Antimony
SbH3(g)
145.11
147.75
232.78
SbCl3(g)
–313.8
–301.2
337.80
SbCl5(g)
–394.34
–334.29
401.94
Arsenic
As(s), gray
As2S3(s)
–169.0
–168.6
163.6
3–(aq)
–888.14
–648.41
–162.8
Barium
Ba(s)
Ba2+(aq)
–537.64
–560.77
BaO(s)
–553.5
–525.1
70.42
BaCO3(s)
–1216.3
–1137.6
112.1
BaCO3(aq)
–1214.78
–1088.59
–47.3
Boron
B2O3(s)
–1272.8
–1193.7
53.97
BF3(g)
–1137.0
–1120.3
254.12
Bromine
Br2(l)
152.23
Br2(g)
30.91
245.46
Br(g)
111.88
82.40
175.02
Br–(aq)
–121.55
–103.96
HBr(g)
–36.40
–53.45
198.70
BrF3(g)
–255.60
–229.43
292.53
Calcium
Ca(s)
41.42
Ca(g)
178.2
144.3
154.88
Ca2+(aq)
–542.83
–553.58
–53.1
(continued)
Thermodynamic Data at 298 K
Appendix VI
2018-19
APPENDICES
Calcium (continued)
CaO(s)
–635.09
–604.03
39.75
Ca(OH)2(s)
–986.09
–898.49
83.39
Ca(OH)2(aq)
–1002.82
–868.07
–74.5
CaCO3(s), calcite
–1206.92
–1128.8
CaCO3(s), aragonite
–1207.1
–1127.8
CaCO3(aq)
–1219.97
–1081.39
–110.0
CaF2(s)
–1219.6
–1167.3
68.87
CaF2(aq)
–1208.09
–1111.15
–80.8
CaCl2(s)
–795.8
–748.1
104.6
CaCl2(aq)
–877.1
–816.0
CaBr2(s)
–682.8
–663.6
CaC2(s)
–59.8
–64.9
69.96
CaS(s)
–482.4
–477.4
CaSO4(s)
–1434.11
–1321.79
106.7
CaSO4(aq)
–1452.10
–1298.10
–33.1
Carbon**
C(s), graphite
5.740
C(s), diamond
1.895
2.900
2.377
716.68
671.26
158.10
CO(g)
–110.53
–137.17
197.67
CO2(g)
–393.51
–394.36
213.74
2–(aq)
–677.14
–527.81
–56.9
CCl4(l)
–135.44
–65.21
216.40
CS2(l)
89.70
65.27
151.34
HCN(g)
135.1
124.7
201.78
HCN(l)
108.87
124.97
112.84
Cerium
Ce(s)
Ce3+(aq)
–696.2
–672.0
Ce4+(aq)
–537.2
–503.8
Chlorine
Cl2(g)
223.07
Cl(g)
121.68
105.68
165.20
Cl–(aq)
–167.16
–131.23
HCl(g)
–92.31
–95.30
186.91
HCl(aq)
–167.16
–131.23
Copper
Cu(s)
33.15
Cu+(aq)
71.67
49.98
Cu2+(aq)
64.77
65.49
–99.6
Cu2O(aq)
–168.6
–146.0
93.14
CuO(s)
–157.3
–129.7
42.63
CuSO4(s)
–771.36
–661.8
CuSO4.5H2O(s)
–2279.7
–1879.7
300.4
(continued)
Substance
Enthalpy of formation,
Gibbs Energy of formation,
Entropy,*
∆fH/ (kJ mol–1)
∆fG/ (kJ mol–1)
S/(J K–1 mol–1)
** For organic compounds, a separate table is provided in continuation.
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Deuterium
D2(g)
144.96
D2O(g)
–249.20
–234.54
198.34
D2O(l)
–294.60
–243.44
75.94
Fluorine
F2(g)
202.78
F–(aq)
–332.63
–278.79
–13.8
HF(g)
–271.1
–273.2
173.78
HF(aq)
–332.63
–278.79
–13.8
Hydrogen (see also Deuterium)
H2(g)
130.68
217.97
203.25
114.71
H+(aq)
H2O(l)
–285.83
–237.13
69.91
H2O(g)
–241.82
–228.57
188.83
H2O2(l)
–187.78
–120.35
109.6
H2O2(aq)
–191.17
–134.03
143.9
Iodine
I2(s)
116.14
I2(g)
62.44
19.33
260.69
I–(aq)
–55.19
–51.57
111.3
HI(g)
26.48
206.59
Fe(s)
27.28
Fe2+(aq)
–89.1
–78.90
–137.7
Fe3+(aq)
–48.5
–315.9
Fe3O4(s), magnetite
–1118.4
–1015.4
146.4
Fe2O3(s), haematite
–824.2
–742.2
87.40
FeS(s,α)
–100.0
–100.4
60.29
FeS(aq)
FeS2(s)
–178.2
–166.9
52.93
Pb(s)
64.81
Pb2+(aq)
–24.43
PbO2(s)
–277.4
–217.33
PbSO4(s)
–919.94
–813.14
148.57
PbBr2(s)
–278.7
–261.92
161.5
PbBr2(aq)
–244.8
–232.34
175.3
Magnesium
Mg(s)
32.68
Mg(g)
147.70
113.10
148.65
Mg2+(aq)
–466.85
–454.8
–138.1
MgO(s)
–601.70
–569.43
26.94
MgCO3(s)
–1095.8
–1012.1
MgBr2(s)
–524.3
–503.8
117.2
(continued)
Substance
Enthalpy of formation,
Gibbs Energy of formation,
Entropy,*
∆fH/ (kJ mol–1)
∆fG/ (kJ mol–1)
S/(J K–1 mol–1)
2018-19
APPENDICES
Mercury
Hg(1)
76.02
Hg(g)
61.32
31.82
174.96
HgO(s)
–90.83
–58.54
70.29
Hg2Cl2(s)
–265.22
–210.75
192.5
Nitrogen
N2(g)
191.61
NO(g)
90.25
86.55
210.76
N2O(g)
82.05
104.20
219.85
NO2(g)
33.18
51.31
240.06
N2O4(g)
97.89
304.29
HNO3(1)
–174.10
–80.71
155.60
HNO3(aq)
–207.36
–111.25
146.4
– (aq)
–205.0
–108.74
146.4
NH3(g)
–46.11
–16.45
192.45
NH3(aq)
–80.29
–26.50
111.3
4 (aq)
–132.51
–79.31
113.4
NH2OH(s)
–114.2
HN3(g)
294.1
328.1
238.97
N2H4(1)
50.63
149.34
121.21
NH4NO3(s)
–365.56
–183.87
151.08
NH4Cl(s)
–314.43
–202.87
NH4ClO4(s)
–295.31
–88.75
186.2
Oxygen
O2(g)
205.14
O3(g)
142.7
163.2
238.93
OH–(aq)
–229.99
–157.24
–10.75
Phosphorus
P(s), white
41.09
P4(g)
58.91
24.44
279.98
PH3(g)
210.23
P4O10(s)
–2984.0
–2697.0
228.86
H3PO3(aq)
–964.8
H3PO4(1)
–1266.9
H3PO4(aq)
–1277.4
–1018.7
PCl3(1)
–319.7
–272.3
217.18
PCl3(g)
–287.0
–267.8
311.78
PCl5(g)
–374.9
–305.0
364.6
Potassium
64.18
89.24
60.59
160.34
K+(aq)
–252.38
–283.27
102.5
KOH(s)
–424.76
–379.08
KOH(aq)
–482.37
–440.50
KF(s)
–567.27
–537.75
66.57
(continued)
Substance
Enthalpy of formation,
Gibbs Energy of formation,
Entropy,*
∆fH/ (kJ mol–1)
∆fG/ (kJ mol–1)
S/(J K–1 mol–1)
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Potassium (continued)
KCl(s)
–436.75
–409.14
82.59
KBr(s)
–393.80
–380.66
95.90
KI(s)
–327.90
–324.89
106.32
KClO3(s)
–397.73
–296.25
143.1
KClO4(s)
–432.75
–303.09
151.0
K2S(s)
–380.7
–364.0
K2S(aq)
–471.5
–480.7
190.4
Silicon
Si(s)
18.83
SiO2(s,α)
–910.94
–856.64
41.84
Silver
Ag(s)
42.55
Ag+(aq)
105.58
77.11
72.68
Ag2O(s)
–31.05
–11.20
121.3
AgBr(s)
–100.37
–96.90
107.1
AgBr(aq)
–15.98
–26.86
155.2
AgCl(s)
–127.07
–109.79
AgCl(aq)
–61.58
–54.12
129.3
AgI(s)
–61.84
–66.19
115.5
AgI(aq)
50.38
25.52
184.1
AgNO3(s)
–124.39
–33.41
140.92
Sodium
Na(s)
51.21
Na(g)
107.32
76.76
153.71
Na+(aq)
–240.12
–261.91
NaOH(s)
–425.61
–379.49
64.46
NaOH(aq)
–470.11
–419.15
NaCl(s)
–411.15
–384.14
72.13
NaCl(aq)
–407.3
–393.1
115.5
NaBr(s)
–361.06
–348.98
86.82
NaI(s)
–287.78
–286.06
98.53
NaHCO3(s)
–947.7
–851.9
102.1
Na2CO3(s)
–1130.9
–1047.7
136.0
Sulphur
S(s), rhombic
31.80
S(s), monoclinic
S2–(aq)
–14.6
SO2(g)
–296.83
–300.19
248.22
SO3(g)
–395.72
–371.06
256.76
H2SO4(l)
–813.99
–690.00
156.90
H2SO4(aq)
–909.27
–744.53
2–(aq)
–909.27
–744.53
H2S(g)
–20.63
–33.56
205.79
H2S(aq)
–39.7
–27.83
SF6(g)
–1209
–1105.3
291.82
Substance
Enthalpy of formation,
Gibbs Energy of formation,
Entropy,*
∆fH/ (kJ mol–1)
∆fG/ (kJ mol–1)
S/(J K–1 mol–1)
(continued)
2018-19
APPENDICES
Sn(s), white
51.55
Sn(s), gray
–2.09
44.14
SnO(s)
–285.8
–256.9
SnO2(s)
–580.7
–519.6
Zn(s)
41.63
Zn2+(aq)
–153.89
–147.06
–112.1
ZnO(s)
–348.28
–318.30
43.64
Zn(g)
+130.73
+95.14
160.93
*The entropies of individual ions in solution are determined by setting the entropy of H+ in water equal to
0 and then defining the entropies of all other ions relative to this value; hence a negative entropy is one
that is lower than the entropy of H+ in water.
ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Substance
Enthalpy of
Enthalpy of
Gibbs Energy of
combustion,
formation,
formation,
Entropy,
∆cH/ (kJ mol–1) ∆fH/ (kJ mol–1)
∆fG/ (kJ mol–1) S/(J K–1 mol–1)
Hydrocarbons
CH4(g), methane
–74.81
–50.72
186.26
C2H2(g), ethyne (acetylene)
–1300
226.73
209.20
200.94
C2H4(g), ethene(ethylene)
–1411
52.26
68.15
219.56
C2H6(g), ethane
–1560
–84.68
–32.82
229.60
C3H6(g), propene (propylene)
–2058
20.42
62.78
266.6
C3H6(g), cyclopropane
–2091
53.30
104.45
237.4
C3H8(g), propane
–2220
–103.85
–23.49
270.2
C4H10(g), butane
–2878
–126.15
–17.03
310.1
C5H12(g), pentane
–3537
–146.44
–8.20
C6H6(l), benzene
–3268
124.3
173.3
C6H6(g)
–3302
C7H8(l), toluene
–3910
113.8
221.0
C7H8(g)
–3953
C6H12(l), cyclohexane
–3920
–156.4
204.4
C6H12(g),
–3953
C8H18(l), octane
–5471
–249.9
Alcohols and phenols
CH3OH(l), methanol
–238.86
–166.27
126.8
CH3OH(g)
–200.66
–161.96
239.81
C2H5OH(l), ethanol
–1368
–277.69
–174.78
160.7
C2H5OH(g)
–1409
–235.10
–168.49
282.70
C6H5OH(s), phenol
–3054
–164.6
–50.42
144.0
(continued)
Substance
Enthalpy of formation,
Gibbs Energy of formation,
Entropy,*
∆fH/ (kJ mol–1)
∆fG/ (kJ mol–1)
S/(J K–1 mol–1)
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Carboxylic acid
HCOOH(l), formic acid
–424.72
–361.35
128.95
CH3COOH(l), acetic acid
–484.5
–389.9
159.8
CH3COOH (aq)
–485.76
–396.64
(COOH)2(s), oxalic acid
–827.2
–697.9
C6H5COOH(s), benzoic acid
–3227
–385.1
–245.3
167.6
Aldehydes and ketones
HCHO(g), methanal
–108.57
–102.53
218.77
(formaldehyde)
CH3CHO(l), ethanal
–1166
–192.30
–128.12
160.2
(acetaldehyde)
CH3CHO(g)
–1192
–166.19
–128.86
250.3
CH3COCH3(l), propanone
–1790
–248.1
–155.4
(acetone)
Sugars
C6H12O6(s), glucose
–2808
–1268
C6H12O6(aq)
C6H12O6(s), fructose
–2810
–1266
C12H22O11(s), sucrose
–5645
–2222
–1545
Nitrogen compounds
CO(NH2)2(s), urea
–333.51
–197.33
104.60
C6H5NH2(l), aniline
–3393
149.1
191.3
NH2CH2COOH(s), glycine
–532.9
–373.4
103.51
CH3NH2(g), methylamine
–1085
–22.97
32.16
243.41
Substance
Enthalpy of
Enthalpy of
Gibbs Energy of
combustion,
formation,
formation,
Entropy,
∆cH/ (kJ mol–1) ∆fH/ (kJ mol–1)
∆fG/ (kJ mol–1) S/(J K–1 mol–1)
2018-19
APPENDICES
Standard potentials at 298 K in electrochemical order
Reduction half-reaction
H4XeO6 + 2H+ + 2e– → XeO3 + 3H2O
F2 + 2e– → 2F–
+2.87
O3 + 2H+ + 2e– → O2 + H2O
+2.07
8 + 2e– → 2SO
+2.05
Ag+ + e– → Ag+
+1.98
Co3+ + e– → Co2+
+1.81
H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e– → 2H2O
+1.78
Au+ + e– → Au
+1.69
Pb4+ + 2e– → Pb2+
+1.67
2HClO + 2H+ + 2e– → Cl2 + 2H2O
+1.63
Ce4+ + e– → Ce3+
+1.61
2HBrO + 2H+ + 2e– → Br2 + 2H2O
+1.60
4 + 8H+ + 5e– → Mn2+ + 4H2O
+1.51
Mn3+ + e– → Mn2+
+1.51
Au3+ + 3e– → Au
+1.40
Cl2 + 2e– → 2Cl–
+1.36
7 + 14H+ + 6e– → 2Cr3+ + 7H2O
+1.33
O3 + H2O + 2e– → O2 + 2OH–
+1.24
O2 + 4H+ + 4e– → 2H2O
+1.23
4 + 2H+ +2e– → ClO–
3 + 2H2O
+1.23
MnO2 + 4H+ + 2e– → Mn2+ + 2H2O
+1.23
Pt2+ + 2e– → Pt
+1.20
Br2 + 2e– → 2Br–
+1.09
Pu4+ + e– → Pu3+
+0.97
3 + 4H+ + 3e– → NO + 2H2O
+0.96
2Hg2+ + 2e– → Hg2+
+0.92
ClO– + H2O + 2e– → Cl– + 2OH–
+0.89
Hg2+ + 2e– → Hg
+0.86
3 + 2H+ + e– → NO2 + H2O
+0.80
Ag+ + e– → Ag
+0.80
2 +2e– → 2Hg
+0.79
Fe3+ + e– → Fe2+
+0.77
BrO– + H2O + 2e– → Br– + 2OH–
+0.76
Hg2SO4 +2e– → 2Hg + SO2–
+0.62
MnO2–
4 + 2H2O + 2e– → MnO2 + 4OH–
+0.60
4 + e– → MnO2–
+0.56
I2 + 2e– → 2I–
+0.54
3 + 2e– → 3I–
+0.53
Reduction half-reaction
Cu+ + e– → Cu
+0.52
NiOOH + H2O + e– → Ni(OH)2 + OH–
+0.49
Ag2CrO4 + 2e– → 2Ag + CrO2–
+0.45
O2 + 2H2O + 4e– → 4OH–
+0.40
4 + H2O + 2e– → ClO–
3 + 2OH–
+0.36
[Fe(CN)6]3– + e– → [Fe(CN)6]4–
+0.36
Cu2+ + 2e– → Cu
+0.34
Hg2Cl2 + 2e– → 2Hg + 2Cl–
+0.27
AgCl + e– → Ag + Cl–
+0.27
Bi3+ + 3e– → Bi
+0.20
2   – + 4H+ + 2e– → H2SO3 + H2O
+0.17
Cu2+ + e– → Cu+
+0.16
Sn4+ + 2e– → Sn2+
+0.15
AgBr + e– → Ag + Br–
+0.07
Ti4+ + e– → Ti3+
2H+ + 2e– → H2
0.0 by
definition
Fe3+ + 3e– → Fe
–0.04
O2 + H2O + 2e– → HO–
2 + OH–
–0.08
Pb2+ + 2e– → Pb
–0.13
In+ + e– → In
–0.14
Sn2+ + 2e– → Sn
–0.14
AgI + e– → Ag + I–
–0.15
Ni2+ + 2e– → Ni
–0.23
V3+ + e– → V2+
–0.26
Co2+ + 2e– → Co
–0.28
In3+ + 3e– → In
–0.34
Tl+ + e– → Tl
–0.34
PbSO4 + 2e– → Pb + SO2–
–0.36
Ti3+ + e– → Ti2+
–0.37
Cd2+ + 2e– → Cd
–0.40
In2+ + e– → In+
–0.40
Cr3+ + e– → Cr2+
–0.41
Fe2+ + 2e– → Fe
–0.44
In3+ + 2e– → In+
–0.44
S + 2e– → S2–
–0.48
In3+ + e– → In2+
–0.49
U4+ + e– → U3+
–0.61
Cr3+ + 3e– → Cr
–0.74
Zn2+ + 2e– → Zn
–0.76
(continued)
Appendix VII
2018-19
CHEMISTRY
Reduction half-reaction
Cd(OH)2 + 2e– → Cd + 2OH–
–0.81
2H2O + 2e– → H2 + 2OH–
–0.83
Cr2+ + 2e– → Cr
–0.91
Mn2+ + 2e– → Mn
–1.18
V2+ + 2e– → V
–1.19
Ti2+ + 2e– → Ti
–1.63
Al3+ + 3e– → Al
–1.66
U3+ + 3e– → U
–1.79
Sc3+ + 3e– → Sc
–2.09
Mg2+ + 2e– → Mg
–2.36
Ce3+ + 3e– → Ce
–2.48
Reduction half-reaction
La3+ + 3e– → La
–2.52
Na+ + e– → Na
–2.71
Ca2+ + 2e– → Ca
–2.87
Sr2+ + 2e– → Sr
–2.89
Ba2+ + 2e– → Ba
–2.91
Ra2+ + 2e– → Ra
–2.92
Cs+ + e– → Cs
–2.92
Rb+ + e– → Rb
–2.93
K+ +e– → K
–2.93
Li+ + e– → Li
–3.05
Appendix  continued
2018-19
