Contents
Foreword
A Letter for You
Unit I
Chapter 1
Power sharing
Chapter 2
Federalism
Unit II
Chapter 3
Democracy and Diversity
Chapter 4
Gender, Religion and Caste
Unit III
Chapter 5
Popular Struggles and Movements
Chapter 6
Political Parties
Unit IV
Chapter 7
Outcomes of Democracy
Chapter 8
Challenges to Democracy
❡✏✎✑❡✒
✕✗✘✔✙✚
s ✜✢✙
✥✙✢✣✖
s ✔✗✚
✘✣✛✙✚
s ✕✗✚✓
✘✣✛✙✚
s ✕✗✚✓
s✔✣✚✓✙
✥✙✢✣✖
s✔✣✚✓✙
s ✣✢✙
s ✕✗✚✓
✥✙✢✣✖
✘✣✛✙✚
s✕✗✚✓
❇✠✡☛☞✌✍
✔✎✏✕✎
I have a simple
equation in mind.
Sharing power =
dividing power =
weakening the
country. Why do we
start by talking of
this?
Ethnic:  A social
division based on
shared culture. People
belonging to the same
ethnic group believe in
their common descent
because of similarities
of physical type or of
culture or both. They
need not always have
the same religion or
nationality.
Communities
regions of
Belgium
Belgium is a small country in Europe,
smaller in area than the state of
Haryana. It has borders with
Netherlands, France and Germany. It
has a population of a little over one
crore, about half the population of
Haryana. The ETHNIC composition of
this small country is very complex. Of
the country’s total population, 59 per
cent lives in the Flemish region and
speaks Dutch language. Another 40 per
cent people live in the Wallonia region
and speak French. Remaining 1 per cent
of the Belgians speak German. In the
capital city Brussels, 80 per cent people
speak French while 20 per cent are
Dutch-speaking.
The minority French-speaking
community was relatively rich and
powerful. This was resented by the
Dutch-speaking community who got
the benefit of economic development
and education much later. This led to
tensions between the Dutch-speaking
and French-speaking communities
during the 1950s and 1960s. The
tension between the two communities
was more acute in Brussels. Brussels
presented a special problem: the
Dutch-speaking people constituted a
majority in the country, but a minority
in the capital.
Let us compare this to the situation
in another country. Sri Lanka is an
island nation, just a few kilometres off
the southern coast of Tamil Nadu. It
has about 2 crore people, about the
same as in Haryana. Like other nations
in the South Asia region, Sri Lanka has
a diverse population. The major social
groups are the Sinhala-speakers (74 per
cent) and the Tamil-speakers (18 per
cent). Among Tamils there are two sub-
groups. Tamil natives of the country
Walloon (French-speaking)
Flemish (Dutch-speaking)
German-speaking
Brussels-Capital Region
Look at the maps of Belgium and Sri Lanka. In which
region do you find concentration of different
communities?
©  Wikipedia
Majoritarianism: A
belief that the majority
community should be
able to rule a country in
whichever way it wants,
by disregarding the
wishes and needs of the
minority.
are called ‘Sri Lankan Tamils’ (13 per
cent). The rest, whose forefathers came
from India as plantation workers during
colonial period, are called ‘Indian
Tamils’. As you can see from the map,
Sri Lankan Tamils are concentrated in
the north and east of the country. Most
of the Sinhala-speaking people are
Buddhist, while most of the Tamils are
Hindus or Muslims. There are about 7
per cent Christians, who are both Tamil
and Sinhala.
Just imagine what could happen
in situations like this. In Belgium, the
Dutch community could take
advantage of its numeric majority and
force its will on the French and
German-speaking population. This
would push the conflict among
communities further. This could  lead
to a very messy partition of  the
country; both the sides would claim
control over Brussels. In Sri Lanka, the
Sinhala community enjoyed an even
bigger majority and could impose its
will on the entire country. Now, let us
look at what happened in both these
countries.
✟✠✡☛☞✌
Sri Lanka emerged as an independent
country in 1948. The leaders of the
Sinhala community sought to secure
dominance over government by virtue
of  their majority. As a result, the
democratically elected government
adopted a series of  MAJORITARIAN
measures to establish Sinhala supremacy.
In 1956, an Act was passed to
recognise Sinhala as the only official
language, thus disregarding Tamil. The
governments followed preferential
policies that favoured Sinhala
applicants for university positions and
government jobs. A new constitution
stipulated that the state shall protect
and foster Buddhism.
All these government measures,
coming one after the other, gradually
increased the feeling of alienation
among the Sri Lankan Tamils. They felt
that none of the major political parties
led by the Buddhist Sinhala leaders
were sensitive to their language and
culture. They felt that the constitution
and government policies denied them
equal political rights, discriminated
against them in getting jobs and other
opportunities and ignored their
interests. As a result, the relations
Ethnic Communities
of Sri Lanka
Sinhalese
Sri Lankan Tamil
Indian Tamil
Muslim
What kind of a solution is
this? I am glad our
Constitution does not say
which minister will come from
which community.
Civil war: A violent
conflict between
opposing groups within
a country that becomes
so intense that it appears
like a war.
The Belgian leaders took a different
path. They recognised the existence of
regional differences and cultural
diversities. Between 1970 and 1993,
they amended their constitution four
times so as to work out an arrangement
that would enable everyone to live
together within the same country. The
arrangement they worked out is
different from any other country and
is very innovative. Here are some of
the elements of the Belgian model:
Constitution prescribes that the
number of Dutch and French-speaking
ministers shall be equal in the central
government. Some special laws require
the support of majority of members
from each linguistic group. Thus, no
What’s wrong if
the majority
community
rules? If Sinhalas
don’t rule in Sri
Lanka, where
else will they
rule?
single community can make decisions
unilaterally.
Many powers of  the central
government have been given to state
governments of the two regions of the
country. The state governments are not
subordinate to the Central Government.
Brussels has a separate government
in which both the communities have
equal representation. The French-
speaking people accepted equal
representation in Brussels because the
Dutch-speaking community has
accepted equal representation in the
Central Government.
✡✡☛☞☞☛✌✍✎✏☛✑
between the Sinhala and Tamil
communities strained over time.
The Sri Lankan Tamils launched
parties and struggles for the recognition
of Tamil as an official language, for
regional autonomy and equality of
opportunity in securing education and
jobs. But their demand for more
autonomy to provinces populated by
the Tamils was repeatedly denied. By
1980s several political organisations
formed
demanding
independent Tamil Eelam (state) in
northern and eastern parts of Sri Lanka.
The distrust between the two
communities turned into widespread
conflict. It soon turned into a CIVIL WAR.
As a result thousands of people of both
the communities have been killed. Many
families were forced to leave the country
as refugees and many more lost their
livelihoods. You have read (Chapter 1
of Economics textbook, Class X) about
Sri Lanka’s excellent record of economic
development, education and health. But
the civil war has caused a terrible setback
to the social, cultural and economic life
of the country.
The photograph here is of a street
address in Belgium. You will notice that
place names and directions in two
languages – French and Dutch.
©  Wikipedia
So you are
saying that
sharing of power
makes us more
powerful. Sounds
odd! Let me
think.
Read any newspaper for one week and make clippings of
news related to ongoing conflicts or wars. A group of five
students could pool their clippings together and do the following:
Classify these conflicts by their location (your state, India,
outside India).
Find out the cause of each of these conflicts. How many of
these are related to power sharing disputes?
Which of these conflicts could be resolved by working out power
sharing arrangements?
What do we learn from these two stories
of Belgium and Sri Lanka? Both are
democracies. Yet, they dealt with the
question of power sharing differently.
In Belgium, the leaders have realised
that the unity of the country is possible
only by respecting the feelings and
interests of different communities and
regions. Such a realisation resulted in
mutually acceptable arrangements for
sharing power. Sri Lanka shows us a
contrasting example. It shows us that
if a majority community wants to force
its dominance over others and refuses
to share power, it can undermine the
unity of the country.
European Union Parliament in Belgium
Apart from the Central and
the State Government, there is a
third kind of  government. This
‘community government’ is elected by
people belonging to one language
community – Dutch, French and
German-speaking – no matter where
they live. This government has the
power regarding cultural, educational
and language-related issues.
You might find the Belgian model
very complicated. It indeed is very
complicated, even for people living in
Belgium. But these arrangements have
worked well so far. They helped to
avoid civic strife between the two
major communities and a possible
division of the country on linguistic
lines. When many countries of Europe
came together to form the European
Union, Brussels was chosen as its
headquarters.
Annette studies in a Dutch medium school in the
northern region of Belgium. Many French-speaking students in
her school want the medium of instruction to be French. Selvi
studies in a school in the northern region of Sri Lanka. All the
students in her school are Tamil-speaking and they want the
medium of instruction to be Tamil.
If the parents of Annette and Selvi were to approach
respective governments to realise the desire of the child
who is more likely to succeed? And why?
Why power sharing is desirable?
Thus, two different sets of reasons can
be given in favour of power sharing.
Firstly, power sharing is good because
it helps to reduce the possibility of
conflict between social groups. Since
social conflict often leads to violence
and political instability, power sharing
is a good way to ensure the stability of
political order. Imposing the will of
majority community over others may
look like an attractive option in the
short run, but in the long run it
undermines the unity of the nation.
Tyranny of the majority is not just
oppressive for the minority; it often
brings ruin to the majority as well.
There is a second, deeper reason
why power sharing is good for
democracies. Power sharing is the very
spirit of democracy. A democratic rule
involves sharing power with those
affected by its exercise, and who have
to live with its effects. People have a
right to be consulted on how they are
to be governed. A legitimate
government is one where citizens,
through participation, acquire a stake
in the system.
Let us call the first set of reasons
PRUDENTIAL and the second moral. While
prudential reasons stress that power
sharing will bring out better outcomes,
moral reasons emphasises the very act
of power sharing as valuable.
Prudential: Based on
prudence, or on careful
calculation of gains and
losses. Prudential decisions
are usually contrasted with
those decisions based
purely on moral
considerations.
The cartoon at the left refers to the
problems of running the Germany’s grand
coalition government that include the two
major parties of the country, namely the
Christian Democratic Union and the
Social Democratic Party. The two parties
are historically rivals to each other. They
have to form a coalition government
because neither of them got clear majority
of seats on their own in the 2005
elections. They take divergent positions
on several policy matters, but still jointly
run the government.
©  Tab - The Calgary Sun, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
As usual, Vikram’s was driving the motorbike under a vow
of silence and Vetal was the pillion rider.  As usual, Vetal
started telling Vikram a story to keep him awake while
driving. This time the story went as follows:
“I n the city of Beirut there lived a m an called Khalil. His parents
cam e from  different com m unities.  His father was an Orthodox Christian and m other a
Sunni Muslim . This was not so uncom m on in this m odern, cosm opolitan city. People
from  various com m unities that lived in Lebanon cam e to live in its capital, Beirut. They
lived together, interm ingled, yet fought a bitter civil war am ong them selves. One of
Khalil’s uncles was killed in that war.
At the end of this civil war, Lebanon’s leaders came together and agreed to some basic
rules for power sharing among different communities. As per these rules the country’s
President must belong to the Maronite sect of Catholic Christians. The Prime Minister
must be from the Sunni Muslim community. The post of Deputy Prime Minister is fixed for
Orthodox Christian sect and that of the Speaker for Shi’a Muslim. Under this pact, the
Christians agreed not to seek French protection and the Muslim agreed not to seek
unification with the neighbouring state of Syria.When the Christians and Muslims came to
this agreement, they were nearly equal in population. Both sides have continued to
respect this agreement though now the Muslims are in clear majority.
Khalil does not like this system  one bit. He is a popular m an with political am bition. But
under the present system the top position is out of his reach barred from him. He does
not practice either his father’s or his mother’s religion and does not wish to be known
by either. He cannot understand why Lebanon can’t be like any other ‘norm al’
democracy. “Just hold an election, allow everyone to contest and whoever wins
m axim um  votes becom es the president, no m atter which com m unity he com es from .
Why can’t we do that, like in other democracies of the world?” he asks. His elders, who
have seen the bloodshed of the civil war, tell him  that the present system  is the best
guarantee for peace…”
The story was not finished, but they had reached the TV
tower where they stopped every day. Vetal
wrapped up quickly and posed his
customary question to Vikram:  “If you had
the power to rewrite the rules in Lebanon,
what would you do? Would you adopt the
‘regular’ rules followed everywhere, as Khalil
suggests? Or stick to the old rules? Or do
something else?” Vetal did not forget to
remind Vikram of their basic pact:  “If you
have an answer in mind and yet do not speak
up, your mobike will freeze, and so
will you!”
Can you help poor Vikram  in answ ering Vetal?
Khalil’s
dilemma
Recently some new laws were made in Russia giving more powers to
its president. During the same time the US president visited Russia.
What, according to this cartoon, is the relationship between democracy
and concentration of power? Can you think of some other examples to
illustrate the point being made here?
The idea of  power sharing has
emerged in opposition to the notions
of undivided political power. For a
long time it was believed that all power
of a government must reside in one
person or group of persons located
at one place. It was felt that if  the
power to decide is dispersed, it would
not be possible to take quick decisions
and to enforce them. But these
notions have changed with the
emergence of democracy. One basic
principle of democracy is that people
are the source of all political power.
In a democracy, people rule
themselves through institutions of
self-governance. In a good democratic
government, due respect is given to
diverse groups and views that exist in
a society. Everyone has a voice in the
shaping of public policies. Therefore,
it follows that in a democracy political
❋✠✡☛☞
✑✒✡✓✔✕
power should be distributed among
as many citizens as possible.
In modern democracies, power
sharing arrangements can take many
forms. Let us look at some of the most
common arrangements that we have
or will come across.
Power is shared among different
organs of government, such as the
legislature, executive and judiciary. Let
us call this horizontal distribution of
power because it allows different organs
of government placed at the same level
to exercise different powers. Such a
separation ensures that none of the
organs can exercise unlimited power.
Each organ checks the others. This
results in a balance of power among
various institutions. Last year we studied
that in a democracy, even though
ministers and government officials
exercise power, they are responsible to
the Parliament or State Assemblies.
Similarly, although judges are appointed
by the executive, they can check the
functioning of executive or laws made
by the legislatures. This arrangement is
called a system of checks and balances.
Power can be shared among
governments at different levels – a
general government for the entire
country and governments at the
provincial or regional level. Such a
general government for the entire
country is usually called federal
government. In India, we refer to it
as the Central or Union Government.
The governments at the provincial or
regional level are called by different
names in different countries. In India,
Reigning Reins
©  Olle Johansson - Sweden, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
In my school, the
class monitor
changes every
month. Is that
what you call a
power sharing
arrangement?
we call them State Governments. This
system is not followed in all countries.
There are many countries where there
provincial
state
governments. But in those countries
like ours, where there are different
levels
governments,
constitution clearly lays down the
powers of  different levels of
government. This is what they did in
Belgium, but was refused in Sri Lanka.
This is called federal division of
power. The same principle can be
extended to levels of  government
lower than the State government, such
as the municipality and panchayat. Let
us call division of powers involving
higher and lower levels of
government vertical division of
power. We shall study these at some
length in the next chapter.
Power may also be shared among
different social groups, such as the
religious and linguistic groups.
‘Community government’ in Belgium
is a good example of this arrangement.
In some countries there are
constitutional and legal arrangements
whereby socially weaker sections and
women are represented in the
legislatures and administration. Last
year we studied the system of ‘reserved
constituencies’ in assemblies and the
parliament of our country. This type
of arrangement is meant to give space
in the government and administration
to diverse social groups who otherwise
would feel alienated from the
government. This method is used to
give minority communities a fair share
in power. In Chapter 3, we shall look
at various ways of accommodating
social diversities.
Power sharing arrangements can
also be seen in the way political
parties, pressure groups and
movements control or influence those
in power. In a democracy, the citizens
must have freedom to choose among
various contenders for power. In
contemporary democracies this takes
the form of  competition among
different parties. Such competition
ensures that power does not remain in
one hand. In the long run power is
shared among different political parties
that represent different ideologies and
social groups. Sometimes this kind of
sharing can be direct, when two or
more parties form an alliance to
contest elections. If their alliance is
elected, they form a coalition
government and thus share power. In
a democracy, we find interest groups
such as those of traders, businessmen,
industrialists, farmers and industrial
workers. They also will have a share in
governmental power, either through
participation in governmental
committees or bringing influence on
the decision making process. In
Chapter 4, we shall study the working
of political parties, pressure groups and
social movements.
Here are some examples of power sharing. Which of the four types of power
sharing do these represent? Who is sharing power with whom?
The Bombay High Court ordered the Maharashtra state government to immediately
take action and improve living conditions for the 2,000-odd children at seven
children’s homes in Mumbai.
The government of Ontario state in Canada has agreed to a land claim settlement with
the aboriginal community. The Minister responsible for Native Affairs announced that
the government will work with aboriginal people in a spirit of mutual respect and
co-operation.
Russia’s two influential political parties, the Union of Right Forces and the Liberal
Yabloko Movement, agreed to unite their organisations into a strong right-wing
coalition. They propose to have a common list of candidates in the next
parliamentary elections.
The finance ministers of various states in Nigeria got together and demanded that
the federal government declare its sources of income. They also wanted to know the
formula by which the revenue is distributed to various state governments.
What are the different forms of power sharing in modern
democracies? Give an example of each of these.
State one prudential reason and one moral reason for power
sharing with an example from the Indian context.
After reading this chapter, three students drew different
conclusions. Which of these do you agree with and why? Give
your reasons in about 50 words.
Thomman -  Power sharing is necessary only in societies which
have religiousm, linguistic or ethnic divisions.
Mathayi – Power sharing is suitable only for big countries that
have regional divisions.
Ouseph – Every society needs some form of power sharing even
if it is small or does not have social divisions.
The Mayor of Merchtem, a town near Brussels in Belgium, has
defended a ban on speaking French in the town’s schools.  He
said that the ban would help all non-Dutch speakers integrate
in this Flemish town. Do you think that this measure is in
keeping with the spirit of Belgium’s power sharing
arrangements? Give your reasons in about 50 words.
Read the following passage and pick out any one of the
prudential reasons for power sharing offered in this.
“We need to give more power to the panchayats to realise the
dream of Mahatma Gandhi and the hopes of the makers of our
Constitution. Panchayati Raj establishes true democracy. It
restores power to the only place where power belongs in a
democracy – in the hands of the people. Giving power to
Panchayats is also a way to reduce corruption and increase
administrative efficiency. When people participate in the planning
and  implementation of developmental schemes, they would
naturally exercise greater control over these schemes. This would
eliminate the corrupt middlemen. Thus, Panchayati Raj will
strengthen the foundations of our democracy.”
Different arguments are usually put forth in favour of and against
power sharing. Identify those which are in favour of power sharing
and select the answer using the codes given below? Power sharing:
reduces conflict among different communities
decreases the possibility of arbitrariness
delays decision making process
accommodates diversities
increases instability and divisiveness
promotes people’s participation in government
G. undermines the unity of a country
Consider the following statements about power sharing
arrangements in Belgium and Sri Lanka.
In Belgium, the Dutch-speaking majority people tried to impose
their domination on the minority French-speaking community.
In Sri Lanka, the policies of the government sought to ensure the
dominance of the Sinhala-speaking majority.
The Tamils in Sri Lanka demanded a federal arrangement of
power sharing to protect their culture, language and  equality of
opportunity in education and jobs.
The transformation of Belgium from unitary government to a
federal one prevented a possible division of the country on
linguistic lines.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) A, B, C and D   (b) A, B and D   (c) C and D   (d) B, C and D
Consider the following two statements on power sharing and
select the answer using the codes given below:
Power sharing is good for democracy.
It helps to reduce the possibility of conflict between social groups.
Which of these statements are true and false?
(a) A is true but B is false
(b) Both A and B are true
(c) Both A and B are false
(d) A is false but B is true
List I
List I I
Power shared among different
organs of government
A. Community government
Power shared among governments
at different levels
B. Separation of powers
Power shared by different social
groups
C. Coalition government
Power shared by two or more
political parties
D. Federal government
Match List I (forms of power sharing) with List II (forms of government)
and select the correct answer using the codes given below in the lists:
☞✌☛✍☞✎
✦✓✏✑✚
✛✒✜✔✑
✍✎✏✎✑✡
Let us get back to the contrast between
Belgium and Sri Lanka that we saw in
the last chapter. You would recall that
one of the key changes made in the
Constitution of Belgium was to reduce
the power of the Central Government
and to give these powers to the regional
governments. Regional governments
existed in Belgium even earlier. They
had their roles and powers. But all these
powers were given to these
governments and could be withdrawn
by the Central Government. The
change that took place in 1993 was that
the regional governments were given
constitutional powers that were no
longer dependent on the central
government. Thus, Belgium shifted
from a unitary to a federal form of
government. Sri Lanka continues to be,
for all practical purposes, a unitary
system where the national government
has all the powers. Tamil leaders want
Sri Lanka to become a federal system.
Federalism is a system of
government in which the power is
divided between a central authority and
various constituent units of  the
country. Usually, a federation has two
levels of  government. One is the
government for the entire country that
is usually responsible for a few subjects
of  common national interest. The
others are governments at the level of
provinces or states that look after
much of the day-to-day administering
of  their state. Both these levels of
governments enjoy their power
independent of the other.
I am confused.
What do we call
the Indian
government? Is
it Union, Federal
or Central?
Though only 25 of the world’s 192 countries have federal political systems, their citizens make up 40 per cent of
the world’s population. Most of the large countries of the world are federations. Can you notice an exception to this
rule in this map?
Source: Montreal and Kingston, Handbook of Federal Countries: 2002, McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2002.
Federal
political systems
Canada
United States
of America
Mexico
PACIFIC OCEAN
Micronesia
Argentina
Venezuela
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
Brazil
St. Kitts
and Nevis
Belgium
Switzerland
Spain
Nigeria
Ethiopia
Comoros
Bosnia and
Herzegovina
Austria
Pakistan
Russia
India
Malaysia
Australia
INDIAN
OCEAN
South Africa
PACIFIC OCEAN
United
Emirates
Germany
Jurisdiction: The area
over which someone
has legal authority. The
area may be defined in
terms of geographical
boundaries or in terms
of certain kinds of
subjects.
7 The federal system thus has dual
objectives: to safeguard and promote
unity of the country, while at the same
time accommodate regional diversity.
Therefore, two aspects are crucial for
the institutions and practice of
federalism. Governments at different
levels should agree to some rules of
power sharing. They should also trust
that each would abide by its part of
the agreement. An ideal federal system
has both aspects : mutual trust and
agreement to live together.
The exact balance of  power
between the central and the state
government varies from one federation
to another.  This balance depends
mainly on the historical context in which
the federation was formed. There are
two kinds of routes through which
federations have been formed. The first
route involves independent States
coming together on their own to form
a bigger unit, so that by pooling
sovereignity and retaining identity they
can increase their security. This type of
‘coming together’ federations include
the USA, Switzerland and Australia. In
this first category of federations, all the
constituent States usually have equal
power and are strong vis-à-vis the
federal government.
The second route is where a large
country decides to divide its power
between the constituent States and the
national government. India, Spain and
Belgium are examples of this kind of
‘holding together’ federations. In
this second category, the central
government tends to be more powerful
vis-à-vis the States. Very often different
constituent units of the federation have
unequal powers. Some units are
granted special powers.
If federalism
works only in big
countries, why
did Belgium
adopt it?
In this sense, federations are
contrasted with unitary governments.
Under the unitary system, either there
is only one level of government or the
sub-units are subordinate to the central
government. The central government
can pass on orders to the provincial or
the local government. But in a federal
system, the central government cannot
order the state government to do
something. State government has
powers of its own for which it is not
answerable to the central government.
Both these governments are separately
answerable to the people.
Let us look at some of the key
features of federalism :
1 There are two or more levels (or
tiers) of government.
2 Different tiers of  government
govern the same citizens, but each tier
has its own JURISDICTION in specific
matters of legislation, taxation and
administration.
3 The jurisdictions of the respective
levels or tiers of  government are
specified in the constitution. So the
existence and authority of each tier of
government is constitutionally
guaranteed.
4 The fundamental provisions of
the constitution cannot be unilaterally
changed by one level of government.
Such changes require the consent of
both the levels of government.
5 Courts have the power to interpret
the constitution and the powers of
different levels of government. The
highest court acts as an umpire if
disputes arise between different levels
of government in the exercise of their
respective powers.
6 Sources of revenue for each level
of government are clearly specified to
ensure its financial autonomy.
Isn’t that
strange? Did our
constitution
makers not know
about
federalism? Or
did they wish to
avoid talking
about it?
Some Nepalese citizens were discussing the proposals on the adoption
of federalism in their new constitution. This is what some of them said:
Khag Raj:  I don’t like federalism. It would lead to reservation of seats for
different caste groups as in India.
Sarita:   Ours in not a very big country. We don’t need federalism.
Babu Lal:  I am hopeful that the Terai areas will get more autonomy if they get
their own state government.
Ram Ganesh:  I like federalism because it will mean that powers that were earlier
enjoyed by the king will now be exercised by our elected representatives.
If you were participating in this conversation what would be your response to each
of these? Which of these reflect a wrong understanding of what federalism is?
What makes India a federal country?
We have earlier seen how small
countries like Belgium and Sri Lanka
face so many problems of managing
diversity. What about a vast country like
India, with so many languages, religions
and regions? What are the power
sharing arrangements in our country?
Let us begin with the Constitution.
India had emerged as an independent
nation after a painful and bloody
partition. Soon after Independence,
several princely states became a part of
the country. The Constitution declared
India as a Union of States. Although it
did not use the word federation, the
Indian Union is based on the principles
of federalism.
Let us go back to the seven features
of federalism mentioned above. We can
see that all these features apply to the
provisions of the Indian Constitution.
The Constitution originally provided
for a two-tier system of government,
the Union Government or what we call
the Central Government, representing
the Union of India and the State
governments. Later, a third tier of
federalism was added in the form of
Panchayats and Municipalities. As in
any federation, these different tiers
enjoy separate jurisdiction.  The
Constitution clearly provided a three-
fold distribution of legislative powers
between the Union Government and
the State Governments. Thus, it
contains three lists:
Union List includes subjects of
national importance such as defence
of the country, foreign affairs, banking,
communications and currency. They
are included in this list because we need
a uniform policy on these matters
throughout the country. The Union
Government alone can make laws
relating to the subjects mentioned in
the Union List.
State List contains subjects of
State and local importance such as
police, trade, commerce, agriculture
and irrigation. The State Governments
✌☛✍✎✏
✑✒✓✔☛
alone can make laws relating to the
subjects mentioned in the State List.
Concurrent List includes subjects
of common interest to both the Union
Government as well as the State
Governments, such as education, forest,
trade unions, marriage, adoption and
succession. Both the Union as well as
the State Governments can make laws
on the subjects mentioned in this list.
If their laws conflict with each other,
the law made by the Union
Government will prevail.
What about subjects that do not
fall in any of the three lists? Or subjects
like computer software that came up
after the constitution was made?
According to our constitution, the
Union Government has the power to
legislate on these ‘residuary’ subjects.
We noted above that most
federations that are formed by ‘holding
together’ do not give equal power to
its constituent units. Thus, all States in
the Indian Union do not have identical
powers. Some States enjoy a special
status. Jammu and Kashmir has its own
Constitution. Many provisions of the
Indian Constitution are not applicable
to this State without the approval of
the State Assembly. Indians who are
not permanent residents of this State
cannot buy land or house here. Similar
special provisions exist for some other
States of India as well.
If agriculture and
commerce are
state subjects,
why do we have
ministers of
agriculture and
commerce in the
Union cabinet?
Listen to one national and one regional news bulletin broadcast by All India
Radio daily for one week. Make a list of news items related to government policies or
decisions by classifying these into the following categories:
✆News items that relate only to the Central Government,
✆News items that relate only to your or any other State Government,
✆News items about the relationship between the Central and State Governments.
There are some units of the Indian
Union which enjoy very little power.
These are areas which are too small to
become an independent State but
which could not be merged with any
of the existing States. These areas, like
Chandigarh, or Lakshadweep or the
capital city of Delhi, are called Union
Territories. These territories do not
have the powers of a State. The Central
Government has special powers in
running these areas.
This sharing of power between the
Union Government and the State
governments is basic to the structure
of the Constitution. It is not easy to
make changes to this power sharing
arrangement. The Parliament cannot
on its own change this arrangement.
Any change to it has to be first passed
by both the Houses of Parliament with
at least two-thirds majority. Then it has
to be ratified by the legislatures of at
least half of the total States.
The judiciary plays an important
role in overseeing the implementation
of  constitutional provisions and
procedures. In case of any dispute about
the division of powers, the High Courts
and the Supreme Court make a decision.
The Union and State governments
have the power to raise resources by
levying taxes in order to carry on the
government and the responsibilities
assigned to each of them.
Pokharan, the place where India conducted its nuclear tests, lies
in Rajasthan. Suppose the Government of Rajasthan was opposed to
the Central Government’s nuclear policy, could it prevent the Government of
India from conducting the nuclear tests?
Suppose the Government of Sikkim plans to introduce new textbooks in its schools.
But the Union Government does not like the style and content of the new
textbooks. In that case, does the state government need to take permission from
the Union Government before these textbooks can be launched?
Suppose the Chief Ministers of Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Orissa have
different policies on how their state police should respond to the naxalites. Can the
Prime Minister of India intervene and pass an order that all the Chief Ministers will
have to obey?
Constitutional provisions are necessary
for the success of federalism but these
are not sufficient. If the federal
experiment has succeeded in India, it
is not merely because of the clearly laid
out constitutional provisions. The real
success of federalism in India can be
attributed to the nature of democratic
politics in our country. This ensured
that the spirit of federalism, respect
for diversity and desire for living
together became a shared ideal in our
country. Let us look at some of the
major ways in which this happened.
Linguistic States
The creation of Linguistic States was
the first and a major test for democratic
politics in our country.  If you look at
the political map of India when it
began its journey as a democracy in
1947 and that of 2006, you will be
surprised by the extent of the changes.
Many old States have vanished and
many new States have been created.
Areas, boundaries and names of the
States have been changed.
In 1947, the boundaries of several
old States of India were changed in
order to create new States. This was
done to ensure that people who spoke
the same language lived in the same
State. Some States were created not on
the basis of language but to recognise
differences based on culture, ethnicity
or geography. These include States like
Nagaland, Uttarakhand and Jharkhand.
Has your village or town
remained under the same State
since Independence? If not,
what was the name of the
earlier State?
Can you identify three State
names in 1947 that have
changed later?
Identify any three States which
have been carved out of a
bigger State.
✠✡☛✡☞✌✍✞✟
✒✞✑✡☛
When the demand for the
formation of States on the basis of
language was raised, some national
leaders feared that it would lead to the
disintegration of  the country. The
Central Government resisted linguistic
States for some time. But the
experience has shown that the
formation of  linguistic States has
actually made the country, more united.
It has also made administration easier.
Language policy
A second test for Indian federation is
the language policy. Our Constitution
did not give the status of  national
language to any one language. Hindi was
identified as the official language. But
Hindi is the mother tongue of only
about 40 per cent of Indians. Therefore,
there were many safeguards to protect
other languages. Besides Hindi, there are
21 other languages recognised as
Scheduled
Languages
Constitution. A candidate in an
examination conducted for the Central
Government positions may opt to take
the examination in any of these
languages. States too have their own
official languages. Much of  the
government work takes place in the
official language of the concerned State.
Unlike Sri Lanka, the leaders of our
country adopted a very cautious
attitude in spreading the use of Hindi.
According to the Constitution, the use
of English for official purposes was to
stop in 1965. However, many non-
Hindi speaking States demanded that
the use of English  continue. In Tamil
Nadu, this movement took a violent
form. The Central Government
responded by agreeing to continue the
use of English along with Hindi for
official purposes. Many critics think
that this solution favoured the English-
speaking elite. Promotion of Hindi
continues to be the official policy of
the Government of India. Promotion
does not mean that the Central
Government can impose Hindi on
States where people speak a different
language. The flexibility shown by
Indian political leaders helped our
country avoid the kind of situation that
Sri Lanka finds itself in.
Centre-State relations
Restructuring the Centre-State
relations is one more way in which
federalism has been strengthened in
practice. How the constitutional
arrangements for sharing power work
in reality depends to a large extent on
how the ruling parties and leaders
follow these arrangements. For a long
time, the same party ruled both at the
Centre and in most of the States. This
meant that the State governments did
not exercise their rights as autonomous
federal units. As and when the ruling
party at the State level was different,
the parties that ruled at the Centre tried
to undermine the power of the States.
In those days, the Central Government
would often misuse the Constitution
to dismiss the State governments that
were controlled by rival parties. This
undermined the spirit of federalism.
All this changed significantly
after 1990. This period saw the rise
of regional political parties in many
States of  the country. This was also
the beginning of the era of
COALITION GOVERNMENTS at the
Centre. Since no single party got a
clear majority in the Lok Sabha, the
major national parties had to enter
into an alliance with many parties
including several regional parties to
form a government at the Centre.
This led to a new culture of power
sharing and respect for the autonomy
of State Governments. This trend was
Coalition government:
A government formed
by the coming together
of at least two political
parties. Usually partners
in a coalition form a
political alliance and
adopt a common
programme.
Why Hindi?
Why not
Bangla or
Telugu?
Here are two cartoons showing the relationship between Centre and States. Should the
State go to the Centre with a begging bowl? How can the leader of a coalition keep the
partners of government satisfied?
Are you
suggesting that
regionalism is
good for our
democracy? Are
you serious?
The States Plead for More Powers
© Kutty - Laughing with Kutty
© Ajith Ninan - India Today Book of Cartoons
Perils of Running a Coalition Government
supported by a major judgement of
the Supreme Court that made it
difficult for the Central Government
to dismiss state governments in an
arbitrary manner. Thus, federal
power sharing is more effective today
than it was in the early years after
the Constitution came into force.
How many languages do we have
in India? The answer depends on
how one counts it. The latest
information that we have is from
the Census of India held in 1991.
This census recorded more than
1500 distinct languages which
people mentioned as their mother
tongues. These languages were
grouped together under some
major languages. For example
languages like Bhojpuri, Magadhi,
Bundelkhandi, Chhattisgarhi,
Rajasthani, Bhili and many others
were grouped together under
‘Hindi’. Even after this grouping,
the Census found 114 major
languages. Of these 22 languages
are now included in the Eighth
Schedule of the Indian Constitution
and are therefore called ‘Scheduled
Languages’. Others are called ‘non-
Scheduled Languages’. In terms of
languages, India is perhaps the
most diverse country in the world.
A look at the enclosed table
makes it clear that no one
language is the mother tongue of
the majority of our population. The
largest language, Hindi, is the
mother tongue of only about 40
per cent Indians. If we add to that
all those who knew Hindi as their
second or third language, the total
number was still less than 50 per
cent in 1991. As for English, only
0.02 per cent Indians recorded it as
their mother tongue. Another 11
per cent knew it as a second or
third language.
Read this table carefully, but
you do not need to memorise it.
Just do the following:
Make a bar or pie chart on
the basis of this information.
Prepare a map of linguistic
diversity of India by shading the
region where each of these
languages is spoken on the map
of India.
Find out about three
languages that are spoken in
India but are not included in this
table.
Scheduled Languages of  India
Language
Proportion of
speakers (%)
Assamese
Bangla
Dogri
Gujarati
Hindi
Kannada
Kashmiri
Konkani
Maithili
Malayalam
Manipuri
Marathi
Nepali
Oriya
Punjabi
Sanskrit
Santhali
Sindhi
Tamil
Telugu
Note: The first column in this table lists all the languages
currently included in the Eighth Schedule of the Indian
Constitution. The second column gives the proportion of the
speakers of each of these languages as per cent of the total
population of India. These figures are based on the Census of
India, 1991. The figures for Kashmiri and Dogri are based on
estimates, as the Census was not conducted in Jammu and
Kashmir in 1991.
Read the following excerpts from an article by noted historian,
Ramachandra Guha, that appeared in the Times of India on November 1,
2006:
Take the example of your own state or any other state that was affected by
linguistic reorganisation. Write a short note for or against the argument given by
the author here on the basis of that example.
We noted above that federal
governments have two or more tiers
of  governments. We have so far
discussed the two-tiers of government
in our country. But a vast country like
India cannot be run only through these
two-tiers. States in India are as large as
independent countries of Europe. In
terms of population, Uttar Pradesh is
bigger than Russia, Maharashtra is
about as big as Germany. Many of
these States are internally very diverse.
There is thus a need for power sharing
within these States. Federal power
sharing in India needs another tier of
government, below that of the State
governments. This is the rationale for
decentralisation of  power. Thus,
resulted a third-tier of government,
called local government.
When power is taken away from
Central and State governments and given
to local government, it is called
decentralisation. The basic idea behind
decentralisation is that there are a large
number of problems and issues which
are best settled at the local level. People
have better knowledge of problems in
their localities. They also have better ideas
on where to spend money and how to
manage things more efficiently. Besides,
at the local level it is possible for the
people to directly participate in decision
making. This helps to inculcate a habit
of  democratic participation. Local
government is the best way to realise  one
important principle of  democracy,
namely local self-government.
The need for decentralisation was
recognised in our Constitution. Since
then, there have been several attempts
to decentralise power to the level of
villages and towns.  Panchayats in
So, we are like a
three-tier coach
in a train! I
always prefer the
lower berth!
villages and municipalities in urban
areas were set up in all the States. But
these were directly under the control
of state governments. Elections to
these local governments were not held
regularly. Local governments did not
have any powers or resources of their
own. Thus, there was very little
decentralisation in effective terms.
A major step towards decentra-
lisation was taken in 1992. The
Constitution was amended to make the
third-tier of democracy more powerful
and effective.
Now it is constitutionally
mandatory to hold regular elections to
local government bodies.
Seats are reserved in the elected
bodies and the executive heads of
these institutions for the Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward Classes.
At least one-third of all positions
are reserved for women.
An independent institution called
the State Election Commission has
been created in each State to conduct
panchayat and municipal elections.
The State governments are required
to share some powers and revenue with
local government bodies. The nature of
sharing varies from State to State.
Rural local government is
popularly known by the name
panchayati raj. Each village, or a group
of villages in some States, has a gram
panchayat. This is a council consisting
of several ward members, often called
panch, and a president or sarpanch.
They are directly elected by all the
adult population living in that ward
☛✌✍✎✏✑✒✓
or village. It is the decision-making
body for the entire village. The
panchayat works under the overall
supervision of the gram sabha. All the
voters in the village are its members.
It has to meet at least twice or thrice
in a year to approve the annual budget
of the gram panchayat and to review
the performance of  the gram
panchayat.
The local government structure
goes right up to the district level. A
few gram panchayats are grouped
together to form what is usually called
a panchayat samiti or block or mandal.
The members of this representative
body are elected by all the panchyat
members in that area. All the panchayat
samitis or mandals in a district together
constitute the zilla (district) parishad.
Most members of the zilla parishad are
elected. Members of the Lok Sabha
and MLAs of that district and some
other officials of other district level
bodies are also its members. Zilla
parishad chairperson is the political
head of the zilla parishad.
Similarly, local government bodies
exist for urban areas as well.
Municipalities are set up in towns. Big
cities are constituted into municipal
corporations. Both municipalities and
municipal corporations are controlled
by elected bodies consisting of people’s
representatives. Municipal chairperson
is the political head of the municipality.
In a municipal corporation such an
officer is called the mayor.
Prime Minister runs
the country. Chief
Minister runs the
state. Logically,
then, the
chairperson of Zilla
Parishad should
run the district.
Why does the D.M.
or Collector
administer the
district?
What do these newspaper clippings have to say about efforts of decentralisation in India?
This new system of  local
government is the largest experiment
in democracy conducted anywhere in
the world. There are now about 36 lakh
elected representatives in the
panchayats and municipalities etc., all
over the country. This number is bigger
than the population of many countries
in the world.  Constitutional status for
local government has helped to deepen
democracy in our country. It has also
increased women’s representation and
voice in our democracy. At the same
time, there are many difficulties. While
elections are held regularly and
enthusiastically, gram sabhas are not
held regularly. Most state governments
have not transferred significant powers
to the local governments. Nor have
they given adequate resources. We are
thus still a long way from realising the
ideal of self-government.
Find out about the local government in the village or town you live in.
If you live in a village, find out the names of the following:  your panch or ward
member, your sarpanch, your panchayat samiti, the chairperson of your zilla
parishad. Also find out when did the last meeting of the gram sabha take place and
how many people took part in that.
If you live in urban areas, find out the name of your municipal councillor, and the
municipal chairperson or mayor. Also find out about the budget of your municipal
corporation, municipality and the major items on which money was spent.
An experim ent in Brazil
A city called Porto Alegre in Brazil has carried out an extraordinary  experiment
in combining decentralisation with participative democracy. The city has set up a
parallel organisation operating alongside the municipal council, enabling local
inhabitants to take real decisions for their city. The nearly 13 lakh people in this
city get to participate in making the budget for their own city. The city is divided
into many sectors or what we call wards. Each sector has a meeting, like that of
the gram sabha, in which anyone living in that area can participate. There are
some meetings to discuss issues that affect the entire city. Any citizen of the city
can participate in those meetings. The budget of the city is discussed in these
meetings. The proposals are put to the municipality that takes a final decision
about it.
About 20,000 people participate in this decision making exercise every year.
This method has ensured that the money cannot be spent only for the benefit of
the colonies where rich people live. Buses now run to the poor colonies and
builders cannot evict slum-dwellers without resettling them.
In our own country, a similar experiment has taken place in some areas in
Kerala. Ordinary people have participated in making a plan for the development
of their locality.
Locate the following States on a blank outline political map of India:
Manipur, Sikkim, Chhattisgarh and Goa.
Identify and shade three federal countries (other than India) on a
blank outline political map of the world.
Point out one feature in the practice of federalism in India that is
similar to and one feature that is different from that of Belgium.
What is the main difference between a federal form of government
and a unitary one? Explain with an example.
State any two differences between the local government before and
after the Constitutional amendment in 1992.
Fill in the blanks:
Since the United States is a ___________________ type of
federation, all the constituent States have equal powers and States
are ______________vis-à-vis the federal government. But India is a
_____________________ type of federation and some States have
more power than others. In India, the ____________ government
has more powers.
Here are three reactions to the language policy followed in India.
Give an argument and an example to support any of these positions.
Sangeeta:  The policy of accommodation have strengthened
national unity.
Arman:  Language based States has divided us by making
everyone conscious of their language.
Harish:  This policy has only helped to consolidate the
dominance of English over all other languages.
The distinguishing feature of a federal government is:
(a) National government gives some powers to the provincial
government.
(b) Power is distributed among the legislature, executive and
judiciary.
(c) Elected officials exercise supreme power in the government.
(d) Governmental power is divided between different levels of
government.
A few subjects in various Lists of the Indian Constitution are given
here. Group them under the Union, State and Concurrent Lists as
provided in the table below.
Defence;  B. Police;  C. Agriculture;  D. Education;
Banking;  F. Forests;  G. Communications;  H. Trade;  I. Marriages
Union List
State List
Concurrent List
(a) State government
State List
(b) Central government
Union List
(c) Central and State governments
Concurrent List
(d) Local governments
Residuary powers
10. Examine the following pairs that give the level of government in
India and the powers of the government at that level to make laws
on the subjects mentioned against each. Which of the following pairs
is not correctly matched?
11. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using
the codes given below the lists:
List I
List II
1. Union of India
A. Prime Minister
2. State
B. Sarpanch
3. Municipal Corporation
C. Governor
4. Gram Panchayat
D. Mayor
12. Consider the following two statements.
In a federation the powers of the federal and provincial
governments are clearly demarcated.
India is a federation because the powers of the Union and State
Governments are specified in the Constitution and they have
exclusive jurisdiction on their respective subjects.
Sri Lanka is a federation because the country is divided into
provinces.
India is no longer a federation because some powers of the States
have been devolved to the local government bodies.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) A, B and C   (b) A, C and D   (c) A and B only   (d) B and C only
❡✒✑✓❡✔
✩✕✬✪✩
✖✩✕✜✖
✖✩✫✘✛✱
✙✚✛✛✱
✛✢✦✕★✛
✕✜✘✛✱
✩✖✩✘✛✳
✢✪✧✙✩✜
★✩✭✩✛
✖✗✘✛✘
✠✡☛☞✌
Civil Rights Movement
in the USA (1954-1968)
refers to a set of events
and reform movements
aimed at abolishing legal
racial discrimination
against African-Americans.
Led by Martin Luther
King Jr., this movement
practiced non-violent
methods of civil
disobedience against
racially discriminatory
laws and practices.
African-American,
Afro-American, Black
American, or Black are the
terms used to refer mainly
to the descendants of
Africans who were
brought into America as
slaves between the 17th
century and early 19th
century.
The Black Power
movement emerged in
1966 and lasted till 1975,
which was a more militant
anti-racist movement,
advocating even violence
if necessary to end racism
in the US.
The pictures on this
depict
important landmark in
the history of the CIVIL
RIGHTS MOVEMENT IN
THE UNITED STATES.
These represent the medal ceremony
of the 200 metres race in the 1968
Olympics held at Mexico City. The two
men standing with clenched fists
upraised and heads bowed, while the
American national anthem was
played, are the US athletes, Tommie
Smith and John Carlos. They are
AFRICAN-AMERICANS. They had won the
gold and bronze medals respectively.
They received their medals wearing
black  socks and no shoes to represent
Black poverty. With this gesture, they
tried to draw international attention to
racial discrimination in the United
States. The black-gloved and raised
clenched fists were meant to symbolise
BLACK POWER. The silver medallist,
white Australian athlete, Peter Norman,
wore a human rights badge on his shirt
during the ceremony to show his
support to the two Americans.
Do you think that Carlos and
Smith should have raised an internal
matter of American society in an
international forum? Would you say
that what they did was political? Why
do you think Peter Norman, who was
neither Black nor American, joined in
the gesture of protest? If you were in
Norman’s place what would you do?
In 2005, the San Jose State University installed a 20-foot high sculpture representing the
protest by Tommie Smith and John Carlos. A photograph of the original medal ceremony
in 1968 is on the top.
My salute to
Carlos and
Smith! Will I ever
have the courage
to do what they
© wikipedia & photo flickr.com Kevin
The International Olympic
Association held Carlos and Smith guilty
of  violating the Olympic spirit by
making a political statement. Their
medals were taken back. Back home,
they were subjected to a lot of criticism.
Norman too suffered for his action and
was not included in the Australian team
for the next Olympic. But their action
succeeded in gaining international
attention for the Civil Rights Movement
in the US. Recently, the San Jose
(pronounced ‘Saan Hoze’) State
University, of which they were former
students, honoured them and installed
their statue in the University campus.
When Norman died in 2006, Smith and
Carlos were pallbearers at his funeral.
Some Dalit groups decided to participate in the UN Conference
Against Racism in Durban in 2001, demanding the inclusion of caste
in the agenda of this conference. Here are three reactions to this move:
Am andeep Kaur (a governm ent official):  Our Constitution declares
caste discrim ination to be illegal. I f som e caste discrim ination
continues, it is an internal m atter. I  am  opposed to this being raised in
an international forum .
Oinam (a sociologist):  I  am opposed to this because caste and race are
not similar divisions. Caste is a social division, while race is a biological
one. Raising caste in this conference on racism  would m ean equating
the two.
Ashok (a Dalit activist):  The argument about internal matter is a
way of preventing open discussion of oppression and
discrimination. Race is not purely biological. It is as much a legal
and sociological category as caste. Caste discrimination must be
raised in this conference.
Which of the three opinions do you agree with most and why?
✡☛☞☞✌✍✌✎✏✌✑
✒☛✓✔✍☛
The athletes in the example above were
responding to social divisions and
social inequalities. But does that
happen only in societies which have
racial divisions? In the previous two
chapters we have already noted some
other forms of social divisions. The
examples of Belgium and Sri Lanka
show both regional and social divisions.
In the case of Belgium we noted that
people who live in different regions
speak different languages. In Sri Lanka,
we noted linguistic as well as religious
differences. Thus social diversity can
take different forms in different
societies.
I met this group
of girls from
Pakistan and felt
that I had more
in common with
them than many
girls from other
parts of my own
country. Is this
anti-national to
feel so?
A cartoon like this can be read by different
people to mean different things. What does
this cartoon mean to you? How do other
students in your class read this?
Origins of  social differences
These social differences are mostly
based on accident of birth. Normally
we don’t choose to belong to our
community. We belong to it simply
because we were born into it. We all
experience social differences based on
accident of birth in our everyday lives.
People around us are male or female,
they are tall and short, have different
kinds of complexions, or have different
physical abilities or disabilities. But all
kinds of social differences are not
based on accident of birth. Some of
the differences are based on our
choices. For example, some people are
atheists. They don’t believe in God or
any religion. Some people choose to
follow a religion other than the one in
which they were born. Most of us
choose what to study, which
occupation to take up and which
games or cultural activities to take part
in. All these lead to formation of social
groups that are based on our choices.
Every social difference does not
lead to social division. Social
differences divide similar people from
one another, but they also unite very
different people. People belonging to
different social groups share
differences and similarities cutting
across the boundaries of their groups.
In the instance above, Carlos and
Smith were similar in one way (both
were African-American) and thus
different from Norman who was
white. But they were also all similar in
other ways – they were all athletes who
stood against racial discrimination.
It is fairly common for people
belonging to the same religion to feel
that they do not belong to the same
community, because their caste or sect
is very different. It is also possible for
people from different religions to have
the same caste and feel close to each
other. Rich and poor persons from the
same family often do not keep close
relations with each other for they feel
they are very different. Thus, we all
have more than one identity and can
belong to more than one social group.
We have different identities in different
contexts.
© Ares - Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Overlapping and cross-cutting
differences
Social division takes place when some
social difference overlaps with other
differences.  The difference between
the Blacks and Whites becomes a social
division in the US because the Blacks
tend to be poor, homeless and
discriminated against. In our country
Dalits tend to be poor and landless.
They often face discrimination and
injustice. Situations of  this kind
produce social divisions, when one
kind of social difference becomes
more important than the other and
people start feeling that they belong to
different communities.
If social differences cross cut one
another, it is difficult to pit one group
of people against the other. It means
that groups that share a common
interest on one issue are likely to be in
different sides on a different issue.
Consider the cases of  Northern
Ireland and the Netherlands. Both are
predominantly Christian but divided
between Catholics and Protestants. In
Northern Ireland, class and religion
overlap with each other. If you are
Catholic, you are also more likely to be
poor, and you may have suffered a
history of  discrimination. In the
Netherlands, class and religion tend to
cut across each other. Catholics and
Protestants are about equally likely to
be poor or rich. The result is that
Catholics and Protestants have had
conflicts in Northern Ireland, while
they do not do so in the Netherlands.
Overlapping social differences create
possibilities of deep social divisions
and tensions. Cross-cutting social
differences are easier to accommodate.
Social divisions of one kind or
another exist in most countries. It does
not matter whether the country is small
or big. India is a vast country with many
communities. Belgium is a small country
with many communities. Even those
countries such as Germany and Sweden,
that were once highly HOMOGENEOUS, are
undergoing rapid change with influx of
people from other parts of the world.
MIGRANTS bring with them their own
culture and tend to form a different
social community. In this sense most
countries of the world are multi-cultural.
Homeogenous society:
A society that has similar
kinds of people,
especially where there
are no significant ethnic
differences.
Migrant: Anybody who
shifts from one region
or country to another
region within a country
or to another country,
usually for work or other
economic opportunities.
Read these two poems by Dalit writers. Why do you think the
poster is titled ‘Hidden Apartheid’ ?
☛✍☛✠✓✍
How do these social divisions affect
politics? What does politics do to these
social divisions? At first sight, it would
appear that the combination of politics
and social divisions is very dangerous
and explosive. Democracy involves
competition among various political
parties. Their competition tends to
divide any society. If  they start
competing in terms of some existing
social divisions, it can make social
divisions into political divisions and
lead to conflict, violence or even
disintegration of a country. This has
happened in many countries.
Range of  outcomes
Take the case of Northern Ireland that
we referred to above. This region of
the United Kingdom has been for many
years the site of a violent and bitter
ethno-political conflict. Its population
is divided into two major sects of
Christianity: 53 per cent are
Protestants, while 44 per cent are
Roman Catholics. The Catholics were
represented by Nationalist parties who
demanded that Northern Ireland be
unified with the Republic of Ireland,
a predominantly Catholic country. The
Protestants were represented by
Unionists who wanted to remain with
the UK, which is predominantly
protestant. Hundreds of  civilians,
militants and security forces were killed
in the fight between Unionists and
Nationalists and between the security
forces of the UK and the Nationalists.
It was only in 1998, that the UK
government and the Nationalists
Imrana is a student of Class X, section B. She and all her classmates are
planning to help students of Class XI in giving a farewell party to the
students of Class XII. Last month she played for section team in a game of
kho-kho against the team of Class X, section A. She goes back home in a bus
and joins all the students from various classes. They all come from trans-
Yamuna area in Delhi. Back home, she often joins her elder sister, Naima, in
complaining against her brother who does no work at home, while the sisters
are asked to help their mother. Her father is looking for a good match for her
elder sister, from a Muslim family with a similar economic status from their
own ‘biradari’.
Can you list the various kinds of identities Imrana has?
At home
she is
a girl
In terms of religion
she is
………….
In the school
she is
………….
……………
she is
…………….
she is
………….
In id a?
India?
India?
India?
Romania
ulg ria,
Bulgaria,
Bulgaria,
Ganesh had come back from his trip and was talking to Mahashweta
about the Roma people who live in many countries of Eastern
Europe. He met Yordanka who works as a nurse in Bulgaria. This is
what she has to say about Roma people:
“Being a nurse you can’t refuse to look after some people, but
these Roma people are very dirty. Even when something small
happens to any one in their family, all the family and even the
neighbours just march to our hospital. And once they are in the hospital
they don’t know how to keep quiet. They talk aloud, smoke and drop ashes all
over and spit on the wall! They have no patience, and they just start pestering our
doctors! And when they are just hanging out like that any way they look so
aggressive. After all these dark skinned people don’t look like us. They have a
strange sense of colour. Look at their dress, why can’t they try to look like
everyone else in the country? And we all know they are thieves. I have heard
people say that these Roma people live by selling their blood. None of them can
afford the hospital fees. But when they are ill they just rush to hospital at the cost
of good Bulgarians who pay their taxes!”
“That sounds familiar’ said Mahashweta.
Ganesh went on to talk about Modruzeni, a Romani who lives in Romania. When
she was eighteen years old, she went to the hospital, to give birth to her first
child. She had no money to pay to the doctor or nurse. Though she was in the
hospital, nobody bothered to come and take care of her. Finally the sweeper, who
was also a Romani, helped her give birth to a boy. And then the nurse appeared on
the scene and said, “Here we have another criminal”. Talking about how the Roma
people are treated in public hospitals, she says:  “These doctors keep us waiting
outside their cabins. On one occasion one doctor asked me to take a bath if I
needed to be examined! Of course, I smelled. During the pregnancy I ate
from the garbage containers, because I was so hungry all the time. My
husband had left me. I had two children, and I was pregnant with the
third.
The social worker refused my request for food assistance. My neighbour
helped me to deliver the baby. I often feel it is better not to visit these
hospitals.”
Mahashweta heard him out and said, “Ganesh, why do you have to travel
halfway across the world to find this out? This is not a story about Romania
and Bulgaria or about the Roma people. This is as much a story about our
own country and about our people who are branded as criminals by our
system.”
Do you think Mahashweta is right? Do you know of some community
in your area that is treated like the Romas?
Have you heard people say things similar to what Yordanka or
Modruzeni say here? If yes, try to think of what the story would sound like if
you heard it from the other side?
Do you think the Bulgarian governm ent should try to ensure that the
Rom a people dress and behave like other people from  Bulgaria?
reached a peace treaty after which the
latter suspended their armed struggle.
In Yugoslavia, the story did not have a
happy end. Political competition along
religious and ethnic lines led to the
disintegration of Yugoslavia into six
independent countries.
Such examples lead some people
to conclude that politics and social
divisions must not be allowed to mix.
They think that it would be best if there
are no social divisions in any country.
If social divisions do exist in a country,
they must never be expressed in politics.
At the same time every expression
of social divisions in politics does not
lead to such disasters. We have already
seen that social divisions of one kind
or another exist in most countries of
the world. Wherever they exist, these
divisions are reflected in politics. In a
democracy it is only natural that
political parties would talk about these
So, it happens all
over the world,
even in Europe!
I thought it was
only in countries
like India that we
have social
divisions.
divisions, make different promises to
different communities, look after due
representation of various communities
and make policies to redress the
grievances of  the disadvantaged
communities. Social divisions affect
voting in most countries. People from
one community tend to prefer some
party more than others. In many
countries there are parties that focus
only on one community. Yet all this
does not lead to disintegration of the
country.
Three determinants
Three factors are crucial in deciding
the outcome of politics of social
divisions. First of  all the outcome
depends on how people perceive their
identities. If people see their identities
in singular and exclusive terms, it
becomes
difficult
accommodate. As long as people in
northern Ireland saw themselves as
only Catholic or Protestant, their
differences were difficult to reconcile.
It is much easier if the people see that
their identities are multiple and are
complementary with the national
identity. A majority of Belgians now
feel that they are as much Belgian as
they are Dutch or German-speaking.
This helps them to stay together. This
is how most people in our country see
their identity: they think of themselves
as Indian as well as belonging to a state
or a language group or a social or
religious community.
Second, it depends on how
political leaders raise the demands of
any community. It is easier to
accommodate demands that are within
the constitutional framework and are
not at the cost of another community.
In some societies of Northern Ireland, the colonies of Protestant and
Catholic communities are divided by walls. These walls are sometimes
filled with graffiti as you can see here. The Irish Republican Army and
British Government  signed an agreement in 2005. What does the graffiti
here tell about the conflict in the society?
© Orion / Juska Rantanen flickr.com
The demand for ‘only Sinhala’ was at
the cost of the interest and identity of
the Tamil community in Sri Lanka. In
Yugoslavia, the leaders of different
ethnic communities presented their
demands in such a way that these could
not be accommodated within a single
country.
Third, it depends on the how the
government reacts to demands of
different groups. As we saw in the
examples of Belgium and Sri Lanka,
if the rulers are willing to share power
and accommodate the reasonable
demands of  minority community,
social divisions become less
threatening for the country. But if they
try to suppress such a demand in the
name of national unity, the end result
is often quite the opposite. Such
attempts at forced integration often
sow the seeds of disintegration.
Thus the assertion of  social
diversities in a country need not be seen
as a source of danger. In a democracy,
political expression of social divisions
is very normal and can be healthy. This
allows various disadvantaged and
marginal social groups to express their
grievances and get the government to
attend to these. Expression of various
kinds of social divisions in politics
often results in their cancelling one
another out and thus reducing their
intensity. This leads to strengthening
of a democracy.
But a positive attitude towards
diversity and a willingness to
accommodate it do not come about
easily. People who feel marginalised,
deprived and discriminated have to
fight against the injustices. Such a fight
often takes the democratic path,
voicing their demands in a peaceful and
constitutional manner and seeking a
fair position through elections.
Sometimes social differences can take
the form of  unacceptable level of
social inequality and injustice. The
struggle against such inequalities
sometimes takes the path of violence
and defiance of state power. However
history shows that democracy is the
best way to fight for recognition and
also to accommodate diversity.
Draw or collect some
images of social divisions
in different aspects of life.
Can you think of some
examples of social
division or discrimination
in the field of sports?
So, you are
saying that too
many small
divisions are
better than a
single big
division? Are you
also saying that
politics is a force
of unity?
Discuss three factors that determine the outcomes of politics of
social divisions.
When does a social difference become a social division?
How do social divisions affect politics? Give two examples.
________________ social differences create possibilities of deep
social divisions and tensions. ___________________ social
differences do not usually lead to conflicts.
© Dario Castillejos - Cagle Cartoons Inc.
In dealing with social divisions which one of the following statements
is NOT correct about democracy?
(a) Due to political competition in a democracy, social divisions get
reflected in politics.
(b) In a democracy it is possible for communities to voice their
grievances in a peaceful manner.
(c) Democracy is the best way to accommodate social diversity.
(d) Democracy always leads to disintegration of society on the basis
of social divisions.
Consider the following three statements.
Social divisions take place when social differences overlap.
It is possible that a person can have multiple identities.
Social divisions exist in only big countries like India.
Which of the statements is/ are correct?
(a) A, B and C
(b) A and B
(c) B and C
(d) Only C
Arrange the following statements in a logical sequence and select
the right answers by using the code given below.
But all political expression of social divisions need not be always
dangerous.
Social divisions of one kind or the other exist in most countries.
Parties try to win political support by appealing to social
divisions.
Some social differences may result in social divisions.
(a) D, B, C, A   (b) D, B, A, C   (c) D, A, C, B   (d) A, B, C, D
8. Among the following, which country suffered disintegration due to
political fights on the basis of religious and ethnic identities?
(a) Belgium   (b) India   (c) Yugoslavia   (d) Netherlands
Read the following passage from a famous speech by Martin Luther
King Jr. in 1963. Which social division is he talking about? What are
his aspirations and anxieties? Do you see a relationship between this
speech and the incident in Mexico Olympics mentioned in this
chapter?
“I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a
nation where they will not be judged by the colour of their skin
but by the content of their character. Let freedom ring. And when
this happens, and when we allow freedom ring—when we let it
ring from every village and every hamlet, from every state and
every city, we will be able to speed up that day when all of God’s
children—black men and white men, Jews and Gentiles,
Protestants and Catholics—will be able to join hands and sing in
the words of the old Negro spiritual:  ‘Free at last! Free at last!
Thank God Almighty, we are free at last!’ I have a dream that
one  day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of
its creed:  ‘We hold these truths to be self-evident:  that all men
are created equal’.”
✤✥✦✧★
✚✥✩✪✯
★★✥✦✙
✢✦★★✥
✩✚✥✩✜
■✙✬✥✪✳
✚✛✣✜✜
✬✥✮✮✜✣✜
✥✤✥★✥✦✙★
✬✥✮✮✜✣
✥✤✥★✥✦✙
✫✛✜✚✛✜✣
✬✥✮✮✜✣✜
✜✭✢✣✜
★★✥✦✙★
✬✥✮✮✜✣✜
✦✚✛✜✣✫
❡✦✩✣✪
●✠✡☛✠☞
✍✎✏✑✒✑✓✔
Let us begin with gender division. This
is a form of hierarchical social division
seen everywhere, but is rarely recognised
in the study of politics. The gender
division tends to be understood as natural
and unchangeable. However, it is not
based on biology but on social
expectations and stereotypes.
Public/private division
Boys and girls are brought up to believe
that the main responsibility of women is
housework and bringing up children.
This is reflected in a SEXUAL DIVISION OF
LABOUR in most families: women do all
work inside the home such as cooking,
cleaning, washing clothes, tailoring,
looking after children, etc., and men do
all the work outside the home. It is not
that men cannot do housework; they
simply think that it is for women to
attend to these things. When these jobs
are paid for, men are ready to take up
these works. Most tailors or cooks in
hotels are men. Similarly, it is not that
women do not work outside their home.
In villages, women fetch water, collect
fuel and  work in the fields. In urban
areas, poor women work as domestic
helper in middle class homes, while
middle class women work in offices. In
fact the majority of women do some
sort of paid work in addition to
domestic labour. But their work is not
valued and does not get recognition.
The result of this division of labour
is that although women constitute half
of the humanity, their role in public life,
especially politics, is minimal in most
societies. Earlier, only men were allowed
to participate in public affairs, vote and
contest for public offices. Gradually the
gender issue was raised in politics.
Women in different parts of the world
organised and agitated for equal rights.
There were agitations in different
countries for the extension of voting
rights to women. These agitations
demanded enhancing the political and
legal status of women and improving
A poster from Bengal affirming women’s
strength.
Sexual division of labour:
A system in which all work
inside the home is either
done by the women of the
family, or organised by
them through the
domestic helpers.
Why not? If
politics is about
power, then
surely male
dominance in the
household should
be considered
political.
Why are we
discussing things
like household
work in this
textbook on
Political Science?
Is this politics?
© Zuban
their educational and career
opportunities. More radical women’s
movements aimed at equality in personal
and family life as well. These movements
are called FEMINIST movements.
Political expression of  gender
division and political mobilisation on this
Discuss all these perceptions of an ideal woman that prevail in our society. Do you
agree with any of these? If not, what is your image of an ideal woman?
Feminist: A woman
or a man who
believes in equal rights
and opportunities for
women and men.
© Zuban
question helped to improve women’s
role in public life. We now find women
working as scientists, doctors, engineers,
lawyers, managers and college and
university teachers which were earlier not
considered suitable for women. In some
parts of the world, for example in
Patriarchy: Literally,
rule by father, this
concept is used to refer
to a system that values
men more and gives
them power over
women.
Activities
Women
Income generating work
Household and related work
Talking, Gossip
No work/ Leisure
Sleep, self-care, reading etc.
12:25
11:10
Daily time use (hours: minutes)
Source: Government of India, Time Use Survey, 1998-99.
A ‘time use survey’ was conducted in six states of our country. It
shows that an average woman works every day for a little over
seven and half hours while an average man works for six and a
half hours. Yet the work done by men is more visible because
most of their work leads to generation of income. Women also do
a lot of direct income generating work, but the bulk of their work
is household related. This work remains unpaid and invisible.
Scandinavian countries such as Sweden,
Norway and Finland, the participation
of women in public life is very high.
In our country, women still lag much
behind men despite some improvement
since Independence. Ours is still a male-
dominated, PATRIARCHAL society. Women
face disadvantage, discrimination and
oppression in various ways:
The literacy rate among women is
only 54 per cent compared with 76 per
cent among men. Similarly, a smaller
You can conduct a similar time use survey in your own household.
Observe all the adult male and female members of your family for
one week. Every day note down the number of hours each of
them spends on the following activities:  income generating
activity (working at the office or shop or factory or field, etc.),
household related activity (cooking, cleaning, washing, fetching
water, looking after children or elders, etc.), reading and
recreation, talking/ gossiping, self-care, taking rest or sleeping. If
necessary make new categories. Add up the time taken on each
activity for a week and calculate the daily average for each activity
for each member. Do women work more in your family as well?
Mummy always
says to outsiders:
“I don’t work. I
am a housewife.”
But I see her
working non-stop
all the time. If
what she does is
not work, what
else is work?
Map not to scale
proportion of girl students go for higher
studies. When we look at school results,
girls perform as well as boys, if not
better in some places. But they drop out
because parents prefer to spend their
resources for their boys’ education rather
than spending equally on their sons and
daughters.
No wonder the proportion of
women among the highly paid and
valued jobs is still very small. On an
average an Indian woman works one
hour more than an average man every
day. Yet much of her work is not paid
and therefore often not valued.
The Equal Wages Act provides that
equal wages should be paid to equal
work. However in almost all areas of
work, from sports and cinema, to
factories and fields, women are paid less
than men, even when both do exactly
the same work.
In many parts of India parents
prefer to have sons and find ways to
have the girl child aborted before she is
born. Such sex-selective abortion led to
a decline in child sex ratio (number of
girl children per thousand boys) in the
Source: UNFP
Can you identify your district on this map?
What is the child sex ratio in it? How is it
different from others with a different colour?
Identify the States where most districts have
child sex ratio below 850.
Compare this map with the poster on the next
page. How do the two of them tell us about the
same issue?
CHILD SEX RATIO
NATIONAL AVERAGE 927
BELOW 800
800-849
850-899
900-949
950 AND ABOVE
DATA  NOT AVA LABLE
DELHI
© Oxfam GB
country to merely 927. As the map
shows, this ratio has fallen below 850 or
even 800 in some places.
There are reports of various kinds
of harassment, exploitation and violence
against women. Urban areas have
become particularly unsafe for women.
They are not safe even within their own
home from beating, harrassment and
other forms of domestic violence.
Women’s political
representation
All this is well known. Yet issues related
to women’s well being or otherwise are
not given adequate attention. This has led
many feminists and women’s movements
to the conclusion that unless women
control power, their problems will not
get adequate attention.  One way to
ensure this is to have more women as
elected representatives.
In India, the proportion of women
in legislature has been very low. For
example, the percentage of elected
women members in Lok Sabha has never
reached even 10 per cent of its total
strength. Their share in the state
assemblies is less than 5 per cent. In this
respect, India is among the bottom
group of nations in the world (see the
graph below). India is behind the
Could you think of some
reasons why women’s
representation is so low
in India? Do you think
America’s and Europe
have achieved a
satisfactory level of
women’s representation?
World
Average
Women in  national parliaments in different
regions of the world (in%)
Nordic
countries
Americas Europe
Saharan Africa
Pacific
South
India
States
Region
Note: Figures are for the per cent of women in the directly elected chambers of parliament in 2006
Source: http://www ipu org/wmn-e/world htm
This cartoon offers an understanding of why the Women’s Reservation Bill has not been passed in the
Parliament. Do you agree with this reading?
© Surender  - The Hindu
If casteism and
communalism are
bad, what makes
feminism a good
thing? Why don’t
we oppose all
those who divide
the society on
any lines – caste,
religion or
gender?
averages for several developing countries
of Africa and Latin America. In the
government, cabinets are largely all-male
even when a woman becomes the Chief
Minister or the Prime Minister.
One way to solve this problem is to
make it legally binding to have a fair
proportion of women in the elected
bodies. This is what the Panchayati Raj
has done in India. One-third of seats in
local government bodies – in panchayats
and municipalities – are now reserved
for women. Now there are more than
10 lakh elected women representatives
in rural and urban local bodies.
Women’s organisations and
activists have been demanding a similar
reservation of at least one-third of
seats in the Lok Sabha and State
Assemblies for women. A bill with this
proposal has been pending before the
Parliament for more than a decade. But
there is no consensus over this among
all the political parties. The bill has not
been passed.
Gender division is an example that
some form of social division needs to
be expressed in politics. This also shows
that disadvantaged groups do benefit
when social divisions become a political
issue. Do you think that women could
have made the gains we noted above if
their unequal treatment was not raised
in the political domain?
❘✠✡☛☞
✒✍✓✡☛✔✑
Let us now turn to a very different kind
of social division, the division based on
religious differences. This division is not
as universal as gender, but religious
diversity is fairly widespread in the world
today. Many countries including India
have in their population, followers of
different religions. As we noticed in the
case of Northern Ireland, even when
most of the people belong to the same
religion, there can be serious differences
about the way people practice that
religion. Unlike gender differences, the
religious differences are often expressed
in the field of politics.
Consider the following:
Gandhiji used to say that religion can
never be separated from politics. What
he meant by religion was not any
I am not religious.
Why should I
bother about
communalism and
secularism?
particular religion like Hinduism or Islam
but moral values that inform all religions.
He believed that politics must be guided
by ethics drawn from religion.
Human rights groups in our country
have argued that most of the victims of
communal riots in our country are
people from religious minorities. They
have demanded that the government
take special steps to protect religious
minorities.
Women’s movement has argued
that FAMILY LAWS of  all religions
discriminate against women. So they
have demanded that government should
change these laws to make them more
equitable.
All these instances involve a
relationship between religion and politics.
But they do not seem very wrong or
dangerous. Ideas, ideals and values
drawn from different religions can and
perhaps should play a role in politics.
People should be able to express in
politics their needs, interests and demands
as a member of a religious community.
Those who hold political power should
sometimes be able to regulate the
practice of religion so as to prevent
discrimination and oppression. These
political acts are not wrong as long as
they treat every religion equally.
Communalism
The problem begins when religion is seen
as the basis of the nation. The example
of Northern Ireland in Chapter 3 shows
the dangers of such an approach to
nationalism. The problem becomes
more acute when religion is expressed
in politics in exclusive and partisan terms,
when one religion and its followers are
pitted against another. This happens when
beliefs of one religion are presented as
superior to those of other religions,
when the demands of one religious
group are formed in opposition to
another and when state power is used
to establish domination of one religious
group over the rest. This manner of
using religion in politics is communal
politics.
Communal politics is based on the
idea that religion is the principal basis of
social community. Communalism
involves thinking along the following
lines. The followers of a particular
religion must belong to one community.
Their fundamental interests are the same.
Any difference that they may have is
irrelevant or trivial for community life.
It also follows that people who follow
different religions cannot belong to the
Family laws: Those
laws that deal with
family related matters
such as marriage,
divorce, adoption,
inheritance, etc. In our
country, different family
laws apply to followers
of different religions.
same social community. If the followers
of different religion have some
commonalities these are superficial and
immaterial. Their interests are bound to
be different and involve a conflict. In its
extreme form communalism leads to the
belief that people belonging to different
religions cannot live as equal citizens
within one nation. Either, one of them
has to dominate the rest or they have to
form different nations.
This belief is fundamentally flawed.
People of one religion do not have the
same interests and aspirations in every
context. Everyone has several other roles,
positions and identities. There are many
voices inside every community. All these
voices have a right to be heard. Therefore
any attempt to bring all followers of one
religion together in context other than
religion is bound to suppress many voices
within that community.
Communalism can take various
forms in politics:
The most common expression of
communalism is in everyday beliefs.
These routinely involve religious
prejudices, stereotypes of religious
communities and belief in the superiority
of one’s religion over other religions. This
is so common that we often fail to notice
it, even when we believe in it.
A communal mind often leads to a
quest for political dominance of one’s
own religious community. For those
belonging to majority community, this
takes the form of  majoritarian
dominance. For those belonging to the
minority community, it can take the
form of a desire to form a separate
political unit.
Political mobilisation on religious
lines is another frequent form of
I often crack
jokes about
people from one
religion. Does
that make me
communal?
communalism. This involves the use of
sacred symbols, religious leaders,
emotional appeal and plain fear in order
to bring the followers of one religion
together in the political arena. In electoral
politics this often involves special appeal
to the interests or emotions of voters
of one religion in preference to others.
Sometimes communalism takes its
most ugly form of communal violence,
riots and massacre. India and Pakistan
suffered some of the worst communal
riots at the time of the Partition. The
post-Independence period has also seen
large scale communal violence.
Secular state
Communalism was and continues to
be one of the major challenges to
democracy in our country. The makers
of our Constitution were aware of this
challenge. That is why they chose the
model of a secular state. This choice was
reflected in several constitutional
provisions that we studied last year:
There is no official religion for the
Indian state. Unlike the status of
Buddhism in Sri Lanka, that of Islam in
Pakistan and that of Christianity in
England, our Constitution does not give
a special status to any religion.
We remain strangers
Even after so many meetings
Blood stains remain
Even after so many rains
‘Faiz’
The Constitution provides to all
individuals and communities freedom to
profess, practice and propagate any
religion, or not to follow any.
The Constitution prohibits
discrimination on grounds of religion.
At the same time the Constitution
allows the state to intervene in the
matters of religion in order to ensure
equality within religious communities.
For example, it bans untouchability.
Understood in this sense, secularism
is not just an ideology of some parties
or persons. This idea constitutes one of
the foundations of  our country.
Communalism should not be seen as a
threat to some people in India. It
threatens the very idea of India. That is
why communalism needs to be
combated. A secular Constitution like
ours is necessary but not sufficient to
combat communalism. Communal
prejudices and propaganda needs to be
countered in every day life and religion
based mobilisation needs to be
countered in the arena of politics.
❈✍✎✏✑
✔✕✖✗✏✗✘✎
We have seen two instances of the
expression of social divisions in the arena
of politics, one largely positive and the
other largely negative. Let us turn to our
final case, that of caste and politics, that
has both positive and the negative aspects.
Caste inequalities
Unlike gender and religion, caste division
is special to India. All societies have some
kind of social inequality and some form
of division of labour. In most societies,
occupations are passed on from one
generation to another. Caste system is an
extreme form of this. What makes it
different from other societies is that in
this system, hereditary occupational
division was sanctioned by rituals.
Members of the same caste group were
supposed to form a social community
that practiced the same or similar
occupation, married within the caste
group and did not eat with members
from other caste groups.
Caste system was based on exclusion
of and discrimination against the
‘outcaste’ groups. They were subjected
to the inhuman practice of untouchability
about which you have studied in Class
IX. That is why political leaders and social
reformers like Jotiba Phule, Gandhiji,
B.R. Ambedkar and Periyar Ramaswami
© Ajith Ninan - The Times of India
Social and Religious Diversity of India
The Census of India records the religion of each and every Indian after every ten
years. The person who fills the Census form visits every household and records the
religion of each member of that household exactly the way each person describes it.
If someone says she has ‘no religion’ or that he is an ‘atheist’, this is exactly how it is
recorded. Thus we have reliable information on the proportion of different religious
communities in the country and how it has changed over the years. The pie chart
below presents the population proportion of six major religious groups in the country.
Since Independence, the total population of each group has increased substantially
but their proportion in the country’s population has not changed much. In percentage
terms, the population of the Hindus, Jains and Christians has declined marginally since
1961. The proportion of Muslim, Sikh and Buddhist population has increased slightly.
There is a common but mistaken impression that the proportion of the Muslims in the
country’s population is going to overtake other religious groups. Expert estimates done
for the Prime Minister’s High Level Committee (popularly known as Sachar Committee)
show that the proportion of the Muslims is expected to go up a little, by about 3 to 4
per cent, in the next 50 years. It proves that in overall terms, the population balance
of different religious groups is not likely to change in a big way.
The same is true of the major caste groups. The Census of India counts two social
groups:  the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. Both these broad groups
include hundreds of castes or tribes whose names are listed in an official Schedule.
Hence the prefix ‘Scheduled’ in their name. The Scheduled Castes, commonly known
as Dalits, include those that were previously regarded as ‘outcaste’ in the Hindu social
order and were subjected to exclusion and untouchability. The Scheduled Tribes, often
referred to as Adivasis, include those communities that led a secluded life usually in
hills and forests and did not interact much with the rest of society. In 2001, the
Scheduled Castes were 16.2 per
cent and the Scheduled Tribes were
8.2 per cent of the country’s
population.
The Census does not yet count the
Other Backward Classes, the group
we discussed in class IX. Hence
there are some differences about
their proportion in the country’s
population. The National Sample
Survey of 2004-05 estimates their
population to be around 41 per
cent. Thus the SC, ST and the
OBC together account for about
two-thirds of the country’s
population and about three-fourths
of the Hindu population.
Population of different religious
group in India, 2001
Hindu
80.5%
Muslim
13.4%
Others 1.9%
Christian 2.3%
Sikh 1.9%
Others include Buddhist 0.8% Jain 0.4%
All other religions 0.6%  No religion 0.1%
Source: Census of India, 2001
Naicker advocated and worked to
establish a society in which caste
inequalities are absent.
Partly due to their efforts and partly
due to other socio-economic changes,
castes and caste system in modern India
have undergone great changes. With
economic development, large scale
URBANISATION, growth of literacy and
education, OCCUPATIONAL MOBILITY and
the weakening of the position of
landlords in the villages, the old notions
of CASTE HIERARCHY are breaking down.
Now, most of the times, in urban areas
it does not matter much who is walking
along next to us on a street or eating at
the next table in a restaurant. The
Constitution of India prohibited any
caste-based discrimination and laid the
foundations of policies to reverse the
injustices of the caste system. If a person
who lived a century ago were to return
to India, she would be greatly surprised
at the change that has come about in
the country.
Yet caste has not disappeared from
contemporary India. Some of the older
aspects of caste have persisted. Even
now most people marry within their
own caste or tribe. Untouchability has
not ended completely, despite
constitutional prohibition. Effects of
centuries
advantages
disadvantages continue to be felt today.
The caste groups that had access to
education under the old system have
done very well in acquiring modern
education as well. Those groups that did
not have access to education or were
prohibited from acquiring it have naturally
lagged behind. That is why there is a
disproportionately large presence of
‘upper caste’ among the urban middle
classes in our country. Caste continues to
be closely linked to economic status.
(See Plus Box on Page 52.)
Caste in politics
As in the case of communalism, casteism
is rooted in the belief that caste is the
sole basis of  social community.
According to this way of thinking,
people belonging to the same caste
belong to a natural social community and
have the same interests which they do
not share with anyone from another caste.
As we saw in the case of communalism,
such a belief is not borne out by our
experience. Caste is one aspect of our
experience but it is not the only relevant
or the most important aspect.
Caste can take various forms in politics:
When parties choose candidates in
elections, they keep in mind the caste
composition of the electorate and
nominate candidates from different
castes so as to muster necessary support
to win elections. When governments are
formed, political parties usually take care
that representatives of different castes and
tribes find a place in it.
Urbanisation: Shift of
population from rural
areas to urban areas
Occupational
mobility: Shift from
one occupation to
another, usually when a
new generation takes up
occupations other than
those practiced by their
ancestors.
Caste hierarchy: A
ladder like formation in
which all the caste
groups are placed from
the ‘highest’ to the
‘lowest’ castes.
I don’t care what
my caste is. Why
are we discussing
all this in the
textbook? Are we
not promoting
casteism by
talking about
caste?
Now you don’t like
it! Didn’t you tell
me that wherever
there is domination,
we should discuss it
in Political Science?
Will caste disappear
if we keep mum
about it?
Caste inequality today
Caste is an important source of economic inequality because it regulates access
to resources of various kinds.  For example, in the past, the so-called
‘untouchable’ castes were denied the right to own land, while only the so-called
‘twice born’ castes had the right to education.  Although this kind of explicit and
formalised inequality based on caste is now outlawed, the effects of centuries of
accumulated advantages and disadvantages continue to be felt.  Moreover, new
kinds of inequalities have also developed.
The relationship between caste and economic status has certainly changed a lot.
Today, it is possible to find very rich and very poor people in every caste,
whether ‘low’ or ‘high’.  This was not true even twenty or thirty years ago – it
was very rare indeed to find rich people among the ‘lowest’ castes. However, as
this evidence from the National Sample Survey shows, caste continues to be very
strongly linked to economic status in many important ways:
The average economic status (measured by criteria like monthly consumption
expenditure) of caste groups still follows the old hierarchy – the ‘upper’ castes
are best off, the Dalits and Adivasis are worst off, and the backward classes are
in between.
Although every caste has some poor members, the proportion living in
extreme poverty (below the official ‘poverty line’) is much higher for the lowest
castes and much lower for the upper castes, with the backward classes once
again in between.
Although every caste has some members who are rich, the upper castes are
heavily over-represented among the rich while the lower castes are severely
under-represented.
Percentage of poulation living below the poverty line, 1999-2000
Caste and Community groups
Rural
Urban
Scheduled Tribes
Scheduled Castes
Other Backward Classes
Muslim Upper Castes
Hindu Upper Castes
Christian Upper Castes
Sikh Upper Castes
Other Upper Castes
All Groups
Note: ‘Upper Caste’ here means those who are not from SC, ST, or OBC. Below the poverty line
means those who spent Rs 327 or less per person per month in rural and Rs 454 or less per
person per month in urban areas.
Source: National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO), Government of India, 55th Round, 1999-2000
Political parties and candidates in
elections make appeals to caste sentiment
to muster support. Some political parties
are known to favour some castes and
are seen as their representatives.
Universal adult franchise and the
principle of one-person-one-vote
compelled political leaders to gear up
to the task of mobilising and securing
political support. It also brought new
consciousness among the people of
castes that were hitherto treated as
inferior and low.
The focus on caste in politics can
sometimes give an impression that
elections are all about caste and nothing
else. That is far from true. Just consider
these:
No parliamentary constituency in
the country has a clear majority of one
single caste. So, every candidate and party
needs to win the confidence of more
than one caste and community to win
elections.
No party wins the votes of all the
voters of a caste or community. When
people say that a caste is a ‘vote bank’
of one party, it usually means that a large
proportion of the voters from that caste
vote for that party.
Many political parties may put up
candidates from the same caste (if that
caste is believed to dominate the
electorate in a particular constituency).
Some voters have more than one
candidate from their caste while many
voters have no candidate from their
caste.
The ruling party and the sitting MP
or MLA frequently lose elections in our
country. That could not have happened
if all castes and communities were
frozen in their political preferences.
Clearly, while caste matters in
electoral politics, so do many other
factors. The voters have strong
attachment to political parties which is
often stronger than their attachment to
their caste or community. People within
the same caste or community have
different interests depending on their
economic condition. Rich and poor or
men and women from the same caste
often vote very differently. People’s
assessment of the performance of the
government and the popularity rating of
the leaders matter and are often decisive
in elections.
Politics in caste
We have so far looked at what caste does
to politics. But it does not mean that there
is only a one-way relation between caste
and politics. Politics too influences the
caste system and caste identities by
bringing them into the political arena.
© Ajith Ninan - India Today Book of Cartoons
Do you think that political leaders are right to treat people belonging
to a caste as ‘vote banks’?
Thus, it is not politics that gets caste-
ridden, it is the caste that gets politicised.
This takes several forms:
Each caste group tries to become
bigger by incorporating within it
neighbouring castes or sub-castes which
were earlier excluded from it.
Various caste groups are required to
enter into a coalition with other castes or
communities and thus enter into a
dialogue and negotiation.
New kinds of caste groups have
come up in the political arena like
‘backward’ and ‘forward’ caste groups.
Thus, caste plays different kinds of
roles in politics. In some situations,
expression of caste differences in politics
gives many disadvantaged communities
the space to demand their share of
power. In this sense-caste politics has
helped people from Dalits and OBC
castes to gain better access to decision
making. Several political and non-political
organisations have been demanding and
agitating for an end to discrimination
against particular castes, for more dignity
and more access to land, resources and
opportunities.
At the same time exclusive attention
to caste can produce negative results as
well. As in the case of religion, politics
based on caste identity alone is not very
healthy in a democracy. It can divert
attention from other pressing issues like
poverty, development and corruption. In
some cases caste division leads to
tensions, conflict and even violence.
Mention different aspects of life in which women are discriminated
or disadvantaged in India.
State different forms of communal politics with one example each.
State how caste inequalities are still continuing in India.
State two reasons to say that caste alone cannot determine
election results in India.
What is the status of women’s representation in India’s legislative
bodies?
Mention any two constitutional provisions that make India a
secular state.
When we speak of gender divisions, we usually refer to:
( a) Biological difference between men and women
(b) Unequal roles assigned by the society to men and women
( c) Unequal child sex ratio
(d) Absence of voting rights for women in democracies
In India seats are reserved for women in
( a) Lok Sabha
(b) State legislative assemblies
( c) Cabinets
(d) Panchayati Raj bodies
Consider the following statements on the meaning of communal
politics. Communal politics is based on the belief that:
One religion is superior to that of others.
People belonging to different religions can live together happily
as equal citizens.
Followers of a particular religion constitute one community.
State power cannot be used to establish the domination of
one religious group over others.
Which of the statements is/ are correct?
(a) A, B, C, and D   (b) A, B, and D   (c) A and C   (d) B and D
10. Which among the following statements about India’s Constitution
is wrong? It
( a) prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion.
(b) gives official status to one religion.
( c) provides to all individuals freedom to profess any religion.
(d) ensures equality of citizens within religious communities.
11. Social divisions based on _________ are peculiar to India.
List I
List I I
A person who believes in equal rights
and opportunities for women and men
A. Communalist
A person who says that religion is the
principal basis of community
B. Feminist
A person who thinks that caste is the
principal basis of community
C. Secularist
A person who does not discriminate
others on the basis of religious beliefs
D. Castiest
12. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the
codes given below the Lists:
✚✛✜✢✣✚✜
✤✙✛✥✘✚✜✦
★✣✦✤✩✦✦✚
✥✫✧✚✜
✛✜✣✗✬
✣✭✥✫✜✘✛✗✘
✚✜✚✗✘
✘✣✚✜✦
✚✜✗✭✚✗✘
✥✫✧✚✜
✤✩✦✦✣✫✗
✩✜✘✙✚✜
✘✙✫✦✚
✫✗✦✘✜✛✣✗✚
✥✜✚✦✦
✘✙✚✭✳
✰✚✭✫✤✜✛
✛✢✭✫✦✘
✣✗✘✚✜✚✦✘✦
✧✥✫✣✗✘✦✳
✥✜✚✦✦✩
✛✗✛✢✪
✚✜✚✗✘
✗✣✦✛✘✣✫✗✦
✤✙✛✥✘✚✜
✣✗★✣✜
✥✫✢✣✘✣✤
✚✭✚✗✘✦✳
✤✙✛✥✘✚✜
✫✗✘✜✫✢✢✣✗✬
✥✫✢✣✘✣✤
✥✫✢✣✘✣
✥✛✜✘✣✚✦✳
✠✡☛☞✌✍
✎✏✍☛✑✑☞✒✎
✗✠☞✓✘✓
Do you remember the story of the
triumph of democracy in Poland? We
studied it last year in the first chapter
of class IX. The story reminded us
about the role played by the people
in the making of  democracy. Let us
read two recent stories of that kind
and see how power is exercised in
democracy.
Movement for democracy in
Nepal
Nepal witnessed an extraordinary
popular movement in April 2006. The
movement was aimed at restoring
democracy. Nepal, you might recall, was
one of the ‘third wave’ countries that had
won democracy in 1990. Although the
king formally remained the head of the
state, the real power was exercised by
popularly elected representatives. King
Birendra, who has accepted this transition
from absolute monarchy to constitutional
monarchy, was killed in a mysterious
massacre of the royal family in 2001.
King Gyanendra, the new king of Nepal,
was not prepared to accept democratic
rule. He took advantage of the weakness
and unpopularity of the democratically
elected government. In February 2005,
the king dismissed the then Prime Minister
and dissolved the popularly elected
Parliament. The movement of April
2006 was aimed at regaining popular
control over the government from
the king.
All the major political parties in the
parliament formed a Seven Party
Alliance (SPA) and called for a four day
strike in Kathmandu, the country’s capital.
This protest soon turned into an
indefinite strike in which MAOIST
insurgents and various other
organisations joined hands. People defied
curfew and took to the streets. The
security forces found themselves unable
to take on more than a lakh people who
gathered almost every day to demand
restoration of democracy. The number
of protesters reached between three to
five lakhs on 21 April and they served
an ultimatum to the king. The leaders
of the movement rejected the half-
hearted concessions made by the king.
They stuck to their demand for
Maoists: Those
communists who believe
in the ideology of Mao, the
leader of the Chinese
revolution. They seek to
overthrow the government
through an armed
revolution so as to
establish the rule of the
peasants and workers.
restoration of parliament, power to
an all-party government and a new
constituent assembly.
On 24 April 2004, the last day of
the ultimatum, the king was forced to
concede all the three demands. The SPA
chose Girija Prasad Koirala as the new
Prime Minister of the interim
government. The restored parliament
met and passed laws taking away most
of the powers of the king. The SPA and
the Maoists came to an understanding
about how the new Constituent
Assembly was going to be elected. This
struggle came to be known as Nepal’s
second movement for democracy.  The
struggle of the Nepali people is a source
of inspiration to democrats all over
the world.
Political parties and people of Nepal in a rally demanding restoration of democracy in their country
© Min Bajarachya
Bolivia’s Water War
The story of Poland and that of Nepal
apply to the struggle for establishing or
restoring democracy. But the role of
popular struggles does not come to an
end with the establishment of democracy.
People’s successful struggle against
privatisation of water in Bolivia reminds
us that popular struggles are integral to
the working of democracy.
Bolivia is a poor country in Latin
America. The World Bank pressurised the
government to give up its control of
municipal water supply. The government
sold these rights for the city of
Cochabamba to a multi-national
company (MNC). The company
immediately increased the price of water
by four times. Many people received
monthly water bill of Rs 1000 in a
country where average income is around
Rs 5000 a month. This led to a
spontaneous popular protest.
In January 2000, a new alliance of
labour, human rights and community
leaders organised a successful four-day
general strike in the city. The government
agreed to negotiate and the strike was
called off. Yet nothing happened. The
police resorted to brutal repression when
the agitation was started again in February.
Another strike followed in April and the
government imposed martial law. But the
power of the people forced the officials
of the MNC to flee the city and made
the government concede to all the
demands of the protesters. The contract
with the MNC was cancelled and water
supply was restored to the municipality
at old rates. This came to be known as
Bolivia’s water war.
Democracy and popular
struggles
These two stories are from very different
contexts. The movement in Nepal was
to establish democracy, while the struggle
in Bolivia involved claims on an elected,
democratic government. The popular
struggle in Bolivia was about one specific
policy, while the  struggle in Nepal was
about the foundations of the country’s
politics. Both these struggles were
successful but their impact was at
different levels.
Despite these differences, both the
stories share some elements which are
relevant to the study of the past and
future of democracies. Both these are
instances of political conflict that led to
popular struggles. In both cases the
struggle involved mass mobilisation.
Public demonstration of mass support
clinched the dispute. Finally, both
instances involved critical role of political
organisations. If you recall the first
chapter of class IX textbook, this is how
democracy has evolved all over the
world.  We can therefore draw a few
conclusions from these examples:
Democracy evolves through
popular struggles. It is possible that some
significant decisions may take place
through consensus and may not involve
any conflict at all. But that would be an
exception. Defining moments of
democracy usually involve conflict
between those groups who have
exercised power and those who aspire
for a share in power. These moments
come when the country is going through
transition to democracy, expansion of
democracy or deepening of democracy.
Democratic conflict is resolved
through mass mobilisation. Sometimes
Are you
suggesting that
strike, dharna,
bandh and
demonstration
are a good thing?
I thought it
happened only in
our country,
because we are
not a mature
democracy yet.
Does it mean that
whichever side
manages to
mobilise a bigger
crowd gets away
with whatever it
wants? Are we
saying that ‘Might
is Right’ in a
democracy?
it is possible that the conflict is resolved
by using the existing institutions like the
parliament or the judiciary. But when
there is a deep dispute, very often these
institutions themselves get involved in the
dispute. The resolution has to come
from outside, from the people.
These conflicts and mobilisations are
based on new political organisations.
True, there is an element of spontaneity
in all such historic moments. But the
spontaneous public participation
becomes effective with the help of
organised politics. There can be many
agencies of organised politics. These
include political parties, pressure groups
and movement groups.
In 1984, the Karnataka government set up a company called Karnataka Pulpwood
Limited. About 30,000 hectares of land was given virtually free to this company for 40
years. Much of this land was used by local farmers as grazing land for their cattle.
However the company began to plant eucalyptus trees on this land, which could be used
for making paper pulp. In 1987, a movement called Kittiko-Hachchiko (meaning, pluck and
plant) started a non-violent protest, where people plucked the eucalyptus plants and
planted saplings of trees that were useful to the people.
Suppose you belong to any of the following groups, what arguments would you put
forward to defend your side:  a local farmer, an environmental activist, a government
official working in this company or just a consumer of paper.
▼☞✌✍✎✍✏✑✒
Let us go back to our two examples and
look at the organisations that made these
struggles successful. We noted that the
call for indefinite strike was given by the
SPA or the Seven Party Alliance in Nepal.
This alliance included some big parties
that had some members in the
Parliament. But the SPA was not the only
organisation behind this mass upsurge.
The protest was joined by the Nepalese
Communist Party (Maoist) which did not
believe in parliamentary democracy. This
party was involved in an armed struggle
against the Nepali government and had
established its control over large parts
of Nepal.
The struggle involved many
organisations other than political parties.
All the major labour unions and their
federations joined this movement. Many
other organisations like the organisation
of the indigenous people, teachers,
lawyers and human rights groups
extended support to the movement.
I don’t like this
‘mobilisation’.
Makes it feel as if
people are like
sheep.
The protest against water
privatisation in Bolivia was not led by
any political party. It was led by an
organisation called FEDECOR. This
organisation comprised of local
professionals, including engineers and
environmentalists. They were supported
by a federation of farmers who relied
on irrigation, the confederation of
factory workers’ unions,  middle class
students from the the University of
Cochabamba and the city’s growing
population of homeless street children.
The movement was supported by the
Socialist Party.   In 2006, this party came
to power in Bolivia.
From both these examples we can
see that in a democracy several different
kinds of organisations work behind any
big struggle. These organisations play
their role in two ways. One obvious way
of influencing the decisions in a
democracy is direct participation in
competitive politics. This is done by
creating parties, contesting elections and
forming governments. But every citizen
does not participate so directly. They
may not have the desire, the need or
the skills to take part in direct political
activity other than voting.
There are many indirect ways in
which people can get governments to
listen to their demands or their point of
view. They could do so by forming an
organisation and undertaking activities to
promote their interest or their viewpoint.
These are called interest groups or
pressure groups. Sometimes people
decide to act together without forming
organisations.
Governments initiate schemes and programme to alleviate the suffering of the poor
and meet their basic needs. But poverty remains in the country? What could be the
reasons for such a situation?
© Keshav - The Hindu
☛☞✌✍✍✎☞✌
Pressure groups are organisations that
attempt to influence government
policies. But unlike political parties,
pressure groups do not aim to directly
control or share political power. These
organisations are formed when people
with common occupation, interest,
aspirations or opinions come together
in order to achieve a common objective.
In the course of the discussion
above we came across entities that are
not quite an organisation. The struggle
in Nepal was called a movement for
democracy. We often hear the word
people’s movement to describe many
forms of collective action: Narmada
Bachao Andolan, Movement for Right
to Information, Anti-liquor Movement,
Women’s Movement, Environmental
Movement. Like an interest group, a
movement also attempts to influence
politics rather than directly take part in
electoral competition. But unlike the
interest groups, movements have a
loose organisation. Their decision
making is more informal and flexible.
They depend much more on
spontaneous mass participation than an
interest group.
Can you identify the
pressure groups
functioning in the news
clippings given here?
What demand are they
making?
Sectional interest groups and
public interest groups
Usually interest groups seek to promote
the interests of a particular section or
group of society. Trade unions, business
associations and professional (lawyers,
doctors, teachers, etc.) bodies are some
examples of this type. They are sectional
because they represent a section of
society: workers, employees, business-
persons, industrialists, followers of a
religion, caste group, etc. Their principal
concern is the betterment and well being
of their members, not society in general.
Sometimes these organisations are
not about representing the interest of one
section of society. They represent some
common or general interest that needs
to be defended. The members of the
organisation may not benefit from the
cause that the organisation represents. The
Bolivian organisation FEDECOR is an
example of that kind of an organisation.
In the context of Nepal, we noted the
participation of human rights
organisations. We read about these
organisations in class IX.
These second type of groups are
called promotional groups or public
interest groups. They promote collective
rather than selective good. They aim to
help groups other than their own
members. For example, a group fighting
against bonded labour fights not for itself
but for those who are suffering under
such bondage. In some instances the
members of a public interest group may
undertake activity that benefits them as
well as others too. For example,
BAMCEF (Backward and Minorities
Community Employees Federation) is an
organisation largely made up of
government employees that campaigns
against caste discrimination. It addresses
Land rights protest: farmers of West Java, Indonesia. On June 2004,
about 15,000 landless farmers from West Java, travelled to Jakarta,
the capital city. They came with their families to demand land reform, to
insist on the return of their farms. Demonstrators chanted, “No land, No
vote” declaring that they would boycott Indonesia’s first presidential
election if no candidate backed land reform.
© w kipedia.com
the problems of its members who suffer
discrimination. But its principal concern
is with social justice and social equality
for the entire society.
Movement groups
As in the case of interest groups, the
groups involved with movements also
include a very wide variety. The various
examples mentioned above already
indicate a simple distinction. Most of
the movements are issue specific
movements that seek to achieve a single
objective within a limited time frame.
Others are more general or generic
movements that seek to achieve a broad
goal in the very long term.
The Nepalese movement for
democracy arose with the specific
objective of reversing the king’s orders
that led to suspension of democracy. In
India, Narmada Bachao Andolan is a
good example of this kind of
movement. The movement started with
the specific issue of the people displaced
by the creation of Sardar Sarovar
dam on the Narmada river. Its objective
was to stop the dam from being
constructed. Gradually it became a
wider movement that questioned all
such big dams and the model of
development that required such dams.
Movements of this kind tend to have a
clear leadership and some organisation.
But their active life is usually short.
These single-issue movements can
be contrasted with movements that are
long term and involve more than one
issue. The environmental movement and
the women’s movement are examples
of such movements. There is no single
organisation that controls or guides such
movements.  Environmental movement
is a label for a large number of
organisations and issue-specific
movements. All of these have separate
organisation, independent leadership
and often different views on policy
Social movements and
pressure groups try to
mobilise citizens in
many ways. The collage
here show some of
them.
related matters. Yet all of these share a
broad objective and have a similar
approach. That is why they are called a
movement. Sometimes these broad
movements have a loose umbrella
organisation as well. For example, the
National Alliance for Peoples’
Movements (NAPM) is an organisation
of organisations. Various movement
groups struggling on specific issues are
constituents of this loose organisation
which coordinates the activities of a
large number of peoples’ movements
in our country.
How do they influence politics?
Pressure groups and movements exert
influence on politics in a variety of ways:
They try to gain public support and
sympathy for their goals and their activity
by carrying out information campaigns,
organising meetings,  file petitions, etc.
Most of these groups try to influence
the media into giving more attention to
these issues.
They often organise protest activity
like strikes or disrupting government
The Right to Information
Act is one of the recent
legislations passed by
Parliament? Who is
shown as obstructing the
implementation of the
legislation?
What are the social movements listed in these news clippings? What efforts are they
making? Which sections are they trying to mobilise?
© Surendera - The Hindu
programmes. Workers’ organisations,
employees’ associations and most of the
movement groups often resort to these
tactics in order to force the government
to take note of their demand.
Business groups often employ
professional lobbyists or sponsor
expensive advertisements. Some persons
from pressure groups or movement
groups may participate in official bodies
and committees that offer advice to the
government.
While interest groups and movements
do not directly engage in party politics,
they seek to exert influence on political
parties. Most of the movement groups
take a political stance without being a party.
They have political ideology and political
position on major issues. The relationship
between political parties and pressure
groups can take different forms, some
direct and others very indirect:
In some instances the pressure
groups are either formed or led by the
leaders of political parties or act as
extended arms of political parties. For
example, most trade unions and students’
organisations in India are either
established by or affiliated to one or the
other major political party. Most of the
leaders of such pressure groups are
usually activists and leaders of party.
Sometimes political parties grow out
of movements. For example, when the
Assam movement led by students against
the ‘foreigners’ came to an end, it led to
the formation of  the Asom Gana
Parishad. The roots of parties like the
DMK and the AIADMK  in Tamil Nadu
can be traced to a long drawn social
reform movement during the 1930 and
1940s.
In most cases the relationship
between parties and interest or
movement groups is not so direct. They
often take positions that are opposed to
each other. Yet they are in dialogue and
negotiation. Movement groups have
raised new issues that have been taken
up by political parties. Most of the new
leadership of political parties comes
from interest or movement groups.
Is their influence healthy?
It may initially appear that it is not healthy
for groups that promote interest of one
section to have influence in democracy.
A democracy must look after the interest
of all, not just one section. Also, it may
seem that these groups wield power
without responsibility. Political parties
have to face the people in elections, but
these groups are not accountable to the
people.  Pressure groups and movements
may not get their funds and support
Follow the news on any news TV channel for one week. Make a note of news related
to pressure groups or movements representing the following sectors or sections:  farmers,
traders, labour, industry, environment and women. Which of these are mentioned most on
television news? Which sections or interests get mentioned the least? You may follow a
newspaper if you don’t have TV at home.
The Green Belt Movement has planted 30 million trees across Kenya. Its
leader Wangari Maathai is very disappointed with the response of government
officials and politicians:
“In the 1970s and 1980s, as I was encouraging farmers to plant trees on their
land, I also discovered that corrupt government agents were responsible for much
of the deforestation by illegally selling off land and trees to
well-connected developers. In the early 1990’s, the
livelihoods, the rights and even the lives of many Kenyans in
the Rift Valley were lost when elements of President Daniel
Arap Moi’s government encouraged ethnic communities to
attack one another over land. Supporters of the ruling party
got the land, while those in the pro-democracy movement
were displaced. This was one of the government’s ways of
retaining power;  if communities were kept busy fighting over
land, they would have less opportunity to demand democracy.”
In the above passage what relationship do you see between
democracy and social movements? How should this movement
respond to the government?
from the people.  Sometimes, pressure
groups with small public support but lots
of money can highjack public discussion
in favour of their narrow agenda.
On balance, however, pressure
groups and movements have deepened
democracy. Putting pressure on the rulers
is not an unhealthy activity in a democracy
as long as everyone gets this opportunity.
Governments can often come under
undue pressure from a small group of
rich and powerful people. Public
interest groups and movements
perform a useful role of countering
this undue influence and reminding
the government of the needs and
concerns of ordinary citizens.
Even the sectional interest groups
play a valuable role.  Where different
groups function actively, no one single
group can achieve dominance over
society. If one group brings pressure on
government to make policies in its
favour, another will bring counter
pressure not to make policies in the way
the first group desires. The government
gets to hear about what different sections
of the population want. This leads to a
rough balance of power and
accommodation of conflicting interests.
© Alen Lauzan Falcon - Cagle Cartoons Inc.
This cartoon is called ‘News-no-news’.
Who is most often visible in the media?
Whom are we most likely to hear about
in newspapers?
In what ways do pressure groups and movements exert influence
on politics?
Describe the forms of relationship between pressure groups and
political parties?
Explain how the activities of pressure groups are useful in the
functioning of a democratic government.
What is a pressure group? Give a few examples.
What is the difference between a pressure group and a
polit ical part y?
Organisations that undertake activities to promote the interests
of specific social sections such as workers, employees, teachers,
and lawyers are called _____________________ groups.
Which among the following is the special feature that
distinguishes a pressure group from a political party?
( a) Parties take political stances, while pressure groups do not
bother about political issues.
(b) Pressure groups are confined to a few people, while parties
involve larger number of people.
( c) Pressure groups do not seek to get into power, while political
parties do.
(d) Pressure groups do not seek to mobilise people, while parties
Match List I (organisations and struggles) with List II and select
the correct answer using the codes given below the lists: do.
List I
List I I
Organisations that seek to promote
A. Movement
the interests of a particular section
or group
Organisations that seek to promote
B. Political parties
common interest
Struggles launched for the resolution
C. Sectional interest
of a social problem with or without
groups
an organisational structure
Organisations that mobilise people
D. Public interest
with a view to win political power
groups
List I
List I I
Pressure group
A. Narmada Bachao Andolan
Long term movement
B. Asom Gana Parishad
Single issue movement
C. Women’s movement
Political party
D. Fertilizer dealers’ association
Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the
codes given below the lists:
10. Consider the following statements about pressure groups and
parties.
Pressure groups are organised expression of the interests and
views of specific social sections.
Pressure groups take positions on political issues.
All pressure groups are political parties.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) A, B, and C   (b) A and B   (c) B and C   (d) A and C
11. Mewat is one of the most backward areas in Haryana. It used  to
be a part of district Gurgaon and Faridabad. The people of Mewat
felt that the area will get better attention if it were to become a
separate district. But political parties were indifferent to this
sentiment. The demand for a separate district was raised by
Mewat Educational and Social Organisation and Mewat Saksharta
Samiti in 1996. Later Mewat Vikas Sabha was founded in 2000 and
carried out a series of public awareness campaigns.  This forced
both the major parties, Congress and the Indian National Lok Dal,
to announe their support for the new district before the assembly
elections held in February 2005. The new district came into
existence in July 2005.
I n this exam ple what is the relationship that you observe am ong
movement, political parties and the government? Can you think of an
example that shows a relationship different from this one?
✜✢✣✘✤✚✥
✤✚✘✗✗
✩✘✪✖✔
✚✔✖✢✗
✔✖✣✢✗
✘✔✖✤✢✜
✣✥✔✖✘
✜✢✗✖❞✓✗
✩✘✪✖✔✖✤
✘✪✖✔✖✤
✚✔✖✢✗
✢✕✖✤✪✢✗
✛✢✜✢✚
✗✘✤✖✥✪
✖✗✖✘✓
✣✘✤✚✥✔
✤✪✙✜✖
✤✪✘✗✢
✚✔✖✢✗
✤✘✙✓✔
✙✢✗✔✖✘
✔✖✢✗✇
✚✔✖✢✗
✚✘✜✙✤✢
✓✥✔✖✘
✚✢❞✖✘✓✥
✘✪✖✔✖✤
✥✯✘✙✔
☞✑✒✓✒✔
✕✖✓✒✍✗✘
Political parties are easily one of the most
visible institutions in a democracy. For
most ordinary citizens, democracy is equal
to political parties. If you travel to remote
parts of our country and speak to the
less educated citizens, you could come
across people who may not know
anything about our Constitution or about
the nature of our government. But
chances are that they would know
something about our political parties. At
the same time this visibility does not mean
popularity. Most people tend to be very
critical of political parties. They tend to
blame parties for all that is wrong with
our democracy and our political life.
Parties have become identified with
social and political divisions.
Therefore, it is natural to ask – do
we need political parties at all? About
hundred years ago there were few
countries of the world that had any
political party. Now there are few that
do not have parties. Why did political
parties become so omnipresent in
democracies all over the world? Let us
first answer what political parties are and
what they do, before we say why we need
them.
Meaning
A political party is a group of people
who come together to contest elections
and hold power in the government. They
agree on some policies and programmes
for the society with a view to promote
the collective good. Since there can be
different views on what is good for all,
So, you agree
with me. Parties
are partial,
partisan and lead
to partitions.
Parties do
nothing but
divide people.
That is their real
function!
Election Commission has officially banned wall
writing by parties during election times. Most
political parties argue that was the cheapest way for
their campaign. These election times used to
create amazing graffiti on the walls. Here are some
examples from Tamil Nadu.
© (1) M Govarthan (2) A Muralidharan (3) M Moorthy (4) T Singaravelou, The Hindu
Partisan: A person
who is strongly
committed to a party,
group or faction.
Partisanship is marked
by a tendency to take a
side and inability to take
a balanced view on an
issue.
© RK Laxman - Brushing up the years
parties try to persuade people why their
policies are better than others. They seek
to implement these policies by winning
popular support through elections.
Thus, parties reflect fundamental
political divisions in a society. Parties are
about a part of the society and thus
involve PARTISANSHIP. Thus a party is
known by which part it stands for, which
policies it supports and whose interests
it upholds. A political party has three
components:
the leaders,
the active members and
the followers
Functions
What does a political party do? Basically,
political parties fill political offices and
exercise political power. Parties do so
by performing a series of functions:
1 Parties contest elections. In most
democracies, elections are fought mainly
among the candidates put up by political
parties. Parties select their candidates in
different ways. In some countries, such
as the USA, members and supporters
of a party choose its candidates. Now
more and more countries are following
this method. In other countries like India,
top party leaders choose candidates for
contesting elections.
2 Parties put forward different
policies and programmes and the
voters choose from them. Each of us
may have different opinions and views
on what policies are suitable for the
society. But no government can handle
such a large variety of  views. In a
democracy, a large number of similar
opinions have to be grouped together
to provide a direction in which policies
can be formulated by the governments.
This is what the parties do. A party
reduces a vast multitude of opinions into
Okay, granted
that we can’t live
without political
parties. But tell
me how do we
live with the kind
of political parties
we have?
a few basic positions which it supports.
A government is expected to base
its policies on the line taken by the
RULING PARTY.
3 Parties play a decisive role in making
laws for a country. Formally, laws are
debated and passed in the legislature. But
since most of the members belong to a
party, they go by the direction of the
party leadership, irrespective of their
personal opinions.
4 Parties form and run governments.
As we noted last year, the big policy
decisions are taken by political executive
that comes from the political parties.
Parties recruit leaders, trains them and
then make them ministers to run the
government in the way they want.
5 Those parties that lose in the elections
play the role of opposition to the parties
in power, by voicing different views and
criticising government for its failures or
wrong policies. Opposition parties also
mobilise opposition to the government.
6 Parties shape public opinion. They
raise and highlight issues. Parties have
lakhs of members and activists spread
all over the country. Many of the pressure
groups are the extensions of political
parties among different sections of
society. Parties sometimes also launch
movements for the resolution of
problems faced by people. Often
opinions in the society crystallise on the
lines parties take.
7 Parties provide people access to
government machinery and welfare
schemes implemented by governments.
For an ordinary citizen it is easy to
approach a local party leader than a
government officer. That is why they feel
close to parties even when they do not
fully trust them.  Parties have to be
responsive to people’s needs and
demands. Otherwise people can reject
those parties in the next elections.
Necessity
This list of functions in a sense answers
the question asked above: we need
political parties because they perform all
these functions. But we still need to ask
why modern democracies cannot exist
without political parties.  We can
understand the necessity of political
parties by imagining a situation without
parties. Every candidate in the elections
will be independent. So no one will be
able to make any promises to the people
about any major policy changes. The
government may be formed, but its
utility will remain ever uncertain. Elected
representative will be accountable to their
constituency for what they do in the
locality. But no one will be responsible
for how the country run.
We can also think about it by looking
at the non-party based elections to the
panchayat in many states. Although, the
parties do not contest formally, it is
generally noticed that the village gets split
into more than one faction, each of
which puts up a ‘panel’ of its candidates.
This is exactly what the party does. That
is the reason we find political parties in
almost all countries of the world,
whether these countries are big or small,
old or new, developed or developing.
The rise of political parties is directly
linked to the emergence of
representative democracies. As we have
seen, large scale societies need
representative democracy.  As societies
became large and complex, they also
needed some agency to gather different
views on various issues and to present
these to the government. They needed
Ruling Party: Political
party that runs
government.
some way to bring various
representatives together so that a
responsible government could be
formed. They needed a mechanism to
support or restrain the government,
Categorise these photographs by the functions of political parties they
illustrate. Find one photograph or news clipping from your own area for
each of the functions listed above.
make policies, justify or oppose them.
Political parties fulfill these needs that
every representative government has.
We can say that parties are a necessary
condition for a democracy.
✓✞✔✕✖
✓✡✗✑✘
In a democracy any group of citizens is
free to form a political party.  In this
formal sense there are a large number
of political parties in each country. More
than 750 parties are registered with the
Election Commission of India. But not
all these parties are serious contenders in
the elections. Usually only a handful of
parties are effectively in the race to win
elections and form the government. So
the question then is: how many major
or effective parties are good for a
democracy?
In some countries only one party is
allowed to control and run the government.
These are called one-party systems.
1: Activists of BJP Mahila Morcha demonstrating against hike in prices of onions and LPG in
Visakhapatnam
2: Minister distributes Rs One lakh cheque to the hooch victims family at their houses.
3: Activists of CPI (M), CPI, OGP and JD (S) take out a rally in Bhubaneswar to protest against
POSCO, the Korean steel company for being permitted by the State Government to export iron
ore from Orissa to feed steel plants in China and Korea
© (1) C V Subrahmanyan (2) K Gopinathan
(3) A Chakrabarty, The Hindu
What did Kishenji mean by an alternative political formation?  The
question came up in a conversation between Sudha, Karuna,
Shaheen and Gracy. All four women had led very powerful people’s
movements in different parts of the country. They were meeting in
a village in Orissa, away from their day-to-day struggles, to think afresh the future of
people’s movements.
The discussion naturally turned to Kishenji, who was regarded as a friend, political
philosopher  and moral guide by all the movement groups in the country. He had argued
that people’s movement should embrace politics openly. His argument was simple yet
powerful. Movements focused on a single issue are suitable as long as we wish to achieve
limited changes in a particular aspect of life. But if we wish to bring about a fundamental
social transformation, or basic change even in one aspect of life, we would need a political
organisation. People’s movement must establish a new political formation to act as a moral
force in politics. This was an urgent task, he said, because all the existing political parties
had become irrelevant for social transformation.
“But Kishenji never clarified what that organisation will be. He talked of an alternative
political formation or a third force in politics. But did he mean a political party?” said
Gracy. She felt that an old style political party was not the right instrument for social
change.
Sudha agreed with her. “I have thought about it several times. I agree that all the
struggles that we are involved with – the struggle against displacement, against
globalisation, against caste and gender oppression and for an alternative kind of
development – all this is political. But the moment we form a party, all the goodwill we
have earned all these years will be lost. People will think of us as no different from other
politicians.”
“Besides”, added Karuna, “we have seen that a lot
can be achieved by putting pressure on the
existing political parties. We tried putting up
candidates in panchayat elections, but the results
were not very encouraging. People respect our
work, they even adore us, but when it comes to
voting they go for the established political
parties.”
Shaheen did not agree with them:  “Let us be very
clear. Kishenji wanted all the people’s movements
to forge a new political party. Of course he
wanted this party to be a different kind of a party.
He was not for political alternatives, but for an
alternative kind of politics.”
Kishenji is no m ore. W hat w ould be your
advice to these four activists? Should they
form  a new  political party? Can a political
party becom e a m oral force in politics? W hat
should that party be like?
politics?
moral force
© Zuban
In Class IX, we noted that in China, only
the Communist Party is allowed to rule.
Although, legally speaking, people are
free to form political parties, it does not
happen because the electoral system does
not permit free competition for power.
We cannot consider one party system as
a good option because this is not a
democratic option. Any democratic
system must allow at least two parties
to compete in elections and provide a
fair chance for the competing parties to
come to power.
In some countries, power usually
changes between two main parties.
Several other parties may exist, contest
elections and win a few seats in the
national legislatures. But only the two
main parties have a serious chance of
winning majority of  seats to form
government. Such a party system is called
two-party system. The United States of
America and the United Kingdom are
examples of two-party system.
If several parties compete for
power, and more than two parties
have a reasonable chance of coming
to power either on their own strength
or in alliance with others, we call it a
multi-party system. Thus in India, we
have a multi-party system. In this
system, the government is formed by
various parties coming together in a
coalition. When several parties in a
multi-party system join hands for the
purpose of contesting elections and
winning power, it is called an alliance
or a front. For example, in India there
were three such major alliances in 2004
parliamentary elections– the National
Democratic Alliance, the United
Progressive Alliance and the Left Front.
The multi-party system often appears
very messy and leads to political
instability. At the same time, this system
allows a variety of interests and
opinions
enjoy
political
representation.
So, which of these is better? Perhaps
the best answer to this very common
question is that this is not a very good
question. Party system is not something
any country can choose. It evolves over
a long time, depending on the nature of
society, its social and regional divisions,
its history of politics and its system of
elections. These cannot be changed very
quickly. Each country develops a party
system that is conditioned by its special
circumstances. For example, if India has
evolved a multi-party system, it is
because the social and geographical
diversity in such a large country is not
easily absorbed by two or even three
parties. No system is ideal for all countries
and all situations.
I don’t like so
many parties. It’s
such a mess. I
wonder how the
politicians
manage these
coalitions. I can’t
even remember
the names of all
the parties.
Let us apply what we have learnt about party systems to the various
states within India. Here are three major types of party systems that
exist at the State level. Can you find the names of at least two States for each
of these types?
Two-party system
Multi-party system with two alliances
Multi-party system
P p lar
Popular
P p lar
Popular
p litica  ar es
political parties
l t ca  ar
political parties
art c p tio
particip tion
participation
participation
It is often said that political parties are facing
a crisis because they are very unpopular and
the citizens are indifferent to political parties.
The available evidence shows that this belief is only
partly true for India. The evidence, based on a series of
large sample surveys conducted over several decades, shows
that:
Political parties do not enjoy much trust among the people in
South Asia. The proportion of those who say their trust in political
parties is ‘not much’ or ‘not at all’ is more than those who have
‘some’ or ‘great’ trust.
The same is true of most other democracies as well. Political
parties are one of the least trusted institutions all over the world.
Yet the level of participation in the activities of political parties
was fairly high. The proportion of those who said they were
members of some political party was higher in India than many
advanced countries like Canada, Japan, Spain and South Korea.
Over the last three
decades the proportion of
those who report to be
members of political parties
in India has gone up
steadily.
The proportion of those
who say they feel ‘close to
a political party’ has also
gone up in India in this
period.
Source: SDSA Team, State of Democracy in South Asia, Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2007
◆✞✟✠✡☛✞☞
✠✟✠✍✞☞
✞✎✟✠✏✑
Democracies that follow a federal system
all over the world tend to have two kinds
of political parties: parties that are present
in only one of the federal units and
parties that are present in several or all
units of the federation. This is the case in
India as well. There are some country-
wide parties, which are called ‘national
parties’. These parties have their units in
various states. But by and large all these
units follow the same policies,
programmes and strategy that is decided
at the national level.
Every party in the country has to
register with the Election Commission.
While the Commission treats all parties
equally, it offers some special facilities to
large and established parties.  These
parties are given a unique symbol – only
the official candidates of that party can
use that election symbol. Parties that get
this privilege and some other special
facilities are ‘recognised’ by the Election
Commission for this purpose. That is
why these parties are called, ‘recognised
political parties’. The Election
Commission has laid down detailed
criteria of the proportion of votes and
seats that a party must get in order to be
a recognised party. A party that secures
at least 6 per cent of the total votes in an
election to the Legislative Assembly of a
State and wins at least two seats is
recognised as a State party. A party that
secures at least six per cent of total votes
in Lok Sabha elections or Assembly
elections in four States and wins at least
four seats in the Lok Sabha is recognised
as a national party.
According to this classification, there
were six national recognised parties in
the country in 2006. Let us learn
something about each of these parties.
Does the cartoonist reflect the data graphics shown in the
previous page?
Crunching  Numbers
© Tab - The Calgary Sun, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Indian National Congress
(INC): Popularly known as
the Congress Party. One of
the oldest parties of the
world. Founded in 1885 and has
experienced many splits. Played a
dominant role in Indian politics at the
national and state level for several decades
after India’s Independence. Under the
leadership of Jawaharlal Nehru, the party
sought to build a modern secular
democratic republic in India. Ruling
party at the centre till 1977 and then from
1980 to 1989. After 1989, its support
declined, but it continues to be present
throughout the country, cutting across
social divisions. A centrist party (neither
rightist nor leftist) in its ideological
orientation, the party espouses
secularism and welfare of weaker
sections and minorities. Supports new
economic reforms but with a human
face. Emerged as the largest party with
145 members in the Lok Sabha elections
held in 2004. Currently leads the ruling
United Progressive Alliance coalition
government at the Centre.
Bharatiya Janata Party
(BJP): Founded in 1980 by
reviving the erstwhile
Bharatiya Jana Sangh.
Wants to build a strong and modern
India by drawing inspiration from India’s
ancient culture and values. Cultural
nationalism (or ‘Hindutva’) is an
important element in its conception of
Indian nationhood and politics. Wants
full territorial and political integration of
Jammu and Kashmir with India, a
uniform civil code for all people living
in the country irrespective of religion,
and ban on religious conversions. Its
support base increased substantially in
the 1990s. Earlier limited to north and
west and to urban areas, the party
expanded its support in the south, east,
the north-east and to rural areas. Came
to power in 1998 as the leader of the
National Democratic Alliance including
several state and regional parties. Lost
elections in 2004 and is the principal
opposition party in the Lok Sabha.
Bahujan
Samaj
Party (BSP): Formed
in 1984 under the
leadership of Kanshi
Ram. Seeks to represent and secure
power for the bahujan samaj which
includes the dalits, adivasis, OBCs and
religious minorities. Draws inspiration
from the ideas and teachings of Sahu
Maharaj, Mahatma Phule, Periyar
Ramaswami Naicker and Babasaheb
Ambedkar. Stands for the cause of
securing the interests and welfare of the
dalits and oppressed people. It has its
main base in the state of Uttar Pradesh
and substantial presence in neighbouring
states like Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Uttarakhand, Delhi and Punjab. Formed
government in Uttar Pradesh several
times by taking the support of different
parties at different times. In the Lok
Sabha elections held in 2004, it polled
about 5 per cent votes and secured 19
seats in the Lok Sabha.
Communist Party of
India - Marxist (CPI-M):
Founded in 1964.
Believes in Marxism-
Leninism. Supports socialism, secularism
and democracy and opposes imperialism
and communalism. Accepts democratic
elections as a useful and helpful means
for securing the objective of socio-
economic justice in India. Enjoys strong
support in West Bengal, Kerala and
Tripura, especially among the poor,
factory workers, farmers, agricultural
labourers and the intelligentsia. Critical
of the new economic policies that allow
free flow of foreign capital and goods
into the country. Has been in power in
West Bengal without a break for 30 years.
In 2004 elections, it won about 6 per
cent of votes and 43 seats in the Lok
Sabha. Currently supports the UPA
government from outside, without
joining the government.
Communist Party of
India (CPI): Formed
in 1925. Believes in
Marxism-Leninism,
secularism and democracy. Opposed to
the forces of secessionism and
communalism. Accepts parliamentary
democracy as a means of promoting
the interests of the working class, farmers
and the poor. Became weak after the
split in the party in 1964 that led to the
formation of the CPI(M). Significant
presence in the states of Kerala, West
Bengal, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh and
Tamil Nadu. Its support base had
gradually declined over the years. It
secured about 1.4 per cent votes and 10
seats in the 2004 Lok Sabha elections.
Advocates the coming together of all left
parties to build a strong left front.
Currently supports UPA government
from outside.
Nationalist Congress
Party (NCP): Formed in
1999 following a split in the
Congress party. Espouses
democracy, Gandhian secularism, equity,
social justice and federalism. Wants that
high offices in government be confined
to natural born citizens of the country.
A major party in Maharashtra and has a
significant presence in Meghalaya,
Manipur and Assam. A coalition partner
in the state of Maharashtra in alliance
with the Congress. Since 2004, a member
of the United Progressive Alliance.
✡✟☛✞☞✠✌
Other than these six parties, most of the
major parties of the country are classified
by the Election Commission as ‘State
parties’. These are commonly referred
to as regional parties. Yet these parties
need not be regional in their ideology
or outlook. Some of these parties are
all India parties that happen to have
succeeded only in some states. Parties like
the Samajwadi Party, Samata Party and
Rashtriya Janata Dal have national level
political organisation with units in several
states. Some of these parties like Biju
Janata Dal, Sikkim Democratic Front
and Mizo National Front are conscious
about their State identity.
Over the last three decades, the
number and strength of these parties has
expanded. This made the Parliament of
India politically more and more diverse.
No one national party is able to secure
on its own a majority in Lok Sabha. As
a result, the national parties are compelled
to form alliances with State parties. Since
1996, nearly every one of the State
parties has got an opportunity to be a
part of one or the other national level
coalition government. This has
contributed to the strengthening of
federalism and democracy in our
country. (See the map on the next page
for details of these parties).
❈✞✟✠✠✡☛☞
✎✠✑✍✑✒
✏✟✓✍✑✡✌
We have seen how crucial political parties
are for the working of democracy. Since
parties are the most visible face of
democracy, it is natural that people blame
parties for whatever is wrong with the
working of democracy. All over the
world, people express strong
dissatisfaction with the failure of political
parties to perform their functions well.
This is the case in our country too.
Popular dissatisfaction and criticism has
focussed on four problem areas in the
working of political parties. Political
parties need to face and overcome these
challenges in order to remain effective
instruments of democracy.
The first challenge is lack of
internal democracy within parties. All
over the world there is a tendency in
political
parties
towards
concentration of power in one or few
leaders at the top. Parties do not keep
membership registers, do not hold
organisational meetings, and do not
conduct internal elections regularly.
Ordinary members of the party do not
get sufficient information on what
happens inside the party. They do not
have the means or
the connections
needed to influence
the decisions. As a
result the leaders
assume
greater
power to make
decisions in the
name of the party.
Since one or few
leaders exercise
paramount power
in the party, those
who disagree with
the leadership find it
Why don’t parties
give enough
tickets to
women? Is that
also due to lack
of internal
democracy?
Berlusconi was the Prime
Minister of Italy. He is also
one of the top business man
in Italy. He is the leader of the
Forza Italia founded in 1993.
His company owns TV
channels, the most important
publishing company, a foot
ball club (AC Milan) and a
bank. This cartoon was
made during the last
elections.
© Riber Hansson - Svenska Dagbladet, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Berlusconi Puppet Theatre
difficult to continue in the party. More
than loyalty to party principles and
policies, personal loyalty to the leader
becomes more important.
The second challenge of dynastic
succession is related to the first one. Since
most political parties do not practice
open and transparent procedures for
their functioning, there are very few ways
for an ordinary worker to rise to the top
in a party. Those who happen to be the
leaders are in a position of unfair
advantage to favour people close to
them or even their family members. In
many parties, the top positions are always
controlled by members of one family.
This is unfair to other members of that
party. This is also bad for democracy,
since people who do not have adequate
experience or popular support come to
occupy positions of  power. This
tendency is present in some measure all
over the world, including in some of
the older democracies.
The third challenge is about the
growing role of money and muscle
power in parties, especially during
elections. Since parties are focussed only
on winning elections, they tend to use
short-cuts to win elections. They tend to
nominate those candidates who have or
can raise lots of money. Rich people and
companies who give funds to the parties
tend to have influence on the policies and
decisions of the party. In some cases,
parties support criminals who can win
elections. Democrats all over the world
are worried about the increasing role of
rich people and big companies in
democratic politics.
The fourth challenge is that very
often parties do not seem to offer a
meaningful choice to the voters. In
order to offer meaningful choice, parties
must be significantly different. In recent
years there has been a decline in the
ideological differences among parties in
most parts of the world. For example,
the difference between the Labour Party
and the Conservative Party in Britain is
very little. They agree on more
fundamental aspects but differ
only in details on how policies
are to be framed and
implemented. In our country
too, the differences among all the
major parties on the economic
policies have reduced. Those
who want really different policies
have no option available to them.
Sometimes people cannot even
elect very different leaders either,
because the same set of leaders
keep shifting from one party to
another.
© Huffaker - Cagle Cartoons Inc.
☞✡✌✍✎✏✑
✞✌✔✏✕✖
In order to face these challenges, political
parties need to be reformed. The
question is: Are political parties willing
to reform? If they are willing, what has
prevented them from reforming so far?
If they are not willing, is it possible to
force them to reform? Citizens all over
the world face this question. This is not
a simple question to answer. In a
democracy, the final decision is made by
leaders who represent political parties.
People can replace them, but only by
another set of party leaders. If all of
them do not wish to reform, how can
anyone force them to change?
Let us look at some of the recent
efforts and suggestions in our country
to reform political parties and its leaders:
The Constitution was amended to
prevent elected MLAs and MPs from
changing parties. This was done because
many elected representatives were
indulging in DEFECTION in order to
become ministers or for cash rewards.
Now the law says that if any MLA or
Defection: Changing
party allegiance from
the party on which a
person got elected (to a
legislative body) to a
different party.
Most cartoons caricature politicians. From the cartoons (on page 83 to 85), can
you identify which of the challenges described in this section is being highlighted
in these cartoons. They relate to Italy, US and India.
© Manjul - DNA
MP changes parties, he or she will lose
the seat in the legislature. This new law
has helped bring defection down. At the
same time this has made any dissent even
more difficult. MPs and MLAs have to
accept whatever the party leaders decide.
The Supreme Court passed an order
to reduce the influence of money and
criminals. Now, it is mandatory for every
candidate who contests elections to file
an AFFIDAVIT giving details of his property
and criminal cases pending against him.
The new system has made a lot of
information available to the public. But
there is no system of check if the
information given by the candidates is
true. As yet we do not know if it has led
to decline in the influence of the rich and
the criminals.
The Election Commission passed an
order making it necessary for political
parties to hold their organisational
elections and file their income tax returns.
The parties have started doing so but
sometimes it is mere formality. It is not
clear if this step has led to greater internal
democracy in political parties.
Besides these, many suggestions are
often made to reform political parties:
A law should be made to regulate
the internal affairs of political parties. It
should be made compulsory for political
parties to maintain a register of its
members, to follow its own constitution,
to have an independent authority, to act
as a judge in case of party disputes, to
hold open elections to the highest posts.
It should be made mandatory for
political parties to give a minimum
number of tickets, about one-third, to
women candidates. Similarly, there should
be a quota for women in the decision
making bodies of the party.
There should be state funding of
elections. The government should give
parties money to support their election
expenses. This support could be given in
kind: petrol, paper, telephone etc. Or it
could be given in cash on the basis of
the votes secured by the party in the last
election.
These suggestions have not yet been
accepted by political parties. If and when
these are accepted these could lead to
some improvement. But we must be
very careful about legal solutions to
political problems. Over-regulation of
political parties can be counter-
productive. This would force all parties
to find ways to cheat the law. Besides,
political parties will not agree to pass a
law that they do not like.
There are two other ways in which
political parties can be reformed. One,
people can put pressure on political
parties. This can be done through
petitions, publicity and agitations.
Affidavit: A signed
document submitted to
an officer, where a
person makes a sworn
statement regarding her
personal information.
Do you agree that this form of reforming political parties will be
acceptable to them?
© Keshav - The Hindu
Ordinary citizens, pressure groups and
movements and the media can play an
important role in this. If political parties
feel that they would lose public support
by not taking up reforms, they would
become more serious about reforms.
Two, political parties can improve if
those who want this join political parties.
The quality of democracy depends on
the degree of public participation. It is
difficult to reform politics if ordinary
citizens do not take part in it and simply
criticise it from the outside. The problem
of bad politics can be solved by more
and better politics. We shall return to this
theme in the final chapter.
State the various functions political parties perform in a
dem ocracy.
What are the various challenges faced by political parties?
Suggest some reforms to strengthen parties so that they perform
their functions well?
What is a political party?
What are the characteristics of a political party?
A group of people who come together to contest elections and
hold power in the government is called a _____________________.
Match List I (organisations and struggles) with List II and select
the correct answer using the codes given below the lists:
Who among the following is the founder of the Bahujan Samaj Party?
Kanshi Ram
Sahu Maharaj
B.R. Ambedker
Jotiba Phule
What is the guiding philosophy of the Bharatiya Janata Party?
Bahujan Samaj
Revolutionary democracy
Integral humanism
Modernity
List I
List I I
Congress Party
A. National Democratic
Alliance
Bharatiya Janata Party
B. State party
Communist Party of India
C. United Progressive
(Marxist)
Alliance
Telugu Desam Party
D. Left Front
10. Consider the following statements on parties.
Political parties do not enjoy much trust among the people.
Parties are often rocked by scandals involving top party leaders.
Parties are not necessary to run governments.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) A, B, and C   (b) A and B   (c) B and C   (d) A and C
11. Read the following passage and answer the questions given below:
Muhammad Yunus is a famous economist of Bangladesh. He
received several international honours for his efforts to
promote economic and social development for the benefit of
the poor. He and the Grameen Bank he started jointly,
received the Nobel Peace Prize for the 2006. In February
2007, he decided to launch a political party and contest in the
parliamentary elections. His objective was to foster proper
leadership, good governance and build a new Bangladesh. He
felt that only a political party different from the traditional
ones would bring about new political culture. His party would
be democratic from the grassroots level.
The launching of the new party, called Nagarik Shakti
(Citizens’ Power), has caused a stir among the Bangladeshis.
While many welcomed his decision, some did not like it. “Now I
think Bangladesh will have a chance to choose between good
and bad and eventually have a good government,” said
Shahedul Islam, a government official. “That government, we
hope, would not only keep itself away from corruption but also
make fighting corruption and black money a top priority.”
But leaders of traditional political parties who dominated
the country’s politics for decades were apprehensive. “There
was no debate (over him) winning the Nobel, but politics is
different – very challenging and often controversial,” said a
senior leader of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party. Some others
were highly critical. They asked why he was rushing into
politics. “Is he being planted in politics by mentors from
outside the country,” asked one political observer.
Do you think Yunus made a right decision to float a new political
party?
Do you agree with the statements and fears expressed by various
people? How do you want this new party organised to make it
different from other parties? If you were the one to begin this
political party how would you defend it?
✜✛✢✣✤
✛✬✦✭✪❛✭
✣✙✭★✙✙
✛✬✦✭✪❛✭
✦★✥✭✦✬
✛r ✩✛✭✥
✧✛✬✦✭✪
✫★✰✫✣✰
✛✬✦✭✪
✛r ✩✛
❛✭✥★❛
✦★✥✭✦✬✛
✧✛✬✦✭✪
✩✛✭✥✙
✣✫✫✛✪✛✤✭
✛✛✧✦✬
✰✣✫✣✛
✰✰✛✤✢
✤✛r ✥
✎✠✏✑✌✏
✠s ✔✏
Do you remember how students in
Madam Lyngdoh’s class argued about
democracy? This was in Chapter 2 of
Class IX textbook. It emerged from that
conversation that democracy is a better
form of government when compared
with dictatorship or any other alternative.
We felt that democracy was better
because it:
Promotes equality among citizens;
Enhances the dignity of the
individual;
Improves the quality of decision-
making;
Provides a method to resolve
conflicts; and
Allows room to correct mistakes.
Are these expectations realised under
democracies? When we talk to people
around us, most of them support
democracy against other alternatives,
such as rule by a monarch or military or
religious leaders. But not so many of
them would be satisfied with the
democracy in practice. So we face a
dilemma: democracy is seen to be good
in principle, but felt to be not so good in
its practice. This dilemma invites us to
think hard about the outcomes of
democracy. Do we prefer democracy
only for moral reasons? Or are there
some prudential reasons to support
democracy too?
Over a hundred countries of the
world today claim and practice some
kind of democratic politics: they have
formal constitutions, they hold elections,
they have parties and they guarantee rights
of citizens. While these features are
common to most of them, these
democracies are very much different
from each other in terms of their social
situations, their economic achievements
and their cultures. Clearly, what may be
achieved or not achieved under each of
these democracies will be very different.
But is there something that we can expect
from every democracy, just because it is
democracy?
Our interest in and fascination for
democracy often pushes us into taking a
position that democracy can address all
socio-economic and political problems.
If some of our expectations are not met,
we start blaming the idea of democracy.
Or, we start doubting if we are living in
a democracy. The first step towards
thinking carefully about the outcomes
of democracy is to recognise that
democracy is just a form of government.
It can only create conditions for achieving
something. The citizens have to take
advantage of those conditions and
achieve those goals. Let us examine some
of the things we can reasonably expect
from democracy and examine the record
of democracy.
Did we reach
these
conclusions in
Madam Lyngdoh’s
class? I loved
that class
because
students were
not being
dictated any
conclusions.
© RK Laxman - Brushing up the years
☞☞✌✍✎✏✑✒✓✔✕
✖✔✗✘✌✎✗
✙✏✙✢✑✏✔
There are some things that democracy
must provide. In a democracy, we are
most concerned with ensuring that
people will have the right to choose their
rulers and people will have control over
the rulers. Whenever possible and
necessary, citizens should be able to
participate in decision making, that affects
them all. Therefore, the most basic
outcome of democracy should be that
it produces a government that is
accountable to the citizens, and
responsive to the needs and expectations
of the citizens.
Before we go into this question, we
face another common question: Is the
democratic government efficient? Is it
effective? Some people think that
democracy produces less effective
government. It is, of course, true that
non-democratic rulers do not have to
bother about deliberation in assemblies or
worry about majorities and public opinion.
So, they can be very quick and efficient in
decision making and implementation.
Democracy is based on the idea of
deliberation and negotiation. So, some delay
is bound to take place. Does that make
democratic government inefficient?
Let us think in terms of costs.
Imagine a government that may take
decisions very fast. But it may take
decisions that are not accepted by the
people and may therefore face problems.
In contrast, the democratic government
will take more time to follow
procedures before arriving at a decision.
But because it has followed procedures,
its decisions may be both more
acceptable to the people and more
effective. So, the cost of  time that
democracy pays is perhaps worth it.
Now look at the other side –
democracy ensures that decision making
will be based on norms and procedures.
So, a citizen who wants to know if a
decision was taken through the correct
procedures can find this out. She has the
right and the means to examine the
process of decision making. This is
known as transparency. This factor is
often missing from a non-democratic
government. Therefore, when we are
trying to find out the outcomes of
democracy, it is right to expect
democracy to produce a government
that follows procedures and is
accountable to the people. We can also
expect that the democratic government
develops mechanisms for citizens to hold
the government accountable and
mechanisms for citizens to take part in
decision making whenever they think fit.
If you wanted to measure
democracies on the basis of this
expected outcome, you would look for
the following practices and institutions:
regular, free and fair elections; open
public debate on major policies and
© Mike Keefe  - Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Can you think of what
and how the
government knows
about you and your
family (for example
ration cards and
voter identity cards)?
What are the sources
of information for you
about the
government?
Governmental Secrecy
So, the best
outcome of
democracy is
that it is a
democracy! That
is what we have
discovered after
all this mental
gymnastics?
legislations; and citizens’ right to
information about the government and
its functioning. The actual performance
of democracies shows a mixed record
on this. Democracies have had greater
success in setting up regular and free
elections and in setting up conditions for
open public debate. But most
democracies fall short of elections that
provide a fair chance to everyone and in
subjecting every decision to public debate.
Democratic governments do not have a
very good record when it comes to
sharing information with citizens. All one
can say in favour of democratic regimes
is that they are much better than any
non-democratic regime in these respects.
In substantive terms it may be
reasonable to expect from democracy a
government that is attentive to the needs
and demands of the people and is largely
free of corruption. The record of
democracies is not impressive on these
two counts. Democracies often frustrate
the needs of the people and often ignore
the demands of a majority of its
population. The routine tales of
corruption are enough to convince us that
democracy is not free of this evil. At the
same time, there is nothing to show that
non-democracies are less corrupt or
more sensitive to the people.
There is one respect in which
democratic government is certainly
better than its alternatives: democratic
government is legitimate government.
It may be slow, less efficient, not always
very responsive or clean. But a
democratic government is people’s own
government. That is why there is an
overwhelming support for the idea of
democracy all over the world. As the
accompanying evidence from South
Asia shows, the support exists in
countries with democratic regimes as
well as countries without democratic
regimes. People wish to be ruled by
representatives elected by them. They
also believe that democracy is suitable
for their country. Democracy’s ability
to generate its own support is itself an
outcome that cannot be ignored.
Source: SDSA Team, State of Democracy in South Asia, Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2007
Democracy is preferred
over dictatorship
everywhere except
Pakistan
South Asia
Bangladesh India Nepal Pakistan Sri Lanka
Democracy is
preferable
Sometimes dictatorship
is better
Doesn’t
matter to me
Those who agree with one of
the statements
Very few doubt the suitability of democracy
for their own country
How suitable is democracy for your country?
Very suitable
Suitable
South Asia
Bangladesh
Sri Lanka
India
Pakistan
Nepal
Overwhelming support for democracy
Those who agree with the rule of leaders elected by the people
Strongly agree
Agree
South Asia
Sri Lanka
Bangladesh
India
Nepal
Pakistan
❊☞✌✍✌✎✏☞
✑✒✌✓✔✕
✘✙✘✚✌
If democracies are expected to produce
good governments, then is it not fair to
expect that they would also produce
development? Evidence shows that in
practice many democracies did not fulfil
this expectation.
If you consider all democracies and
all dictatorships for the fifty years between
1950 and 2000, dictatorships have slightly
higher rate of economic growth. The
inability of democracy to achieve higher
economic development worries us. But
this alone cannot be reason to reject
democracy. As you have already studied
in economics, economic development
depends on several factors: country’s
population size, global situation,
The Rich Get Buff
cooperation from other countries,
economic priorities adopted by the
country, etc. However, the difference in
the rates of economic development
between less developed countries with
dictatorships and democracies is
negligible. Overall, we cannot say that
democracy is a guarantee of economic
development. But we can expect
democracy not to lag behind
dictatorships in this respect.
When we find such significant
difference in the rates of economic
growth between countries under
dictatorship and democracy, it is better
to prefer democracy as it has several
other positive outcomes.
© RJ Matson - Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Cartoon on this page
and next three pages tell
us about the disparities
between the rich and
poor.  Should the gains
of economic growth be
evenly distributed? How
can the poor get a voice
for a better share in a
nation? What can the
poor countries do to
receive a greater share
in the world’s wealth?
Arguments about democracy tend to
be very passionate. This is how it
should be, for democracy appeals to
some of our deep values. These
debates cannot be resolved in a
simple manner. But some debates
about democracy can and should be
resolved by referring to some facts
and figures. The debate about the
economic outcomes of democracy is
one such debate. Over the years
many students of democracy have
gathered careful evidence to see
what the relationship of democracy
with economic growth and economic
inequalities is. The tables and the
cartoon here present some of the evidences:
Table 1 shows that on an average dictatorial regimes have had a slightly better record
of economic growth. But when we compare their record only in poor countries, there is
virtually no difference.
Table 2 shows that within democracies there can be very high degree of inequalities. In
democratic countries like South Africa and Brazil, the top 20 per cent people take away
more than 60 per cent of the national income, leaving less than 3 per cent for the bottom
20 per cent population. Countries like Denmark and Hungary are much better in this respect.
You can see in the cartoon, there is often inequality of opportunities available to the
poorer sections.
W hat w ould be your verdict on dem ocracy if you had to base it purely on econom ic
performance of democratic regimes in terms of grow th and equal distribution?
Table 1
Rates of economic growth for different countries,
1950-2000
Table 2
Inequality of income in selected countries
Type of regimes and countries
All democratic regimes
All dictatorial regimes
Poor countries under dictatorship
Poor countries under democracy
Growth Rate
Name of the
% share of national
Countries
income
Top 20 %
Bottom 20 %
South Africa
Brazil
Russia
United Kingdom 45.0
Denmark
Hungary
Source: A Przeworski, M E Alvarez, J A Cheibub and F Limongi, Democracy and
Development: Political Institutions and Well-Being in the World, 1950-1990.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Poor Kids
democracy
Economic outcomes
© Jimmy Margulies - Cagle Cartoons Inc.
❘☞✌✍✎✏✑✒✓
✍✖✗✑✏
Perhaps more than development, it is
reasonable to expect democracies to
reduce economic disparities. Even when
a country achieves economic growth, will
wealth be distributed in such a way that
all citizens of the country will have a
share and lead a better life? Is economic
growth in democracies accompanied by
increased inequalities among the people?
Or do democracies lead to a just
distribution of goods and opportunities?
© Ares - Best of Latin America, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Democracies are based on political
equality. All individuals have equal weight
in electing representatives. Parallel to the
process of bringing individuals into the
political arena on an equal footing, we
find growing economic inequalities. A
small number of ultra-rich enjoy a highly
disproportionate share of wealth and
incomes. Not only that, their share in the
total income of the country has been
increasing. Those at the bottom of the
society have very little to depend upon.
Their incomes have been declining.
Sometimes they find it difficult to meet
their basic needs of life, such as food,
clothing, house, education and health.
In actual life, democracies do not
appear to be very successful in reducing
economic inequalities. In Class IX
Economics textbook, you have already
studied about poverty in India. The
poor constitute a large proportion
of our voters and no  party will
like to lose their votes. Yet
democratically elected
governments do not
appear to be as keen to
address the question of
poverty as you would
expect them to. The
situation is much worse in
some other countries. In
Bangladesh, more than
half of its population lives
in poverty. People in
several poor countries are
now dependent on the rich
countries even for food
supplies.
Voice of the Poor
Democracy is a
rule of the
majority. The
poor are in
majority. So
democracy must
be a rule of the
poor. How can
this not be the
case?
World’s Wealth Owned by a Few
✡☛☛✡☞✌✍✎✡
All you are saying
is that
democracy
ensures that
people do not
break each
other’s head.
This is not
harmony. Should
we be happy
about it?
Do democracies lead to peaceful and
harmonious life among citizens? It will
be a fair expectation that democracy
should produce a harmonious social life.
We have seen in the earlier chapters how
democracies accommodate various social
divisions. We saw in the first chapter how
Belgium has successfully negotiated
differences among ethnic populations.
Democracies usually develop a procedure
to conduct their competition. This reduces
the possibility of these tensions becoming
explosive or violent.
No society can fully and permanently
resolve conflicts among different groups.
But we can certainly learn to respect these
differences and we can also evolve
mechanisms to negotiate the differences.
Democracy is best suited to produce this
outcome. Non-democratic regimes often
turn a blind eye to or suppress internal
social differences. Ability to handle social
differences, divisions and conflicts is thus
a definite plus point of democratic
regimes. But the example of Sri Lanka
reminds us that a democracy must fulfil
two conditions in order to achieve this
outcome:
It is necessary to understand that
democracy is not simply rule by majority
opinion.  The majority always needs to
work with the minority so that
governments function to represent the
general view. Majority and minority
opinions are not permanent.
It is also necessary that rule by
majority does not become rule by
majority community in terms of religion
or race or linguistic group, etc.  Rule by
majority means that in case of every
decision or in case of every election,
different persons and groups may and
© Manny Francisco - The Phillippines, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
can form a majority. Democracy remains
democracy only as long as every citizen
has a chance of being in majority at some
point of time. If someone is barred
The two images depict two different kinds of
effects democratic politics can have on social
divisions. Take one example for each image
and write a paragraph each on the outcome
of democratic politics in both situations.
from being in majority on the basis of
birth, then the democratic rule ceases
to be accommodative for that person
or group.
❉☞✌✍☞✎✏
✓✔✕✕✒
☞✎☞✚✕
Democracy stands much superior to any
other form of  government in
promoting dignity and freedom of the
individual. Every individual wants to
receive respect from fellow beings.
Often conflicts arise among individuals
because some feel that they are not
treated with due respect. The passion for
respect and freedom are the basis of
democracy. Democracies throughout the
world have recognised this, at least in
principle. This has been achieved in
various degrees in various democracies.
For societies which have been built for
long on the basis of subordination and
domination, it is not a simple matter to
recognize that all individuals are equal.
Take the case of dignity of women.
Most societies across the world were
historically male dominated societies.
Long struggles by women have created
some sensitivity today that respect to and
Enemies
Greeting
© Ares - Best of Latin America, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
equal treatment of women are necessary
ingredients of a democratic society. That
does not mean that women are actually
always treated with respect. But once the
principle is recognised, it becomes easier
for women to wage a struggle against
what is now unacceptable legally and
morally. In a non-democratic set up, this
unacceptability would not have legal basis
because the principle of individual
freedom and dignity would not have the
legal and moral force there. The same is
true of caste inequalities. Democracy in
India has strengthened the claims of the
disadvantaged and discriminated castes
for equal status and equal opportunity.
There are instances still of caste-based
inequalities and atrocities, but these lack
the moral and legal foundations. Perhaps
it is the recognition that makes ordinary
citizens value their democratic rights.
Expectations from democracy also
function as the criteria for judging any
democratic country. What is most
distinctive about democracy is that its
examination never gets over. As
democracy passes one test, it produces
another test. As people get some benefits
of democracy, they ask for more and
want to make democracy even better.
That is why when we ask people about
the way democracy functions, they will
always come up with more expectations,
and many complaints. The fact that
people are complaining is itself a
testimony to the success of democracy:
it shows that people have developed
awareness and the ability to expect and
to look critically at power holders and
the high and the mighty. A public
expression of dissatisfaction with
democracy shows the success of the
democratic project: it transforms people
from the status of a subject into that of
a citizen. Most individuals today believe
that their vote makes a difference to the
way the government is run and to their
own self-interest.
The above cartoon and graph. Illustrates a point made in this section
(Dignity and freedom of the citizens). Underline the sentences from
this section which connect to the cartoon or graph.
I am anxious
about my board
exams. But
democracy has
so many exams.
And millions of
examiners!
Source: SDSA Team, State of Democracy in South
Asia, Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Rosa Still Inspires
© Pat Bagley - Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Belief in the efficacy of vote is placed above the
calculus of utility
Those who say that their vote makes a difference...
South Asia
Bangladesh
India
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
How does democracy produce an accountable, responsive and
legitimate government?
What are the conditions under which democracies accommodate
social diversities?
Give arguments to support or oppose the following assertions:
Industrialised countries can afford democracy but the poor
need dictatorship to become rich.
Democracy can’t reduce inequality of incomes between
different citizens.
Government in poor countries should spend less on poverty
reduction, health, education and spend more on industries and
infrastructure.
In democracy all citizens have one vote, which means that
there is absence of any domination and conflict.
Identify the challenges to democracy in the following descriptions.
Also suggest policy/ institutional mechanism to deepen democracy
in the given situations:
Following a High Court directive a temple in Orissa that had
separate entry doors for dalits and non-dalits allowed entry
for all from the same door.
A large number of farmers are committing suicide in different
states of India.
Following allegation of killing of three civilians in Gandwara in a
fake encounter by Jammu and Kashmir police, an enquiry has
been ordered.
In the context of democracies, which of the following ideas is
correct – democracies have successfully eliminated:
conflicts among people
economic inequalities among people
differences of opinion about how marginalised sections
are to be treated
the idea of political inequality
In the context of assessing democracy which among the following
is odd one out. Democracies need to ensure:
free and fair elections
dignity of the individual
majority rule
equal treatment before law
Studies on political and social inequalities in democracy show that
democracy and development go together.
inequalities exist in democracies .
inequalities do not exist under dictatorship.
dictatorship is better than democracy.
Read the passage below:
Nannu is a daily wage earner. He lives in Welcome Mazdoor
Colony, a slum habitation in East Delhi. He lost his ration
card and applied for a duplicate one in January 2004. He
made several rounds to the local Food & Civil Supplies office
for the next three months. But the clerks and officials would
not even look at him, leave alone do his job or bother to tell
him the status of his application. Ultimately, he filed an
application under the Right to Information Act asking for the
daily progress made on his application, names of the
officials, who were supposed to act on his application and
what action would be taken against these officials for their
inaction. Within a week of filing application under the Right to
Information Act, he was visited by an inspector from the
Food Department, who informed him that the card had been
made and he could collect it from the office. When Nannu
went to collect his card next day, he was given a very warm
treatment by the Food & Supply Officer (FSO), who is the
head of a Circle. The FSO offered him tea and requested him
to withdraw his application under the Right to Information,
since his work had already been done.
What does Nannu’s example show? What impact did Nannu’s
action have on officials? Ask your parents their experiences
when they approach government officials to attend to their
problems.
✣✤✥✣✦✧★✜✥✩
✣✛✪✫✬✭
✫✤✦✜✬✜
✣✛✪✦✦✭
✫✤✦✜✬✜
✳✧✭✢✬✜✤✥✢
✢✧✩✩✭✢✬✜✤✥✢
✪✵✤✧✬
✣✛✪✦✦✭✥✩✭✢
✣✛✪✦✦✭✥✩✭✢
❧✜✥✜✬✜✤✥
❚✠✡☛☞✡
✠✍✔✔✕☛✌✕✖
Do you remember the first chapter of your Political
Science textbook of Class IX?  There we tracked the
expansion of democracy all over the world in the last
hundred years. Our reading thereafter has confirmed
our initial impression: democracy is the dominant form
of government in the contemporary world. It does
not face a serious challenger or rival. Yet our exploration
of the various dimensions of democratic politics has
shown us something else as well. The promise of
democracy is far from realised anywhere in the world.
Democracy does not have a challenger, but that does
not mean that it does not face any challenges.
At different points in this tour of democracy, we
have noted the serious challenges that democracy faces
all over the world. A challenge is not just any problem.
We usually call only those difficulties a ‘challenge’ which
are significant and which can be overcome. A challenge
is a difficulty that carries within it an opportunity for
progress. Once we overcome a challenge we go up to
a higher level than before.
Different countries face different kinds of
challenges. Can you recall the map of democratic
governments in the year 2000 that was included in your
textbook? At least one fourth of the globe is still not
under democratic government. The challenge for
democracy in these parts of the world is very stark.
These countries face the foundational challenge of
making the transition to democracy and then instituting
democratic government. This involves bringing down
the existing non-democratic regime, keeping military
away from controlling government and establishing a
sovereign and functional state.
Most of the established democracies face the
challenge of expansion. This involves applying the
basic principle of democratic government across all
the regions, different social groups and various
institutions. Ensuring greater power to local
governments, extension of federal principle to all the
units of the federation, inclusion of women and
minority groups, etc., falls under this challenge. This
also means that less and less decisions should remain
outside the arena of democratic control. Most
countries including India and other democracies like
the US face this challenge.
The third challenge of deepening of democracy
is faced by every democracy in one form or another.
This involves strengthening of the institutions and
practices of democracy. This should happen in such a
way that people can realise their expectations of
democracy. But ordinary people have different
expectations from democracy in different societies.
Therefore, this challenge takes different meanings and
paths in different parts of the world. In general terms,
it usually means strengthening those institutions
that help people’s participation and control.
This requires an attempt to bring down the
control and influence of the rich and
powerful people in making governmental
decision.
We have noted or hinted at these
challenges in all the various examples and
stories that we studied in our textbook of
Class IX and in the earlier chapters of this
book. Let us go back to all the major stops
in our tour of democracy, refresh our
memory and note down the challenges
that democracy faces in each of these.
❉✍✎✎✏✑✏✒✓
✒✓✏✖✓✗
✘✍✎✎✏✑✏✒✓
✙✚✛✛✏✒✜
Each of these cartoons represents a challenge to democracy. Please describe what that challenge is. Also place it
in one of the three categories mentioned in the first section.
Mubarak Re-elected
Seeing the democracy
Liberal Gender Equality
Campaign Money
© Patrick Chappatte - Cagle Cartoons Inc.
© Ares - Cagle Cartoons Inc.
© Tab - The Calgary Sun, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
© Ares - Best Latin America, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Case and context
Your description of the challenges for dem ocracy in that
situation
Chile: General Pinochet’s
[ Example]  Establishing civilian control over all governmental
government defeated, but institutions, holding the first multi-party elections, recalling all
military still in control of
political leaders from exile.
many institutions
Poland: After the first
success of Solidarity, the
government imposed
martial law and banned
solidarity
Ghana: Just attained
independence, Nkrumah
elected president
Myanm ar: Suu Kyi under
house arrest for more than
15 years, army rulers
getting global acceptance
I nternational
organisations:
US as the only super
power disregards the UN
and takes unilateral action
Mexico: Second free
election after the defeat
of PRI in 2000;  defeated
candidate alleges rigging
China: Communist Party
adopts economic reforms
but maintains monopoly
over political power
Pakistan: General
Musharraf holds
referendum, allegations
of fraud in voters’ list
I raq: Widespread
sectarian violence as the
new government fails to
establish its authority
South Africa: Mandela
retires from active politics,
pressure on his successor
Mbeki to withdraw some
concessions given to
White minority
US, Guantanam o Bay:
UN Secretary General
calls this a violation of
international law,
US refused to respond
Saudi Arabia:  Women not
allowed to take part in
public activities,
no freedom of religion for
minorities
Yugoslavia: Ethnic
tension between Serbs
and Albanians on the rise
in the province of Kosovo.
Yugoslavia disintergrated
Belgium : One round of
constitutional change
taken place, but the Dutch
speakers not satisfied;
they want more autonomy
Sri Lanka: The peace talks
between the government
and the LTTE break
down, renewed violence
US, Civil Rights: Blacks
have won equal rights, but
are still poor, less
educated and marginalised
Northern I reland: The
civil war has ended but
Catholics and Protestants
yet to develop trust
Nepal: Constituent
Assembly about to be
elected, unrest in
Terai areas, Maoists have
not surrendered arms
Bolivia: Morales, a
supporter of water struggle,
becomes Prime Minister,
MNCs threaten to leave
the country
Case and context
Your description of the challenges for dem ocracy in that
situation
✠✡☛☛☞✌☞✍✎
✕✖✗✗☞✍✘☞
Now that you have noted down all these challenges, let us group these together into some broad categories.
Given below are some spheres or sites of democratic politics. You may place against each of these the specific
challenges that you noted for one or more countries or cartoons in the previous section. In addition to that write
one item for India for each of these spheres. In case you find that some challenges do not fit into any of the
categories given below, you can create new categories and put some items under that.
Constitutional
design
Democratic
rights
Working of
institutions
Elections
Federalism,
decentralisation
Accommodation
of diversity
Political
organisations
Any other category
Any other category
Let us group these again, this time by the nature of these challenges as per the classification suggested in the first
section. For each of these categories, find at least one example from India as well.
Foundational
challenge
Challenge of
expansion
Challenge of
deepening
Now let us think only about India. Think of all the challenges that democracy faces in contemporary India. List
those five that should be addressed first of all. The listing should be in order of priority, i.e, the challenge you
find most important or pressing should be mentioned at number 1, and so on. Give one example of that
challenge and your reasons for assigning it the priority.
Priority Challenges to
Example
Reasons for preference
democracy
❚✠✡☛☞✡
✍✎✏✑✒
Each of these challenges is linked to the possibility
of  reforms. As mentioned above, we discuss
challenges only because we think these can be
overcome. Generally all the suggestions or proposals
about overcoming various challenges to democracy
are called ‘democracy reform’ or ‘political reform’.
We are not going to give here a list of desirable
political reforms, for there cannot be any such list. If
all the countries do not have the same challenges, it
follows that everyone cannot follow the same recipe
of political reforms. We cannot prescribe a procedure
for car repair without knowing which model the car
is, what the defect is and what tools are available,
where the car has broken down, etc.
Can we at least have a list of such reforms for our
country in today’s context? We can develop some
proposals for reforms at the national level. But the
real challenge of reforms may not lie at the national
level. Some of the crucial questions need to be thought
at the State or local level. Besides, such a list may
become irrelevant after some time. So, instead of that
let us think of some broad guidelines that can be kept
in mind while devising ways and means for political
reforms in India:
It is very tempting to think of legal ways of
reforming politics, to think of new laws to ban
undesirable things. But this temptation needs to be
resisted. No doubt, law has an important role to play
in political reform. Carefully devised changes in law
can help to discourage wrong political practices and
encourage good ones. But legal-constitutional changes
by themselves cannot overcome challenges to
democracy. This is like the rules of cricket. A change
in rules for LBW decisions helped to reduce negative
batting tactics. But no one would ever think that the
quality of cricket could be improved mainly through
changes in the rules. This is to be done mainly by the
players, coaches and administrators. Similarly,
democratic reforms are to be carried out mainly by
political activists, parties, movements and politically
conscious citizens.
Any legal change must carefully look at what results
it will have on politics. Sometimes the results may be
counter-productive. For example, many states have
banned people who have more than two children
from contesting panchayat elections. This has resulted
in denial of democratic opportunity to many poor
and women, which was not intended. Generally, laws
that seek to ban something are not very successful in
politics. Laws that give political actors incentives to do
good things have more chances of working. The best
laws are those which empower people to carry out
democratic reforms. The Right to Information Act is
a good example of a law that empowers the people
to find out what is happening in government and act
as watchdogs of democracy. Such a law helps to
control corruption and supplements the existing laws
that banned corruption and imposed strict penalties.
Democratic reforms are to be brought about
principally through political practice. Therefore, the
main focus of political reforms should be on ways to
strengthen democratic practice. As we discussed in the
chapter on political parties, the most important concern
should be to increase and improve the quality of
political participation by ordinary citizens.
Any proposal for political reforms should think not
only about what is a good solution but also about who
will implement it and how. It is not very wise to think
that the legislatures will pass legislations that go against
the interest of all the political parties and MPs. But
measures that rely on democratic movements, citizens’
organisations and the media are likely to succeed.
Let us keep these general guidelines in mind and
look at some specific instances of challenges to
democracy that require some measure of reform. Let
us try to come up with some concrete proposals of
reform.
Here are some challenges that require political reforms. Discuss these challenges in detail study the reform
options offered here and give your preferred solution with reasons. Remember that none of the options
offered here is ‘right’ or ‘wrong’. You can opt for a mix of more than one options, or come up with something
that is not offered here. But you must give your solution in details and offer reasons for your choice.
Doctors’ absenteeism
Challenge:
Uttar Pradesh government got a survey done and
found out that most of the doctors posted in the rural
primary health centres are simply not there. They live
in a town, carry out private practice and visit the village
where they are posted only once or twice in the entire
month. Villagers have to travel to towns and pay very
high fee to private doctors even for common ailments.
Reform proposals:
The government should make it compulsory
for the doctors to live in the village where they are
posted, otherwise their service should be terminated.
District administration and police should carry
out surprise raids to check the attendance of the
doctors.
Village panchayat should be given the power to
write the annual report of the doctor which should
be read out in the gram sabha meeting.
Problems like this can be solved only if Uttar
Pradesh is split into several smaller states which can
be administered more efficiently.
Political funding
Challenge:
On an average, every candidate who contested the
last Lok Sabha elections owned a property of more
than Rs one crore. There is a fear that only wealthy
people or those with their support can afford to
fight elections. Most of the political parties are
dependent on money given by big business houses.
The worry is that the role of money in politics will
reduce whatever little voice the poor have in our
democracy.
Reform proposals:
The financial accounts of every political party
should be made public. These accounts should be
examined by government auditors.
There should be state funding of elections.
Parties should be given some money by the
government to meet their election expenditure.
Citizens should be encouraged to give more
donations to parties and to political workers.
Such donations should be exempt from income
Any other problem of your choice
Challenge:
Reform proposals:
r ing
Reforming
Rose managed to catch Madam Lyngdoh outside the
classroom,
something she had been
planning to do for some time. “Ma’am! I
really liked that Canadian cartoon”. Rose
needed something to open the
conversation. “Which one?” Madam
Lyngdoh could not recall. “Ma’am, the one
which says 98%  Canadians want all the
politicians to be locked in the trunk of a
car and thrown into Niagara falls. I was
thinking of our politicians. We would need a
bigger vehicle and a river as mighty as
Brahmaputra!”
Lyngdoh Ma’am smiled at Rose. Like most
Indians, she is also very much unhappy
with the way politicians of the country have been behaving and running the parties and
governments. But she wanted Rose to appreciate the complexity of the problem:  “Do you
think our problems will be solved if we get rid of our politicians?,” she asked.
“Yes, Ma’am. Aren’t these mean politicians responsible for all the problems in our country?
I mean corruption, defection, casteism, communal violence, criminality… everything.”
Lyngdoh Madam:  “So, all we need is to get rid of the current lot. Are you sure that those
who replace them will not do these things?”
Rose:  “Well, I had not thought of it, but may be not. May be we will get leaders of better
character”.
Lyngdoh Madam:  “I agree with you that the situation will change if people show more care
and alertness to reject corrupt and bad politicians and elect the right ones. And, maybe,
all politicians are not corrupt…”
“How can you say that Ma’am” interrupted Rose.
Lyngdoh Madam:  “I did not say that politicians are not corrupt. Maybe when you think of
politicians you think of these big people whose photos appear in newspapers. I think of
political leaders that I have known. I don’t think that the political leaders I know are more
corrupt than my own colleagues, government officials, contractors or other middle class
professionals that I know. The corruption of the politician is more visible and we get the
impression that all politicians are corrupt. Some of them are and some of them are not.”
Rose did not give up. “Ma’am, what I meant is that there should be strict laws to curb
corruption and wrong practices like appeals to caste and community.
Lyngdoh Madam:  “I am not sure Rose. For one thing there is already a law banning any
appeal to caste and religion in politics. Politicians find a way to bypass that. Laws can
have little impact unless people resist attempts to mislead and divide people in the name
of caste and religion. You cannot have democracy in a real sense unless people and
politicians overcome the barriers of caste and religion.
politicians
politicians
❘✍✎✍✏✑✒✑
We began this tour of democracy last year with a
minimal definition of democracy. Do you remember
that? This is what Chapter 2 of your textbook said last
year: democracy is a form of government in which
the rulers are elected by the people. We then looked at
many cases and expanded the definition slightly to add
some qualifications:
the rulers elected by the people must take all the
major decisions;
elections must offer a choice and fair opportunity
to the people to change the current rulers;
this choice and opportunity should be available to
all the people on an equal basis; and
the exercise of this choice must lead to a
government limited by basic rules of the constitution
and citizens’ rights.
You may have felt disappointed that the definition
did not refer to any high ideals that we associate with
democracy. But in operational terms, we deliberately
started with a minimalist but clear definition of
democracy. It allowed us to make a clear distinction
between democratic and non-democratic regimes.
You may have noticed that in the course of our
discussions of various aspects of democratic
government and politics, we have gone beyond that
definition:
We discussed democratic rights at length and noted
that these rights are not limited to the right to vote,
stand in elections and form political organisations. We
discussed some social and economic rights that a
democracy should offer to its citizens.
We have taken up power sharing as the spirit of
democracy and discussed how power sharing between
governments and social groups is necessary in
a democracy.
We saw how democracy cannot be the brute rule
of majority and how a respect for minority voice is
necessary for democracy.
Our discussion of democracy has gone beyond
the government and its activities. We discussed how
eliminating discrimination based on caste, religion and
gender is important in a democracy.
Finally, we have had some discussion about some
outcomes that one can expect from a democracy.
In doing so, we have not gone against the definition
of democracy offered last year. We began then with a
definition of what is the minimum a country must
have to be called a democracy. In the course of our
discussion we moved to the set of desirable conditions
that a democracy should have. We have moved from
the definition of democracy to the description of a
good democracy.
How do we define a good democracy? What are
its features? Which are the features a democracy must
have to be called a good democracy? And what must
not take place in a democracy if it is a good democracy?
You decide that.
Reading between the Lines
© Ares - Best Latin America, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Here is your space for writing your own definition of good democracy.
(Write your name here) ________________________ ’s definition of good
dem ocracy (not more than 50 words):
Features (use only as many points as you want. Try to compress it in as few points as
possible)
How did you like this exercise? Was it enjoyable? Very demanding? A little frustrating? And a little scary? Are
you a little resentful that the textbook did not help you in this crucial task? Are you worried that your definition
may not be ‘correct’?
Here then is your last lesson in thinking about democracy: there is no fixed definition of good democracy.
A good democracy is what we think it is and what we wish to make it. This may sound strange. Yet, think of it:
is it democratic for someone to dictate to us what a good democracy is?
