www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Flamingo
Flamingo
Flamingo
Flamingo
Flamingo
Textbook in English for Class XII
(Core Course)
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
First Edition
January 2007   Pausa 1928
Reprinted
January 2009   Magha 1930
PD 230T MJ
© National Council of
Educational Research
and Training, 2007
Rs. 25.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with
NCERT watermark
Published at the Publication
Department by the Secretary,
National Council of Educational
Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg,
New Delhi 110 016 and printed
at Shagun Offset Press, A-3,
Sector-5, NOIDA 201 301
ISBN  81-7450-650-0
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION DEPARTMENT, NCERT
✛✜✢✣✤✥
✜✦✧★✩✪
✫✮✯✬✰✱✮
New Delhi 110 016
Bangalore 560 085
Ahmedabad 380 014
Kolkata 700 114
Guwahati 781 021
Publication Team
Head, Publication
: P. Rajakumar
Department
Chief Production
: Shiv Kumar
Officer
Chief Editor
: Shveta Uppal
Chief Business
: Gautam Ganguly
Manager
Production Asstt.
: Rajesh Pippal
Cover, Layout and Illustrations
Joel Gill
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
(iii)
FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework, 2005, recommends
that children's life at school must be linked to their life outside
the school. This principle marks a departure from the legacy
of bookish learning which continues to shape our system and
causes a gap between the school, home and community. The
syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify
an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt to
discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp
boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these
measures will take us significantly further in the direction of
a child-centred system of education outlined in the National
Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school
principals and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect
on their own learning and to pursue imaginative activities and
questions. We must recognise that, given space, time and
freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with
the information passed on to them by adults. Treating the
prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one of
the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are
ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we
perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as
receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines
and mode of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is
as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual calendar
so that the required number of teaching days are actually
devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and
evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook
proves for making children's life at school a happy experience,
rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers
have tried to address the problem of curricular burden by
restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages
with greater consideration for child psychology and the time
available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance this
endeavour by giving higher priority and space to
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion
in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and
Training (NCERT) appreciates the hard work done by the
Textbook Development Committee responsible for this book.
We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in
Languages, Professor Namwar Singh and the Chief Advisor
for this book, Professor Amritavalli  for guiding the work of
this committee. Several teachers contributed to the
development of this textbook; we are grateful to their
principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the
institutions and organisations which have generously
permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and
personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the
National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department
of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human
Resource Development under the Chairmanship of
Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their
valuable time and contribution. As an organisation committed
to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality
of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions
which will enable us to undertake further revision and
refinement.
Director
New Delhi
National Council of  Educational
20 November 2006
Research and Training
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
ABOUT THE BOOK
This textbook for Class XII English course has been developed
on the basis of the recommendations made in the National
Curriculum Framework 2005. It follows the design of the
Class XI textbook, Hornbill, published in 2006.
The prose selections aim to provide exposure to a wide
variety of genres and themes, and writing from different parts
of the world. They take into account the interests of young
adults while making them aware of the socio-political issues
that they will confront as they step into the world outside
school. The tasks that follow the units provide opportunities
for the development of language skills.
Three short stories, representative of fiction from different
parts of the world - French, Swedish and British, have been
included. Alphonse Daudet’s The Last Lesson deals with
the theme of language imposition and language loyalty,
Selma Lagelerof’s The Rattrap, captures the basic goodness
in a human being in the face of material temptations and
A.C. Barton’s Going Places explores the theme of adolescent
hero-worship and fantasising.
Two of the non-fiction pieces are biographical and two
autobiographical. Of the two biographical pieces, Indigo, an
excerpt from Louis Fischer’s Life of Mahatma Gandhi
portrays Gandhi in action, helping peasants secure legal
justice and the excerpt from Anees Jung’s Lost Spring is an
account of the lives of street children, a contemporary reality
that youngsters need to be made sensitive to.
The autobiographical piece by William Douglas, a lawyer
who was a close associate of Franklin Roosevelt, deals with
his personal experience of overcoming the fear of swimming.
The second autobiographical account is by Asokamitran
writing in a humorous vein about his years in the Gemini
Studios.
The Introduction from The Penguin Book of Interviews
edited by Christopher Silvester has been  included to
introduce pupils to the subject of media writing. This is
accompanied by a recent newspaper interview with Umberto
Eco by Mukund Padmanabhan.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Each Unit is interspersed with ‘Think as you read’
questions to check factual comprehension. This is followed
by end-of-unit global questions and text-related issues to
be taken up for discussion. Language work on vocabulary
and sentence patterns is followed by writing tasks. Useful
vocabulary is presented at the beginning of each unit for
learners to notice them in the text and understand their
meaning from the context. Annotations are added where
necessary. ‘About the unit’ highlights the points of focus in
the tasks section following each text.
The poetry section has six poems. A short excerpt from
Keats’ Endymion has been chosen to give pupils a taste of
classical poetry, lines which have universal appeal and eternal
value. Robert Frost’s A Roadside Stand is on the rural-urban
economic divide. The other four poems are by reputed
contemporary poets including two women, Kamala Das and
Adrienne Rich. While the theme of Das’ poem, My Mother at
Sixty-six touches a personal chord of looking objectively at a
close relative, Rich’s poem, Aunt Jennifer’s Tigers, gives
expression to the voice of women stifled by the institution of
marriage. Stephen Spender’s poem on An Elementary School
Classroom in a Slum sensitively brings out the disparity
between the formal education system and the reality of the
lives of the poor. The poems are followed by ‘noticing’ items
which indicate the elements that deserve special attention in
the classroom.
The tasks in the poetry section encourage pupils to enjoy
aesthetic writing and evoke subjective responses to the
language of poetry.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
(vii)
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS IN LANGUAGES
Namwar Singh, Professor and formerly Chairman, School of
Languages, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
CHIEF ADVISOR
R. Amritavalli, Professor, Central Institute of English and
Foreign Languages (CIEFL), Hyderabad
CHIEF COORDINATOR
Ram Janma Sharma, Head, Department of Languages,
NCER T, New Delhi
MEMBERS
Chaya Nautiyal, Deputy Director, Secondary Education,
Directorate of Education, Allahabad
Gayatri Khanna, ELT Consultant, New Delhi
Indu Khetarpal, Principal, Salwan Public School, Gurgaon
Kirti Kapur, Lecturer, NCERT, New Delhi
Malathy Krishnan, Professor, CIEFL, Hyderabad
Nasiruddin Khan, Reader, NCERT, New Delhi
Pranjit Dev Sarmah, Teacher, Garigaon, Guwahati
Rajendrasinh Jadeja, Director,  H. M. Patel Institute of English
Training and Research, Vallabh Vidyanagar, Gujarat
Saryug Yadav, Reader, RIE, Shillong
S.K. Shyamla, PGT , Demonstration Multi Purpose School,
RIE, Mysore
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Meenakshi Khar, Lecturer, Department of Languages, NCERT,
New Delhi
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training
is grateful to Professor Alok Rai and Professor Harish Trivedi
from Department of English, Delhi University and
Vandana R. Singh, Consultant Editor for going through the
manuscript and making valuable suggestions.
For permission to reproduce copyright material in this
book NCERT would like to thank the following: Penguin
Books Pvt Ltd for Lost Spring by Anees Jung; and for
Introduction by Christopher Sylvester; Harper Collins for
Indigo by Louis Fischer; The Editorial and Advertising office
of Resurgence (No. 233 November-December, 2005) for
Keeping Quiet by Pablo Neruda; Chatto and Windus Ltd. for
Endymion by John Keats; Shri Asokmitran for Poets and
Pancakes by Asokmitran; Hutchinson & Co. Ltd. for Going
Places by A. R. Barton; Faber & Faber for An Elementary
School Classroom in a Slum by Stephen Spender.
The Council also acknowledges the services of
Sunanda Khanna and G.C. Chandrakar, Copy  Editors;
Surender K Vats, Proof Reader; Mohd. Harun and
Arvind Sharma DTP Operators; Rajeev Kumar, Artist and
Parash Ram Kaushik, Incharge, Computer station. The efforts
of the Publication Department, NCERT are also highly
appreciated.
It has not been possible to trace the copyright in all cases.
The publishers apologise for any omissions and would be
glad to hear from any such unacknowledged copyright
holder.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
t n s
Contents
PROSE
THE LAST LESSON
Alphonse Daudet
LOST SPRING
Anees Jung
DEEP WATER
William  Douglas
THE RATTRAP
Selma Lagerlof
INDIGO
Louis Fischer
POETS AND PANCAKES
Asokamitran
THE INTERVIEW
PART I
Christopher Silvester
PART II
An Interview with Umberto Eco
GOING PLACES
A. R. Barton
POETRY
89-104
MY MOTHER AT SIXTY-SIX
Kamala Das
AN ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
CLASSROOM IN A SLUM
Stephen Spender
KEEPING QUIET
Pablo Neruda
A THING OF BEAUTY
John Keats
A ROADSIDE STAND
Robert Frost
AUNT JENNIFER’S TIGERS
Adrienne Rich
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
First Edition
January 2007   Pausa 1928
Reprinted
January 2009   Magha 1930
PD 230T MJ
© National Council of
Educational Research
and Training, 2007
Rs. 25.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with
NCERT watermark
Published at the Publication
Department by the Secretary,
National Council of Educational
Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg,
New Delhi 110 016 and printed
at Tan Prints (India) Pvt. Ltd.,
44km, Mile Stone, Rohtak
Road, Jhajjar, Haryana
ISBN  81-7450-650-0
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION DEPARTMENT, NCERT
✛✜✢✣✤✥
✦✧★✩✪
New Delhi 110 016
Bangalore 560 085
Ahmedabad 380 014
Kolkata 700 114
Guwahati 781 021
Publication Team
Head, Publication
: P. Rajakumar
Department
Chief Production
: Shiv Kumar
Officer
Chief Editor
: Shveta Uppal
Chief Business
: Gautam Ganguly
Manager
Production Asstt.
: Rajesh Pippal
Cover, Layout and Illustrations
Joel Gill
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
The Last Lesson
Alphonse Daudet
Lost Spring
Anees Jung
Deep Water
William Douglas
The Rattrap
Selma Lagerlof
Indigo
Louis Fischer
Poets and Pancakes
Asokamitran
The Interview
Christopher Silvester
Umberto Eco
Going Places
A. R. Barton
Prose
Prose
Prose
Prose
Prose
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
ess n
The Last Lesson
About the author
Alphonse Daudet (1840-1897) was a French novelist
and short-story writer. The Last Lesson is set in the
days of the Franco-Prussian War (1870-1871) in which
France was defeated by Prussia led by Bismarck.
Prussia then consisted of what now are the nations of
Germany, Poland and parts of Austria. In this story the
French districts of Alsace and Lorraine have passed
into Prussian hands. Read the story to find out what
effect this had on life at school.
Notice these expressions in the text.
Infer their meaning from the context
 in great dread of
 in unison
 counted on
 a great bustle
 thumbed at the edges
 reproach ourselves with
I started for school very late that morning and was in great
dread of a scolding, especially because M. Hamel had said
that he would question us on participles, and I did not
know the first word about them. For a moment I thought of
running away and spending the day out of doors. It was so
warm, so bright! The birds were chirping at the edge of the
woods; and in the open field back of the sawmill the
Prussian soldiers were drilling. It was all much more
tempting than the rule for participles, but I had the
strength to resist, and hurried off to school.
When I passed the town hall there was a crowd in
front of the bulletin-board. For the last two years all our
bad news had come from there — the lost battles, the draft,
the orders of the commanding officer — and I thought to
myself, without stopping, “What can be the matter now?”
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
The Last Lesson/3
Then, as I hurried by as fast as I could go, the
blacksmith, Wachter, who was there, with his apprentice,
reading the bulletin, called after me, “Don’t go so fast,
bub; you’ll get to your school in plenty of time!”
I thought he was making fun of me, and reached
M. Hamel’s little garden all out of breath.
Usually, when school began, there was a great bustle,
which could be heard out in the street, the opening and
closing of desks, lessons repeated in unison, very loud, with
our hands over our ears to understand better, and the
teacher’s great ruler rapping on the table. But now it was
all so still! I had counted on the commotion to get to my
desk without being seen; but, of course, that day everything
had to be as quiet as Sunday morning. Through the window
I saw my classmates, already in their places, and M. Hamel
walking up and down with his terrible iron ruler under his
arm. I had to open the door and go in before everybody. You
can imagine how I blushed and how frightened I was.
But nothing happened. M. Hamel saw me and said
very kindly, “Go to your place quickly, little Franz. We were
beginning without you.”
I jumped over the bench and sat down at my desk. Not
till then, when I had got a little over my fright, did I see
that our teacher had on his beautiful green coat, his frilled
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
4/Flamingo
shirt, and the little black silk
cap, all embroidered, that he
never
except
inspection and prize days.
Besides, the whole school
seemed so strange and
solemn. But the thing that
surprised me most was to
see, on the back benches that
were always empty, the village
people sitting quietly like
ourselves; old Hauser, with
his three-cornered hat, the
for mer mayor, the former
postmaster, and several others besides. Everybody looked
sad; and Hauser had brought an old primer, thumbed at
the edges, and he held it open on his knees with his great
spectacles lying across the pages.
While I was wondering about it all, M. Hamel mounted
his chair, and, in the same grave and gentle tone which he
had used to me, said, “My children, this is the last lesson
I shall give you. The order has come from Berlin to teach
only German in the schools of Alsace and Lorraine. The
new master comes tomorrow. This is your last French
lesson. I want you to be very attentive.”
What a thunderclap these words were to me!
Oh, the wretches; that was what they had put up at
the town-hall!
My last French lesson! Why, I hardly knew how to
write! I should never learn any more! I must stop there, then!
Oh, how sorry I was for not learning my lessons, for seeking
birds’ eggs, or going sliding on the Saar! My books, that had
seemed such a nuisance a while ago, so heavy to carry, my
grammar, and my history of the saints, were old friends now
that I couldn’t give up. And M. Hamel, too; the idea that he
was going away, that I should never see him again, made me
forget all about his ruler and how cranky he was.
Poor man! It was in honour of this last lesson that he
had put on his fine Sunday clothes, and now I understood
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
The Last Lesson/5
why the old men of the village were sitting there in the
back of the room. It was because they were sorry, too, that
they had not gone to school more. It was their way of
thanking our master for his forty years of faithful service
and of showing their respect for the country that was theirs
no more.
While I was thinking of all this, I heard my name called.
It was my turn to recite. What would I not have given to be
able to say that dreadful rule for the participle all through,
very loud and clear, and without one mistake? But I got
mixed up on the first words and stood there, holding on to
my desk, my heart beating, and not daring to look up.
I heard M. Hamel say to me, “I won’t scold you, little
Franz; you must feel bad enough. See how it is! Every day
we have said to ourselves, ‘Bah! I’ve plenty of time. I’ll
learn it tomorrow.’ And now you see where we’ve come out.
Ah, that’s the great trouble with Alsace; she puts off
learning till tomorrow. Now those fellows out there will
have the right to say to you, ‘How is it; you pretend to be
Frenchmen, and yet you can neither speak nor write your
own language?’ But you are not the worst, poor little Franz.
We’ve all a great deal to reproach ourselves with.”
“Your parents were not anxious enough to have you
learn. They preferred to put you to work on a farm or at
the mills, so as to have a little more money. And I? I’ve
been to blame also. Have I not often
sent you to water my flowers
instead of learning your
lessons? And when I
wanted to go fishing,
did I not just give
you a holiday?”
Then, from one
thing to another,
M. Hamel went on
French language,
saying that it was
the most beautiful
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
6/Flamingo
Sketch map not to scale
France
1870-71
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
The Last Lesson/7
language in the world — the
clearest, the most logical; that
we must guard it among us and
never forget it, because when a
people are enslaved, as long as
they hold fast to their language
it is as if they had the key to their
prison. Then he opened a
grammar and read us our lesson.
I was amazed to see how well I
understood it. All he said seemed
so easy, so easy! I think, too, that
I had never listened so carefully,
and that he had never explained
everything with so much patience.
It seemed almost as if the poor
man wanted to give us all he knew
before going away, and to put it
all into our heads at one stroke.
After the grammar, we had a
lesson in writing. That day M.
Hamel had new copies for us,
written in a beautiful round hand
— France, Alsace, France, Alsace. They looked like little
flags floating everywhere in the school-room, hung from
the rod at the top of our desks. You ought to have seen how
every one set to work, and how quiet it was! The only sound
was the scratching of the pens over the paper. Once some
beetles flew in; but nobody paid any attention to them, not
even the littlest ones, who worked right on tracing their
fish-hooks, as if that was French, too. On the roof the
pigeons cooed very low, and I thought to myself, “Will they
make them sing in German, even the pigeons?”
Whenever I looked up from my writing I saw M. Hamel
sitting motionless in his chair and gazing first at one thing,
then at another, as if he wanted to fix in his mind just how
everything looked in that little school-room. Fancy! For
forty years he had been there in the same place, with his
garden outside the window and his class in front of him,
1 . What was Franz expected to
be prepared with for school
that day?
2 . What did Franz notice that was
unusual about the school that
3 . What had been put up on the
bulletin-board?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
8/Flamingo
just like that. Only the desks and benches had been worn
smooth; the walnut-trees in the garden were taller, and
the hopvine that he had planted himself twined about the
windows to the roof. How it must have broken his heart to
leave it all, poor man; to hear his sister moving about in
the room above, packing their trunks! For they must leave
the country next day.
But he had the courage to hear every lesson to the
very last. After the writing, we had a lesson in history,
and then the babies chanted their ba, be bi, bo, bu. Down
there at the back of the room old Hauser had put on his
spectacles and, holding his primer in both hands, spelled
the letters with them. You could see that he, too, was crying;
his voice trembled with emotion, and it was so funny to
hear him that we all wanted to laugh and cry. Ah, how
well I remember it, that last lesson!
All at once the church-clock struck twelve. Then the
Angelus. At the same moment the trumpets of the
Prussians, returning from drill, sounded under our
windows. M. Hamel stood up, very pale, in his chair.
I never saw him look so tall.
“My friends,” said he, “I—I—” But something choked
him. He could not go on.
Then he turned to the blackboard, took a piece of chalk,
and, bearing on with all his
might, he wrote as large as he
could —
“Vive La France!”
Then he stopped and leaned
his head against the wall, and,
without a word, he made a
gesture to us with his hand —
“School is dismissed — you
may go.”
1. What changes did the order
from Berlin cause in school
that day?
2. How did Franz’s feelings about
M. Hamel and school change?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
The Last Lesson/9
Understanding the text
The people in this story suddenly realise how precious their
language is to them. What shows you this? Why does this
happen?
Franz thinks, “Will they make them sing in German, even the
pigeons?” What could this mean?
(There could be more than one answer.)
Talking about the text
“When a people are enslaved, as long as they hold fast to their
language it is as if they had the key to their prison.”
Can you think of examples in history where a conquered people
had their language taken away from them or had a language
imposed on them?
What happens to a linguistic minority in a state? How do you
think they can keep their language alive? For example:
Punjabis in Bangalore
Tamilians in Mumbai
Kannadigas in Delhi
Gujaratis in Kolkata
Is it possible to carry pride in one’s language too far?
Do you know what ‘linguistic chauvinism’ means?
Working with words
English is a language that contains words from many other
languages. This inclusiveness is one of the reasons it is now a
world language, For example:
petite
French
kindergarten
German
capital
Latin
democracy
Greek
bazaar
Hindi
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
10/Flamingo
Find out the origins of the following words.
tycoon
barbecue
tulip
veranda
robot
bandicoot
Notice the underlined words in these sentences and tick the
option that best explains their meaning.
(a) “What a thunderclap these words were to me!”
The words were
loud and clear.
startling and unexpected.
(iii)
pleasant and welcome.
(b) “When a people are enslaved, as long as they hold fast to
their language it is as if they had the key to their prison”
It is as if they have the key to the prison as long as they
do not lose their language.
are attached to their language.
(iii)
quickly learn the conqueror’s language.
(c) Don’t go so fast, you will get to your school in plenty of time.
You will get to your school
very late.
too early.
(iii)
early enough.
(d) I never saw him look so tall.
M. Hamel
(a) had grown physically taller
(b) seemed very confident
stood on the chair
Noticing form
Read this sentence
M. Hamel had said that he would question us on participles.
In the sentence above, the verb form “had said” in the first
part is used to indicate an “earlier past”. The whole story is
narrated in the past. M. Hamel’s “saying” happened earlier
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
The Last Lesson/11
than the events in this story. This form of the verb is called the
past perfect.
Pick out five sentences from the story with this form of the verb
and say why this form has been used.
Writing
Write a notice for your school bulletin board. Your notice could
be an announcement of a forthcoming event, or a requirement
to be fulfilled, or a rule to be followed.
Write a paragraph of about 100 words arguing for or against
having to study three languages at school.
Have  you ever changed your opinion about someone or
something that you had earlier liked or disliked? Narrate what
led you to change your mind.
Things to do
Find out about the following (You may go to the internet, interview
people, consult reference books or visit a library.)
(a) Linguistic human rights
(b) Constitutional guarantees for linguistic minorities in India.
Given below is a survey form. Talk to at least five of your
classmates and fill in the information you get in the form.
S.No.
Languages
Neighbourhood
City/Town
School
you know
language
language
language
language
ABOUT THE UNIT
THEME
The pain that is inflicted on the people of a territory by its
conquerors by taking away the right to study or speak their
own language.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
12/Flamingo
SUB-THEME
Student and teacher attitudes to learning and teaching.
READING COMPREHENSION
The comprehension check at the end of each section in the
unit helps pupils make sure that they have understood the
facts before they move on to the next section. One session of
forty minutes is likely to be enough for one section of the unit.
Pupils can read each section silently and discuss the answers
in pairs.
The questions at the end of the unit are inferential. These help
pupils make sense of the writer’s intention in focussing on a
local episode and to comment on an issue of universal
significance. There could be a follow-up discussion on parts
for which students need explanation.
TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT
Topics to be discussed in small groups or pairs. This shall help
pupils think of issues that relate to the realities of the society
they live in. Gives scope for developing speaking skills in the
English language on varied issues. Fluency development.
WORKING WITH WORDS
To make pupils aware of
the enrichment of the English language through borrowings
from the other languages.
idiomatic expressions and figurative use of language.
NOTICING FORM
To make pupils notice tense form and understand the context
of its use.
WRITING
Practice in a functional genre, e.g., bulletin.
Argumentative writing on a topic related to their life at school.
Narrating subjective experience discussing personal likes and
dislikes.
THINGS TO DO
Extension activity that will help pupils understand language
rights of citizens and the problems of linguistic minorities. Social
and political awareness.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Los  S r
Lost Spring
About the author
Anees Jung (1964) was born in Rourkela and spent
her childhood and adolescence in Hyderabad. She
received her education in Hyderabad and in the
United States of America. Her parents were both writers.
Anees Jung began her career as a writer in India. She
has been an editor and columnist for major newspapers
in India and abroad, and has authored several books.
The following is an excerpt from her book titled Lost
Spring, Stories of Stolen Childhood. Here she analyses
the grinding poverty and traditions which condemn
these children to a life of exploitation.
Notice these expressions in the text.
Infer their meaning from the context.
✞looking for
✞perpetual state of poverty
✞slog their daylight hours
✞dark hutments
✞roof over his head
✞imposed the baggage on the child
‘Sometimes I find a Rupee in the garbage’
“Why do you do this?” I ask Saheb whom I encounter every
morning scrounging for gold in the garbage dumps of my
neighbourhood. Saheb left his home long ago. Set amidst
the green fields of Dhaka, his home is not even a distant
memory. There were many storms that swept away their
fields and homes, his mother tells him. That’s why they
left, looking for gold in the big city where he now lives.
“I have nothing else to do,” he mutters, looking away.
“Go to school,” I say glibly, realising immediately how
hollow the advice must sound.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
14/Flamingo
“There is no school in my neighbourhood. When they
build one, I will go.”
“If I start a school, will you come?” I ask, half-joking.
“Yes,” he says, smiling broadly.
A few days later I see him running up to me. “Is your
school ready?”
“It takes longer to build a school,” I say, embarrassed
at having made a promise that was not meant. But promises
like mine abound in every corner of his bleak world.
After months of knowing him, I ask him his name.
“Saheb-e-Alam,” he announces. He does not know what it
means. If he knew its meaning — lord of the universe — he
would have a hard time believing it. Unaware of what his
name represents, he roams the streets with his friends, an
army of barefoot boys who appear like the morning birds
and disappear at noon. Over the months, I have come to
recognise each of them.
“Why aren’t you wearing chappals?” I ask one.
“My mother did not bring them down from the shelf,”
he answers simply.
“Even if she did he will throw them off,” adds another
who is wearing shoes that do not match. When I comment
on it, he shuffles his feet and says nothing. “I want shoes,”
says a third boy who has never owned a pair all his life.
Travelling across the country I have seen children walking
barefoot, in cities, on village roads. It is not lack of money
but a tradition to stay barefoot, is one explanation. I wonder
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Lost Spring/15
if this is only an excuse to explain away a perpetual state
of poverty.
I remember a story a man from Udipi once told me. As a
young boy he would go to school past an old temple, where
his father was a priest. He would stop briefly at the temple
and pray for a pair of shoes. Thirty years later I visited his
town and the temple, which was now drowned in an air of
desolation. In the backyard, where lived the new priest, there
were red and white plastic chairs. A young boy dressed in a
grey uniform, wearing socks and shoes, arrived panting and
threw his school bag on a folding bed. Looking at the boy, I
remembered the prayer another boy had made to the goddess
when he had finally got a pair of shoes, “Let me never lose
them.” The goddess had granted his prayer. Young boys like
the son of the priest now wore shoes. But many others like
the ragpickers in my neighbourhood remain shoeless.
My acquaintance with the barefoot ragpickers leads
me to Seemapuri, a place on the periphery of Delhi yet
miles away from it, metaphorically. Those who live here are
squatters who came from Bangladesh back in 1971. Saheb’s
family is among them. Seemapuri was then a wilderness. It
still is, but it is no longer empty. In structures of mud, with
roofs of tin and tarpaulin, devoid of sewage, drainage or
running water, live 10,000 ragpickers. They have lived here
for more than thirty years without an identity, without
permits but with ration cards that get their names on voters’
lists and enable them to buy grain. Food is more important
for survival than an identity. “If at the end of the day we
can feed our families and go to bed without an aching
stomach, we would rather live here than in the fields that
gave us no grain,” say a group of women in tattered saris
when I ask them why they left their beautiful land of green
fields and rivers. Wherever they find food, they pitch their
tents that become transit homes. Children grow up in them,
becoming partners in survival. And survival in Seemapuri
means rag-picking. Through the years, it has acquired the
proportions of a fine art. Garbage to them is gold. It is
their daily bread, a roof over their heads, even if it is a
leaking roof. But for a child it is even more.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
16/Flamingo
“I sometimes find a rupee, even
a ten-rupee note,” Saheb says, his
eyes lighting up. When you can
find a silver coin in a heap of
garbage,
don’t
scrounging, for there is hope of
finding more. It seems that for
children, garbage has a
meaning
different
from what it means to
their parents. For the
children it is wrapped
in wonder, for the
elders it is a means of
survival.
One winter morning
I see Saheb standing
by the fenced gate of
the neighbourhood
club, watching two
young men dressed
in white, playing tennis. “I like
the game,” he hums, content to watch it standing behind
the fence. “I go inside when no one is around,” he admits.
“The gatekeeper lets me use the swing.”
Saheb too is wearing tennis shoes that look strange
over his discoloured shirt and shorts. “Someone gave them
to me,” he says in the manner of an explanation. The fact
that they are discarded shoes of some rich boy, who perhaps
refused to wear them because of a hole in one of them,
does not bother him. For one who has walked barefoot,
even shoes with a hole is a dream come true. But the game
he is watching so intently is out of his reach.
This morning, Saheb is on his way to the milk booth. In
his hand is a steel canister. “I now work in a tea stall down
the road,” he says, pointing in the distance. “I am paid
800 rupees and all my meals.” Does he like the job? I ask.
His face, I see, has lost the carefree look. The steel canister
seems heavier than the plastic bag he would carry so lightly
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Lost Spring/17
over his shoulder. The bag was
his. The canister belongs to the
man who owns the tea shop.
Saheb is no longer his own
master!
“I want to drive a car”
Mukesh insists on being his
own master. “I will be a motor
mechanic,” he announces.
“Do you know anything about cars?” I ask.
“I will learn to drive a car,” he answers, looking straight
into my eyes. His dream looms like a mirage amidst the
dust of streets that fill his town Firozabad, famous for its
bangles. Every other family in Firozabad is engaged in
making bangles. It is the centre of India’s glass-blowing
industry where families have spent generations working
around furnaces, welding glass, making bangles for all the
women in the land it seems.
Mukesh’s family is among them. None of them know
that it is illegal for children like him to work in the glass
furnaces with high temperatures, in dingy cells without air
and light; that the law, if enforced, could get him and all
those 20,000 children out of the hot furnaces where they
slog their daylight hours, often losing the brightness of their
eyes. Mukesh’s eyes beam as he volunteers to take me
home, which he proudly says is being rebuilt. We walk down
stinking lanes choked with garbage, past homes that remain
hovels with crumbling walls, wobbly doors, no windows,
crowded with families of humans and animals coexisting in
a primeval state. He stops at the door of one such house,
bangs a wobbly iron door with his foot, and pushes it open.
We enter a half-built shack. In one part of it, thatched with
dead grass, is a firewood stove over which sits a large vessel
of sizzling spinach leaves. On the ground, in large aluminium
platters, are more chopped vegetables. A frail young woman
is cooking the evening meal for the whole family. Through
eyes filled with smoke she smiles. She is the wife of
1. What is Saheb looking for in the
garbage dumps? Where is he
and where has he come from?
2. What explanations does the
author offer for the children not
wearing footwear?
3. Is Saheb happy working at the
tea-stall? Explain.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
18/Flamingo
Mukesh’s elder brother. Not much older in years, she has
begun to command respect as the bahu, the daughter-in-
law of the house, already in charge of three men — her
husband, Mukesh and their father. When the older man
enters, she gently withdraws behind the broken wall and
brings her veil closer to her face. As custom demands,
daughters-in-law must veil their faces before male elders.
In this case the elder is an impoverished bangle maker.
Despite long years of hard labour, first as a tailor, then a
bangle maker, he has failed to renovate a house, send his
two sons to school. All he has managed to do is teach them
what he knows — the art of making bangles.
“It is his karam, his destiny,” says Mukesh’s
grandmother, who has watched her own husband go blind
with the dust from polishing the glass of bangles. “Can a
god-given lineage ever be broken?” she implies. Born in the
caste of bangle makers, they have seen nothing but bangles
—  in the house, in the yard, in every other house, every
other yard, every street in Firozabad. Spirals of bangles —
sunny gold, paddy green, royal blue, pink, purple, every
colour born out of the seven colours of the rainbow — lie in
mounds in unkempt yards, are piled on four-wheeled
handcarts, pushed by young men along the narrow lanes
of the shanty town. And in dark hutments, next to lines of
flames of flickering oil lamps, sit boys and girls with their
fathers and mothers, welding pieces of coloured glass into
circles of bangles. Their eyes are more adjusted to the dark
than to the light outside. That is why they often end up
losing their eyesight before they become adults.
Savita, a young girl in a drab pink dress, sits alongside
an elderly woman, soldering pieces of glass. As her hands
move mechanically like the tongs of a machine, I wonder if
she knows the sanctity of the bangles she helps make. It
symbolises an Indian woman’s suhaag, auspiciousness in
marriage. It will dawn on her suddenly one day when her
head is draped with a red veil, her hands dyed red with
henna, and red bangles rolled onto her wrists. She will
then become a bride. Like the old woman beside her who
became one many years ago. She still has bangles on her
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Lost Spring/19
wrist, but no light in her eyes. “Ek waqt ser bhar khana bhi
nahin khaya,” she says, in a voice drained of joy. She has
not enjoyed even one full meal in her entire lifetime  —
that’s what she has reaped! Her husband, an old man
with a flowing beard, says, “I know nothing except bangles.
All I have done is make a house for the family to live in.”
Hearing him, one wonders if he has achieved what
many have failed in their lifetime. He has a roof over his
head!
The cry of not having money to do anything except
carry on the business of making bangles, not even enough
to eat, rings in every home. The young men echo the lament
of their elders. Little has moved with time, it seems, in
Firozabad. Years of mind-numbing toil have killed all
initiative and the ability to dream.
“Why not organise yourselves into a cooperative?” I
ask a group of young men who have fallen into the vicious
circle of middlemen who trapped their fathers and
forefathers. “Even if we get organised, we are the
ones who will be hauled up by the police,
beaten and dragged to jail for doing
something illegal,” they say. There is
no leader among them, no one
who could help them see
things differently. Their
fathers are as tired as
they are. They talk
endlessly in a spiral
moves
poverty to apathy to
greed and to injustice.
Listening to them,
I see two distinct
worlds — one
of the family,
caught in
a web of
poverty,
burdened
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
20/Flamingo
by the stigma of caste in which
they are born; the other a vicious
circle of the sahukars, the
middlemen, the policemen, the
keepers of law, the bureaucrats
and the politicians. Together they
have imposed the baggage on the
child that he cannot put down.
Before he is aware, he accepts it
as naturally as his father. To do
anything else would mean to dare.
And daring is not part of his growing up. When I sense a
flash of it in Mukesh I am cheered. “I want to be a motor
mechanic,’ he repeats. He will go to a garage and learn.
But the garage is a long way from his home. “I will walk,”
he insists. “Do you also dream of flying a plane?” He is
suddenly silent. “No,” he says, staring at the ground. In
his small murmur there is an embarrassment that has
not yet turned into regret. He is content to dream of cars
that he sees hurtling down the streets of his town. Few
airplanes fly over Firozabad.
Understanding the text
What could be some of the reasons for the migration of people
from villages to cities?
Would you agree that promises made to poor children are rarely
kept? Why do you think this happens in the incidents narrated
in the text?
What forces conspire to keep the workers in the bangle industry
of Firozabad in poverty?
Talking about the text
How, in your opinion, can Mukesh realise his dream?
Mention the hazards of working in the glass bangles industry.
Why should child labour be eliminated and how?
1. What makes the city of
Firozabad famous?
2. Mention the hazards of working
in the glass bangles industry.
3. How is Mukesh’s attitude to his
situation different from that of
his family?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Lost Spring/21
Thinking about language
Although this text speaks of factual events and situations of
misery it transforms these situations with an almost poetical
prose into a literary experience. How does it do so? Here are
some literary devices:
Hyperbole is a way of speaking or writing that makes
something sound better or more exciting than it really is.
For example: Garbage to them is gold.
A Metaphor, as you may know, compares two things or ideas
that are not very similar. A metaphor describes a thing in
terms of a single quality or feature of some other thing; we
can say that a metaphor “transfers” a quality of one thing to
another. For example: The road was a ribbon of light.
Simile is a word or phrase that compares one thing with
another using the words  “like” or “as”. For example: As white
as snow.
Carefully read the following phrases and sentences taken from the
text. Can you identify the literary device in each example?
Saheb-e-Alam which means the lord of the universe is directly
in contrast to what Saheb is in reality.
Drowned in an air of desolation.
Seemapuri, a place on the periphery of Delhi yet miles away
from it, metaphorically.
For the children it is wrapped in wonder; for the elders it is a
means of survival.
As her hands move mechanically like the tongs of a machine,
I wonder if she knows the sanctity of the bangles she helps
make.
She still has bangles on her wrist, but not light in her eyes.
Few airplanes fly over Firozabad.
Web of poverty.
Scrounging for gold.
And survival in Seemapuri means rag-picking. Through the
years, it has acquired the proportions of a fine art.
The steel canister seems heavier than the plastic bag he would
carry so lightly over his shoulders.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
22/Flamingo
Things to do
The beauty of the glass bangles of Firozabad contrasts with
the misery of people who produce them.
This paradox is also found in some other situations, for
example, those who work in gold and diamond mines, or carpet
weaving factories, and the products of their labour, the lives of
construction workers, and the buildings they build.
  Look around and find examples of such paradoxes.
  Write a paragraph of about 200 to 250 words on any one of
them. You can start by making notes.
Here is an example of how one such paragraph may begin:
You never see the poor in this town. By day they toil, working
cranes and earthmovers, squirreling deep into the hot sand to
lay the foundations of chrome. By night they are banished to
bleak labour camps at the outskirts of the city...
ABOUT THE
THEME
The plight of street children forced into labour early in life and
denied the opportunity of schooling.
SUB-THEME
The callousness of society and the political class to the
sufferings of the poor.
COMPREHENSION
Factual understanding and responding with sensitivity.
Thinking on socio-economic issues as a take-off from the text.
TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT
Fluency development
Social awareness
Discussion on
✁the dreams of the poor and the reality.
✁problems of child labour.
THINKING ABOUT LANGUAGE
Focus on the use of figures of speech in writing.
THINGS TO DO
Observation of the paradoxes in the society we live in.
WRITING
Note-making and reporting.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
e p W te
Deep Water
About the author
William Douglas (1898-1980) was born in Maine,
Minnesota. After graduating with a Bachelors of Arts
in English and Economics, he spent two years teaching
high school in Yakima. However, he got tired of this and
decided to pursue a legal career. He met Franklin D.
Roosevelt at Yale and became an adviser and friend to
the President. Douglas was a leading advocate of
individual rights. He retired in 1975 with a term lasting
thirty-six years and remains the longest-serving Justice
in the history of the court. The following excerpt is taken
from Of Men and Mountains by William O. Douglas. It
reveals how as a young boy William Douglas nearly
drowned in a swimming pool. In this essay he talks
about his fear of water and thereafter, how he finally
overcame it. Notice how the autobiographical part of
the selection is used to support his discussion of fear.
Notice these words and expressions in the text.
Infer their meaning from the context.
  treacherous
  misadventure
  subdued my pride
  bob to the surface like a cork
  flailed at the surface
  curtain of life fell
  fishing for landlocked salmon
  back and forth across the pool
It had happened when I was ten or eleven years old. I had
decided to learn to swim. There was a pool at the Y.M.C.A.
in Yakima that offered exactly the opportunity. The Yakima
River was treacherous. Mother continually warned against
it, and kept fresh in my mind the details of each drowning
in the river. But the Y.M.C.A. pool was safe. It was only
two or three feet deep at the shallow end; and while it was
nine feet deep at the other, the drop was gradual. I got a
pair of water wings and went to the pool. I hated to walk
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
24/Flamingo
Sketch map not to scale
The Yakima River is a tributary
of the Columbia River in eastern
Washington, U.S.A. The state is
named after the indigenous
Yakama people.
THE YAKIMA RIVER
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Deep Water/25
naked into it and show my skinny legs. But I subdued my
pride and did it.
From the beginning, however, I had an aversion to the
water when I was in it. This started when I was three or
four years old and father took me to the beach in California.
He and I stood together in the surf. I hung on to him, yet
the waves knocked me down and swept over me. I was
buried in water. My breath was gone. I was frightened.
Father laughed, but there was terror in my heart at the
overpowering force of the waves.
My introduction to the Y.M.CA. swimming pool revived
unpleasant memories and stirred childish fears. But in a
little while I gathered confidence. I paddled with my new
water wings, watching the other boys and trying to learn
by aping them. I did this two or three times on different
days and was just beginning to feel at ease in the water
when the misadventure happened.
I went to the pool when no one else was there. The place
was quiet. The water was still, and the tiled bottom was as
white and clean as a bathtub. I was timid about going in
alone, so I sat on the side of the pool to wait for others.
I had not been there long when in came a big bruiser
of a boy, probably eighteen years old. He had thick hair on
his chest. He was a beautiful physical specimen, with legs
and arms that showed rippling muscles. He yelled, “Hi,
Skinny! How’d you like to be ducked?”
With that he picked me up and tossed me into the deep
end. I landed in a sitting position, swallowed water, and
went at once to the bottom. I was frightened, but not yet
frightened out of my wits. On the way down I planned:
When my feet hit the bottom, I would make a big jump,
come to the surface, lie flat on it, and paddle to the edge of
the pool.
It seemed a long way down. Those nine feet were more
like ninety, and before I touched bottom my lungs were
ready to burst. But when my feet hit bottom I summoned
all my strength and made what I thought was a great spring
upwards. I imagined I would bob to the surface like a cork.
Instead, I came up slowly. I opened my eyes and saw nothing
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
26/Flamingo
but water — water that had a dirty yellow tinge to it. I
grew panicky. I reached up as if to grab a rope and my
hands clutched only at water. I was suffocating. I tried to
yell but no sound came out. Then my eyes and nose came
out of the water — but not my mouth.
I flailed at the surface of the water, swallowed and
choked. I tried to bring my legs up, but they hung as dead
weights, paralysed and rigid. A great force was pulling me
under. I screamed, but only the water heard me. I had
started on the long journey back to the bottom of the pool.
I struck at the water as I went down, expending my
strength as one in a nightmare fights an irresistible force. I
had lost all my breath. My lungs ached, my head throbbed.
I was getting dizzy. But I remembered the strategy — I
would spring from the bottom of the pool and come like a
cork to the surface. I would lie flat on the water, strike out
with my arms, and thrash with my legs. Then I would get
to the edge of the pool and be safe.
I went down, down, endlessly. I opened my eyes. Nothing
but water with a yellow glow — dark water that one could
not see through.
And then sheer, stark terror seized me, terror that
knows no understanding, terror that knows no control,
terror that no one can understand who has not experienced
it. I was shrieking under water. I was paralysed under water
— stiff, rigid with fear. Even the screams in my throat were
frozen. Only my heart, and the pounding in my head, said
that I was still alive.
And then in the midst of the terror came a touch of
reason. I must remember to jump when I hit the bottom. At
last I felt the tiles under me. My toes reached out as if to
grab them. I jumped with everything I had.
But the jump made no difference. The water was still
around me. I looked for ropes, ladders, water wings. Nothing
but water. A mass of yellow water held me. Stark terror
took an even deeper hold on me, like a great charge of
electricity. I shook and trembled with fright. My arms
wouldn’t move. My legs wouldn’t move. I tried to call for
help, to call for mother. Nothing happened.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Deep Water/27
And then, strangely, there was light. I was coming out
of the awful yellow water. At least my eyes were. My nose
was almost out too.
Then I started down a third time. I sucked for air and
got water. The yellowish light was going out.
Then all effort ceased. I relaxed. Even my legs felt limp;
and a blackness swept over my brain. It wiped out fear; it
wiped out terror. There was no more panic. It was quiet
and peaceful. Nothing to be afraid of. This is nice... to be
drowsy... to go to sleep... no need to jump... too tired to
jump... it’s nice to be carried gently... to float along in space...
tender arms around me... tender arms like Mother’s... now
I must go to sleep...
I crossed to oblivion, and the
curtain of life fell.
The next I remember I was
lying on my stomach beside the
pool, vomiting. The chap that threw
me in was saying, “But I was only
fooling.” Someone said, “The kid
nearly died. Be all right now. Let’s
carry him to the locker room.”
Several hours later, I walked
home. I was weak and trembling.
I shook and cried when I lay on
my bed. I couldn’t eat that night. For days a haunting fear
was in my heart. The slightest exertion upset me, making
me wobbly in the knees and sick to my stomach.
I never went back to the pool. I feared water. I avoided
it whenever I could.
A few years later when I came to know the waters of
the Cascades, I wanted to get into them. And whenever I
did — whether I was wading the Tieton or Bumping River
or bathing in Warm Lake of the Goat Rocks — the terror
that had seized me in the pool would come back. It would
take possession of me completely. My legs would become
paralysed. Icy horror would grab my heart.
This handicap stayed with me as the years rolled by.
In canoes on Maine lakes fishing for landlocked salmon,
1. What is the “misadventure” that
William Douglas speaks about?
2. What were the series of emotions
and fears that Douglas
experienced when he was thrown
into the pool? What plans did he
make to come to the surface?
3. How did this experience affect
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
28/Flamingo
bass fishing in New Hampshire, trout fishing on the
Deschutes and Metolius in Oregon, fishing for salmon on
the Columbia, at Bumping Lake in the Cascades —
wherever I went, the haunting fear of the water followed
me. It ruined my fishing trips; deprived me of the joy of
canoeing, boating, and swimming.
I used every way I knew to overcome this fear, but it
held me firmly in its grip. Finally, one October, I decided to
get an instructor and learn to swim. I went to a pool and
practiced five days a week, an hour each day. The instructor
put a belt around me. A rope attached to the belt went
through a pulley that ran on an overhead cable. He held on
to the end of the rope, and we went back and forth, back
and forth across the pool, hour after hour, day after day,
week after week. On each trip across the pool a bit of the
panic seized me. Each time the instructor relaxed his hold
on the rope and I went under, some of the old terror returned
and my legs froze. It was three months before the tension
began to slack. Then he taught me to put my face under
water and exhale, and to raise my nose and inhale. I repeated
the exercise hundreds of times. Bit by bit I shed part of the
panic that seized me when my head went under water.
Next he held me at the side of the pool and had me
kick with my legs. For weeks I did just that. At first my
legs refused to work. But they gradually relaxed; and finally
I could command them.
Thus, piece by piece, he built a swimmer. And when he
had perfected each piece, he put them together into an
integrated whole. In April he said, “Now you can swim. Dive
off and swim the length of the pool, crawl stroke.”
I did. The instructor was finished.
But I was not finished. I still wondered if I would be
terror-stricken when I was alone in the pool. I tried it. I
swam the length up and down. Tiny vestiges of the old
terror would return. But now I could frown and say to that
terror, “Trying to scare me, eh? Well, here’s to you! Look!”
And off I’d go for another length of the pool.
This went on until July. But I was still not satisfied. I
was not sure that all the terror had left. So I went to Lake
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Deep Water/29
Wentworth in New Hampshire, dived off a dock at Triggs
Island, and swam two miles across the lake to Stamp Act
Island. I swam the crawl, breast stroke, side stroke, and
back stroke. Only once did the terror return. When I was
in the middle of the lake, I put my face under and saw
nothing but bottomless water. The old sensation returned
in miniature. I laughed and said, “Well, Mr Terror, what do
you think you can do to me?” It fled and I swam on.
Yet I had residual doubts. At my first opportunity I
hurried west, went up the Tieton to Conrad Meadows, up
the Conrad Creek Trail to Meade Glacier, and camped in
the high meadow by the side of Warm Lake. The next
morning I stripped, dived into the lake, and swam across
to the other shore and back — just as Doug Corpron used
to do. I shouted with joy, and Gilbert Peak returned the
echo. I had conquered my fear of water.
The experience had a deep meaning for me, as only
those who have known stark terror and conquered it can
appreciate. In death there is peace. There is terror only in
the fear of death, as Roosevelt knew when he said, “All we
have to fear is fear itself.” Because
I had experienced both the
sensation of dying and the terror
that fear of it can produce, the
will to live somehow grew in
intensity.
At last I felt released — free
to walk the trails and climb the
peaks and to brush aside fear.
Understanding the text
How does Douglas make clear to the reader the sense of panic
that gripped him as he almost drowned? Describe the details
that have made the description vivid.
How did Douglas overcome his fear of water?
Why does Douglas as an adult recount a childhood experience
of terror and his conquering of it? What larger meaning does he
draw from this experience?
1. Why was Douglas determined to
get over his fear of water?
2. How did the instructor “build a
swimmer” out of Douglas?
3. How did Douglas make sure that
he conquered the old terror?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
30/Flamingo
Talking about the text
“All we have to fear is fear itself”. Have you ever had a fear that
you have now overcome? Share your experience with your
partner.
Find and narrate other stories about conquest of fear and what
people have said about courage. For example, you can recall Nelson
Mandela’s struggle for freedom, his perseverance to achieve his
mission, to liberate the oppressed and the oppressor as depicted
in his autobiography. The story We’re Not Afraid To Die, which you
have read in Class XI, is an apt example of how courage and
optimism helped a family survive under the direst stress.
Thinking about language
If someone else had narrated Douglas’s experience, how would
it have differed from this account? Write out a sample
paragraph or paragraphs from this text from the point of view
of a third person or observer, to find out which style of narration
would you consider to be more effective? Why?
Writing
Doing well in any activity, for example a sport, music, dance or
painting, riding a motorcycle or a car, involves a great deal of
struggle. Most of us are very nervous to begin with until
gradually we overcome our fears and perform well.
Write an essay of about five paragraphs recounting such an
experience. Try to recollect minute details of what caused the
fear, your feelings, the encouragement you got from others or
the criticism.
You could begin with the last sentence of the essay you have
just read — “At last I felt released — free to walk the trails and
climb the peaks and to brush aside fear.”
Write a short letter to someone you know about your having
learnt to do something new.
Things to do
Are there any water sports in India? Find out about the areas
or places which are known for water sports.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Deep Water/31
ABOUT THE UNIT
THEME
A real-life personal account of experiencing fear and the steps
taken to overcome it.
SUB-THEME
Psychological analysis of fear.
COMPREHENSION
Understanding another person’s experience.
Relating subjectively to the discussion on fear.
TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT
Sharing personal experiences.
Sharing accounts of acts of courage.
THINKING ABOUT LANGUAGE
Focus on first person narrative style.
WRITING
First person narration of personal experience.
Letter-writing on personal learning achievement.
THINGS TO DO
Gathering information on water sports.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
R ttra
The Rattrap
About the author
Selma Lagerlof (1858-1940) was a Swedish writer whose
stories have been translated into many languages. A
universal theme runs through all of them — a belief
that the essential goodness in a human being can be
awakened through understanding and love. This story
is set amidst the mines of Sweden, rich in iron ore,
which figure large in the history and legends of that
country. The story is told somewhat in the manner of a
fairy tale.
Notice these expressions in the text.
Infer their meaning from the context.
 keep body and soul together
 hunger gleamed in his eyes
 plods along the road
 unwonted joy
 impenetrable prison
 nodded a haughty consent
 eased his way
 fallen into a line of thought
 things have gone downhill
Once upon a time there was a man who went around selling
small rattraps of wire. He made them himself at odd
moments, from the material he got by begging in the stores
or at the big farms. But even so, the business was not
especially profitable, so he had to resort to both begging
and petty thievery to keep body and soul together. Even so,
his clothes were in rags, his cheeks were sunken, and
hunger gleamed in his eyes.
No one can imagine how sad and monotonous life can
appear to such a vagabond, who plods along the road, left
to his own meditations. But one day this man had fallen
into a line of thought, which really seemed to him
entertaining. He had naturally been thinking of his rattraps
when suddenly he was struck by the idea that the whole
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
The Rattrap/33
world about him — the whole world with its lands and
seas, its cities and villages — was nothing but a big rattrap.
It had never existed for any other purpose than to set baits
for people. It offered riches and joys, shelter and food, heat
and clothing, exactly as the rattrap offered cheese and
pork, and as soon as anyone let himself be tempted to
touch the bait, it closed in on him, and then everything
came to an end.
The world had, of course, never been very kind to him,
so it gave him unwonted joy to think ill of it in this way. It
became a cherished pastime of his, during many dreary
ploddings, to think of people he knew who had let
themselves be caught in the dangerous snare, and of others
who were still circling around the bait.
One dark evening as he was trudging along the road
he caught sight of a little gray cottage by the roadside, and
he knocked on the door to ask shelter for the night. Nor
was he refused. Instead of the sour faces which ordinarily
met him, the owner, who was an old man without wife or
child, was happy to get someone to talk to in his loneliness.
Immediately he put the porridge pot on the fire and gave
him supper; then he carved off such a big slice from his
tobacco roll that it was enough both for the stranger’s pipe
and his own. Finally he got out an old pack of cards and
played ‘mjolis’ with his guest until bedtime.
The old man was just as generous with his confidences
as with his porridge and tobacco. The guest was informed
at once that in his days of prosperity his host had been a
crofter at Ramsjo Ironworks and had worked on the land.
Now that he was no longer able to do day labour, it was his
cow which supported him. Yes, that bossy was
extraordinary. She could give milk for the creamery every
day, and last month he had received all of thirty kronor in
payment.
The stranger must have seemed incredulous, for the
old man got up and went to the window, took down a leather
pouch which hung on a nail in the very window frame, and
picked out three wrinkled ten-kronor bills. These he held
up before the eyes of his guest, nodding knowingly, and
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
34/Flamingo
then stuffed them back into the
pouch.
The next day both men got up
in good season. The crofter was in
a hurry to milk his cow, and the
other man probably thought he
should not stay in bed when the
head of the house had gotten up.
They left the cottage at the same
time. The crofter locked the door
and put the key in his pocket. The
man with the rattraps said good
bye and thank you, and thereupon
each went his own way.
But half an hour later the
rattrap peddler stood again before
the door. He did not try to get in,
however. He only went up to the window, smashed a pane,
stuck in his hand, and got hold of the pouch with the
thirty kronor. He took the money and thrust it into his
own pocket. Then he hung the leather pouch very carefully
back in its place and went away.
As he walked along with the money in his pocket he
felt quite pleased with his smartness. He realised, of course,
that at first he dared not continue on the public highway,
but must turn off the road, into the woods. During the
first hours this caused him no difficulty. Later in the day
it became worse, for it was a big and confusing forest which
he had gotten into. He tried, to be sure, to walk in a definite
direction, but the paths twisted back and forth so strangely!
He walked and walked without coming to the end of the
wood, and finally he realised that he had only been walking
around in the same part of the forest. All at once he recalled
his thoughts about the world and the rattrap. Now his
own turn had come. He had let himself be fooled by a bait
and had been caught. The whole forest, with its trunks
and branches, its thickets and fallen logs, closed in upon
him like an impenetrable prison from which he could
never escape.
1. From where did the peddler get
the idea of the world being a
rattrap?
2. Why was he amused by this
idea?
3. Did the peddler expect the kind
of hospitality that he received
from the crofter?
4. Why was the crofter so talkative
and friendly with the peddler?
5. Why did he show the thirty
kroner to the peddler?
6. Did the peddler respect the
confidence reposed in him by
the crofter?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
The Rattrap/35
It was late in December. Darkness was already
descending over the forest. This increased the danger, and
increased also his gloom and despair. Finally he saw no
way out, and he sank down on the ground, tired to death,
thinking that his last moment had come. But just as he
laid his head on the ground, he heard a sound—a hard
regular thumping. There was no doubt as to what that
was. He raised himself. ‘‘Those are the hammer strokes
from an iron mill’’, he thought. ‘‘There must be people near
by’’. He summoned all his strength, got up, and staggered
in the direction of the sound.
The Ramsjo Ironworks, which are now closed down,
were, not so long ago, a large plant, with smelter, rolling
mill, and forge. In the summertime long lines of heavily
loaded barges and scows slid down the canal, which led to
a large inland lake, and in the wintertime the roads near
the mill were black from all the coal dust which sifted
down from the big charcoal crates.
During one of the long dark evenings just before
Christmas, the master smith and his helper sat in the
dark forge near the furnace waiting for the pig iron, which
had been put in the fire, to be ready to put on the anvil.
Every now and then one of them got up to stir the glowing
mass with a long iron bar, returning in a few moments,
dripping with perspiration, though, as was the custom, he
wore nothing but a long shirt and a pair of wooden shoes.
All the time there were many sounds to be heard in
the forge. The big bellows groaned and the burning coal
cracked. The fire boy shovelled charcoal into the maw of
the furnace with a great deal of clatter. Outside roared the
waterfall, and a sharp north wind whipped the rain against
the brick-tiled roof.
It was probably on account of all this noise that the
blacksmith did not notice that a man had opened the gate
and entered the forge, until he stood close up to the furnace.
Surely it was nothing unusual for poor vagabonds
without any better shelter for the night to be attracted to
the forge by the glow of light which escaped through the
sooty panes, and to come in to warm themselves in front of
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
36/Flamingo
the fire. The blacksmiths glanced only casually and
indifferently at the intruder. He looked the way people of
his type usually did, with a long beard, dirty, ragged, and
with a bunch of rattraps dangling on his chest.
He asked permission to stay, and the master blacksmith
nodded a haughty consent without honouring him with a
single word.
The tramp did not say anything, either. He had not
come there to talk but only to warm himself and sleep.
In those days the Ramsjo iron mill was owned by a
very prominent ironmaster, whose greatest ambition was
to ship out good iron to the market. He watched both night
and day to see that the work was done as well as possible,
and at this very moment he came into the forge on one of
his nightly rounds of inspection.
Naturally the first thing he saw was the tall ragamuffin
who had eased his way so close to the furnace that steam
rose from his wet rags. The ironmaster did not follow the
example of the blacksmiths, who had hardly deigned to
look at the stranger. He walked close up to him, looked
him over very carefully, then tore off his slouch hat to get
a better view of his face.
‘‘But of course it is you, Nils Olof!’’ he said. “How you
do look!”
The man with the rattraps had never before seen the
ironmaster at Ramsjo and did not even know what his
name was. But it occurred to him that if the fine gentleman
thought he was an old acquaintance, he might perhaps
throw him a couple of kronor. Therefore he did not want to
undeceive him all at once.
‘‘Yes, God knows things have gone downhill with me’’,
he said.
‘‘You should not have resigned from the regiment’’, said
the ironmaster. ‘‘That was the mistake. If only I had still
been in the service at the time, it never would have happened.
Well, now of course you will come home with me.’’
To go along up to the manor house and be received by
the owner like an old regimental comrade — that, however,
did not please the tramp.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
The Rattrap/37
1. What made the peddler think
that he had indeed fallen into a
rattrap?
2. Why did the ironmaster speak
kindly to the peddler and invite
him home?
3. Why did the peddler decline the
invitation?
‘‘No, I couldn’t think of it!’’ he said, looking quite
alarmed.
He thought of the thirty kronor. To go up to the manor
house would be like throwing himself voluntarily into the
lion’s den. He only wanted a chance to sleep here in the
forge and then sneak away as inconspicuously as possible.
The ironmaster assumed that he felt embarrassed
because of his miserable clothing.
‘‘Please don’t think that I have such a fine home that
you cannot show yourself there’’, He said... ‘‘Elizabeth is
dead, as you may already have heard. My boys are abroad,
and there is no one at home except my oldest daughter
and myself. We were just saying that it was too bad we
didn’t have any company for Christmas. Now come along
with me and help us make the Christmas food disappear a
little faster.”
But the stranger said no, and
no, and again no, and the ironmaster
saw that he must give in.
‘‘It looks as though Captain
von Stahle preferred to stay with
you tonight, Stjernstrom’’, he said
to the master blacksmith, and
turned on his heel.
But he laughed to himself
as he went away, and the blacksmith,
who knew him, understood very well
that he had not said his last word.
It was not more than half an hour before they heard
the sound of carriage wheels outside the forge, and a new
guest came in, but this time it was not the ironmaster. He
had sent his daughter, apparently hoping that she would
have better powers of persuasion than he himself.
She entered, followed by a valet, carrying on his arm a
big fur coat. She was not at all pretty, but seemed modest
and quite shy. In the forge everything was just as it had
been earlier in the evening. The master blacksmith and
his apprentice still sat on their bench, and iron and
charcoal still glowed in the furnace. The stranger had
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
38/Flamingo
stretched himself out on the floor and lay with a piece of
pig iron under his head and his hat pulled down over his
eyes. As soon as the young girl caught sight of him, she
went up and lifted his hat. The man was evidently used to
sleeping with one eye open. He jumped up abruptly and
seemed to be quite frightened.
‘‘My name is Edla Willmansson,’’ said the young girl.
‘‘My father came home and said that you wanted to sleep
here in the forge tonight, and then I asked permission to
come and bring you home to us. I am so sorry, Captain,
that you are having such a hard time.’’
She looked at him compassionately, with her heavy
eyes, and then she noticed that the man was afraid. ‘‘Either
he has stolen something or else he has escaped from, jail’’,
she thought, and added quickly, “You may be sure, Captain,
that you will be allowed to leave us just as freely as you
came. Only please stay with us over Christmas Eve.’’
She said this in such a friendly manner that the
rattrap peddler must have felt confidence in her.
‘‘It would never have occurred to me that you would
bother with me yourself, miss,’’ he said. ‘’I will come at
once.’’
He accepted the fur coat, which the valet handed him
with a deep bow, threw it over his rags, and followed the
young lady out to the carriage, without granting the
astonished blacksmiths so much as a glance.
But while he was riding up to the manor house he had
evil forebodings.
‘‘Why the devil did I take that fellow’s money?’’ he
thought. ‘‘Now I am sitting in the trap and will never get
out of it.’’
The next day was Christmas Eve, and when the
ironmaster came into the dining room for breakfast he
probably thought with satisfaction of his old regimental
comrade whom he had run across so unexpectedly.
“First of all we must see to it that he gets a little flesh
on his bones,” he said to his daughter, who was busy at
the table. “And then we must see that he gets something
else to do than to run around the country selling rattraps.”
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
The Rattrap/39
“It is queer that things have gone downhill with him
as badly as that,” said the daughter. “Last night I did not
think there was anything about him to show that he had
once been an educated man.”
“You must have patience, my little girl,” said the father.
“As soon as he gets clean and dressed up, you will see
something different. Last night he was naturally
embarrassed. The tramp manners will fall away from him
with the tramp clothes.”
Just as he said this the door opened and the stranger
entered. Yes, now he was truly clean and well dressed.
The valet had bathed him, cut his hair, and shaved him.
Moreover he was dressed in a good-looking suit of clothes
which belonged to the ironmaster. He wore a white shirt
and a starched collar and whole shoes.
But although his guest was now so well groomed, the
ironmaster did not seem pleased. He looked at him with
puckered brow, and it was easy to understand that when
he had seen the strange fellow in the uncertain reflection
from the furnace he might have made a mistake, but that
now, when he stood there in broad daylight, it was
impossible to mistake him for an old acquaintance.
“What does this mean?” he thundered.
The stranger made no attempt to dissimulate. He saw
at once that the splendour had come to an end.
“It is not my fault, sir,” he said. “I never pretended to
be anything but a poor trader, and I pleaded and begged to
be allowed to stay in the forge. But no harm has been
done. At worst I can put on my rags again and go away”.
“Well,” said the ironmaster, hesitating a little, “it was
not quite honest, either. You must admit that, and I should
not be surprised if the sheriff would like to have something
to say in the matter.”
The tramp took a step forward and struck the table
with his fist.
“Now I am going to tell you, Mr Ironmaster, how things
are,” he said. “This whole world is nothing but a big rattrap.
All the good things that are offered to you are nothing but
cheese rinds and bits of pork, set out to drag a poor fellow
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
40/Flamingo
into trouble. And if the sheriff comes now and locks me up
for this, then you, Mr Ironmaster, must remember that a
day may come when you yourself may want to get a big
piece of pork, and then you will get caught in the trap.”
The ironmaster began to laugh.
“That was not so badly said, my good fellow. Perhaps
we should let the sheriff alone on Christmas Eve. But now
get out of here as fast as you can.”
But just as the man was opening the door, the daughter
said, “I think he ought to stay with us today. I don’t want
him to go.” And with that she went and closed the door.
“What in the world are you doing?” said the father.
The daughter stood there quite embarrassed and hardly
knew what to answer. That morning she had felt so happy
when she thought how homelike and Christmassy she was
going to make things for the poor hungry wretch. She could
not get away from the idea all at once, and that was why
she had interceded for the vagabond.
“I am thinking of this stranger here,” said the young
girl. “He walks and walks the whole year long, and there is
probably not a single place in the whole country where he
is welcome and can feel at home. Wherever he turns he is
chased away. Always he is afraid of being arrested and
cross-examined. I should like to have him enjoy a day of
peace with us here — just one in the whole year.”
The ironmaster mumbled something in his beard. He
could not bring himself to oppose her.
“It was all a mistake, of course,” she continued. “But
anyway I don’t think we ought to chase away a human
being whom we have asked to come here, and to whom we
have promised Christmas cheer.”
“You do preach worse than a parson,” said the
ironmaster. “I only hope you won’t have to regret this.”
The young girl took the stranger by the hand and led
him up to the table.
“Now sit down and eat,” she said, for she could see
that her father had given in.
The man with the rattraps said not a word; he only
sat down and helped himself to the food. Time after time
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
The Rattrap/41
What made the peddler
accept Edla Willmansson’s
invitation?
What doubts did Edla have
about the peddler?
When did the ironmaster
realise his mistake?
What did the peddler say in
his defence when it was clear
that he was not the person the
ironmaster had thought he
Why did Edla still entertain
the peddler even after she
knew the truth about him?
he looked at the young girl who had interceded for him.
Why had she done it? What could the crazy idea be?
After that, Christmas Eve at Ramsjo passed just as it
always had. The stranger did not cause any trouble because
he did nothing but sleep. The whole forenoon he lay on the
sofa in one of the guest rooms and slept at one stretch. At
noon they woke him up so that he could have his share of
the good Christmas fare, but after that he slept again. It
seemed as though for many years he had not been able to
sleep as quietly and safely as here at Ramsjo.
In the evening, when the Christmas tree was lighted,
they woke him up again, and he stood for a while in the
drawing room, blinking as though the candlelight hurt him,
but after that he disappeared again. Two hours later he
was aroused once more. He then had to go down into the
dining room and eat the Christmas fish and porridge.
As soon as they got up from the table he went around
to each one present and said thank you and good night,
but when he came to the young
girl she gave him to understand
that it was her father’s intention
that the suit which he wore was
to be a Christmas present — he
did not have to return it; and if
wanted
spend
Christmas Eve in a place where
he could rest in peace, and be
sure that no evil would befall him,
he would be welcomed back again.
The man with the rattraps
did not answer anything to this.
He only stared at the young girl
in boundless amazement.
morning
ironmaster and his daughter got
up in good season to go to the early Christmas service.
Their guest was still asleep, and they did not disturb him.
When, at about ten o’clock, they drove back from the
church, the young girl sat and hung her head even more
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
42/Flamingo
dejectedly than usual. At church she had learned that one
of the old crofters of the ironworks had been robbed by a
man who went around selling rattraps.
“Yes, that was a fine fellow you let into the house,”
said her father. “I only wonder how many silver spoons are
left in the cupboard by this time.”
The wagon had hardly stopped at the front steps when
the ironmaster asked the valet whether the stranger was
still there. He added that he had heard at church that the
man was a thief. The valet answered that the fellow had
gone and that he had not taken anything with him at all.
On the contrary, he had left behind a little package which
Miss Willmansson was to be kind enough to accept as a
Christmas present.
The young girl opened the package, which was so badly
done up that the contents came into view at once. She
gave a little cry of joy. She found a small rattrap, and in it
lay three wrinkled ten kronor notes. But that was not all.
In the rattrap lay also a letter written in large, jagged
characters —
“Honoured and noble Miss,
“Since you have been so nice to
me all day long, as if I was a
captain, I want to be nice to you,
in return, as if I was a real
captain — for I do not want you
to be embarrassed at this
Christmas season by a thief; but
you can give back the money to
the old man on the roadside, who has the money pouch
hanging on the window frame as a bait for poor wanderers.
“The rattrap is a Christmas present from a rat who
would have been caught in this world’s rattrap if he had
not been raised to captain, because in that way he got
power to clear himself.
“Written with friendship
and high regard,
“Captain von Stahle.”
1.   Why was Edla happy to see
the gift left by the  peddler?
2.   Why did the peddler sign
himself as Captain von Stahle?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
The Rattrap/43
Understanding the text
How does the peddler interpret the acts of kindness and
hospitality shown by the crofter, the ironmaster and his
daughter?
What are the instances in the story that show that the character
of the ironmaster is different from that of his daughter in many
ways?
The story has many instances of unexpected reactions from the
characters to others’ behaviour. Pick out instances of these
surprises.
What made the peddler finally change his ways?
How does the metaphor of the rattrap serve to highlight the
human predicament?
The peddler comes out as a person with a subtle sense of humour.
How does this serve in lightening the seriousness of the theme
of the story and also endear him to us?
Talking about the text
Discuss the following in groups of four. Each group can deal
with one topic. Present the views of your group to the whole
class.
The reader’s sympathy is with the peddler right from the
beginning of the story. Why is this so? Is the sympathy justified?
The story also focuses on human loneliness and the need to
bond with others.
Have you known/heard of an episode where a good deed or an
act of kindness has changed a person’s view of the world?
The story is both entertaining and philosophical.
Working with words
The man selling rattraps is referred to by many terms such as
“peddler, stranger” etc. Pick out all such references to him. What
does each of these labels indicate of the context or the attitude
of the people around him.
You came across the words, plod, trudge, stagger in the story.
These words indicate movement accompanied by weariness. Find
five other such words with a similar meaning.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
44/Flamingo
Noticing form
He made them himself at odd moments.
He raised himself.
He had let himself be fooled by a bait and had been caught.
… a day may come when you yourself may want to get a big
piece of pork.
Notice the way in which these reflexive pronouns have been used
(pronoun+self)
In 1 and 4 the reflexive pronouns “himself” and “yourself”
are used to convey emphasis.
In 2 and 3  the reflexive pronoun is used in place of personal
pronoun to signal that it refers to the same subject in the
sentence.
Pick out other examples of the use of reflexive pronouns from
the story and notice how they are used.
Thinking about language
Notice the words in bold in the following sentence.
“The fire boy shovelled charcoal into the maw of the furnace
with a great  deal of clatter”. This is a phrase that is used in the
specific context of an iron plant.
Pick out other such phrases and words from the story that are
peculiar to the terminology of ironworks.
Mjolis is a card game of Sweden.
Name a few indoor games played in your region. ‘Chopar’ could be
an example.
A crofter is a person who rents or owns a small farm especially
in Scotland. Think of other uncommon terms for ‘a small farmer’
including those in your language.
ABOUT THE
THEME
The trap of material benefit that most human beings are prone
to fall into.
SUB-THEME
The human tendency to redeem oneself from dishonest ways.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
The Rattrap/45
COMPREHENSION
Factual understanding of events.
Inferring motives for human actions.
TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT
Small group discussion on
the portrayal of characters in fiction.
human emotional needs and human behaviour.
real-life recounting of similar incidents.
narrative style.
WORKING WITH WORDS
Choice of synonyms to reflect personal attitudes ‘Noticing form’.
Focus on the uses of the reflexive pronoun.
THINKING ABOUT LANGUAGE
Vocabulary specific to a particular field.
Culture-specific games (especially indoor).
Region-specific synonyms.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Indigo
About the author
Louis Fischer (1896-1970) was born in Philadelphia.
He served as a volunteer in the British Army between
1918 and 1920. Fischer made a career as a journalist
and wrote for The New York Times, The Saturday Review
and for European and Asian publications. He was also
a member of the faculty at Princeton University. The
following is an excerpt from his book- The Life of Mahatma
Gandhi. The book has been reviewed as one of the best
books ever written on Gandhi by Times Educational
Supplement.
Notice these expressions in the text.
Infer their meaning from the context.
 urge the departure
 harbour a man like me
 conflict of duties
 seek a prop
When I first visited Gandhi in 1942 at his ashram in
Sevagram, in central India, he said, “I will tell you how it
happened that I decided to urge the departure of the British.
It was in 1917.”
He had gone to the December 1916 annual convention
of the Indian National Congress party in Lucknow. There
were 2,301 delegates and many visitors. During the
proceedings, Gandhi recounted, “a peasant came up to me
looking like any other peasant in India, poor and emaciated,
and said, ‘I am Rajkumar Shukla. I am from Champaran,
and I want you to come to my district’!’’ Gandhi had never
heard of the place. It was in the foothills of the towering
Himalayas, near the kingdom of Nepal.
Under an ancient arrangement, the Champaran
peasants were sharecroppers. Rajkumar Shukla was one
of them. He was illiterate but resolute. He had come to the
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Indigo/47
Congress session to complain about the injustice of the
landlord system in Bihar, and somebody had probably said,
“Speak to Gandhi.”
Gandhi told Shukla he had an appointment in
Cawnpore and was also committed to go to other parts of
India. Shukla accompanied him everywhere. Then Gandhi
returned to his ashram near Ahmedabad. Shukla followed
him to the ashram. For weeks he never left Gandhi’s side.
“Fix a date,” he begged.
Impressed by the sharecropper’s tenacity and story
Gandhi said, ‘‘I have to be in Calcutta on such-and-such a
date. Come and meet me and take me from there.”
Months passed. Shukla was
sitting on his haunches at the
appointed spot in Calcutta when
Gandhi arrived; he waited till Gandhi
was free. Then the two of them
boarded a train for the city of Patna
in Bihar. There Shukla led him to
the house of a lawyer named
Rajendra Prasad who later became
President of the Congress party and
of India. Rajendra Prasad was out
of town, but the servants knew
Shukla as a poor yeoman who
pestered their master to help the
indigo sharecroppers. So they let
him stay on the grounds with his
companion, Gandhi, whom they took
to be another peasant. But Gandhi
was not permitted to draw water
from the well lest some drops from his bucket pollute the entire
source; how did they know that he was not an untouchable?
Gandhi decided to go first to Muzzafarpur, which was
en route to Champaran, to obtain more complete
information about conditions than Shukla was capable of
imparting. He accordingly sent a telegram to Professor
J.B. Kripalani, of the Arts College in Muzzafarpur, whom
he had seen at Tagore’s Shantiniketan school. The train
Strike out what is not true in
the following.
Rajkumar Shukla was
(i) a sharecropper.
(ii) a politician.
(iii) delegate.
(iv) a landlord.
Rajkumar Shukla  was
(i) poor.
(ii) physically  strong.
(iii) illiterate.
Why is Rajkumar Shukla
described as  being ‘resolute’?
Why do you think the
servants thought Gandhi to be
another peasant?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
48/Flamingo
arrived at midnight, 15 April 1917. Kripalani was waiting
at the station with a large body of students. Gandhi stayed
there for two days in the home of Professor Malkani, a
teacher in a government school.
‘‘It was an extraordinary
thing ‘in those days,’’ Gandhi
commented, “for a government
professor to harbour a man
like me”. In smaller localities,
the Indians were afraid
to show sympathy for
advocates of home-rule.
The news of Gandhi’s
advent and of the nature of
his mission spread quickly
through Muzzafarpur and to
Champaran. Sharecroppers
Champaran
began
arriving on foot and by
conveyance
their
champion. Muzzafarpur lawyers
called on Gandhi to brief him;
they frequently represented
peasant groups in court; they
told him about their cases and
reported the size of their fee.
Gandhi chided the lawyers for
collecting big fee from the
sharecroppers. He said, ‘‘I have
come to the conclusion that we
should stop going to law courts.
Taking such cases to the courts
does litte good. Where the peasants
are so crushed and fear-stricken,
law courts are useless. The real relief
for them is to be free from fear.’’
Most of the arable land
in the Champaran district
was divided into large
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Indigo/49
estates owned by Englishmen and worked by Indian tenants.
The chief commercial crop was indigo. The landlords
compelled all tenants to plant three twentieths or 15 per
cent of their holdings with indigo and surrender the entire
indigo harvest as rent. This was done by long-term contract.
Presently, the landlords learned
that Germany had developed
synthetic indigo. They, thereupon,
obtained agreements from the
sharecroppers
compensation for being released
from the 15 per cent arrangement.
The sharecropping arrangement
was irksome to the peasants, and
many signed willingly. Those who
resisted, engaged lawyers; the
landlords hired thugs. Meanwhile,
the information about synthetic
indigo reached the illiterate peasants
who had signed, and they wanted
their money back.
At this point Gandhi arrived in Champaran.
He began by trying to get the facts. First he visited the
secretary of the British landlord’s association. The secretary
told him that they could give no information to an outsider.
Gandhi answered that he was no outsider.
Next, Gandhi called on the British official commissioner
of the Tirhut division in which the Champaran district
lay. ‘‘The commissioner,’’ Gandhi reports, ‘‘proceeded to bully
me and advised me forthwith to leave Tirhut.’’
Gandhi did not leave. Instead he proceeded to Motihari,
the capital of Champaran. Several lawyers accompanied him.
At the railway station, a vast multitude greeted Gandhi. He
went to a house and, using it as headquarters, continued his
investigations. A report came in that a peasant had been
maltreated in a nearby village. Gandhi decided to go and see;
the next morning he started out on the back of an elephant.
He had not proceeded far when the police superintendent’s
messenger overtook him and ordered him to return to town
1. List the places that Gandhi
visited between his first
meeting with Shukla and his
arrival at Champaran.
2. What did the peasants pay the
British landlords as rent? What
did the British now want
instead and why? What would
be the impact of synthetic
indigo on the prices of natural
indigo?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
50/Flamingo
in his carriage. Gandhi complied. The messenger drove
Gandhi home where he served him with an official notice to
quit Champaran immediately. Gandhi signed a receipt for
the notice and wrote on it that he would disobey the order.
In consequence, Gandhi received a summons to appear
in court the next day.
All night Gandhi remained awake. He telegraphed
Rajendra Prasad to come from Bihar with influential
friends. He sent instructions to the ashram. He wired a
full report to the Viceroy.
Morning found the town of Motihari black with peasants.
They did not know Gandhi’s record in South Africa. They
had merely heard that a Mahatma who wanted to help them
was in trouble with the authorities. Their spontaneous
demonstration, in thousands, around the courthouse was
the beginning of their liberation from fear of the British.
The officials felt powerless without Gandhi’s
cooperation. He helped them regulate the crowd. He was
polite and friendly. He was giving them concrete proof that
their might, hitherto dreaded and unquestioned, could be
challenged by Indians.
The government was baffled. The prosecutor requested
the judge to postpone the trial. Apparently, the authorities
wished to consult their superiors.
Gandhi protested against the delay. He read a statement
pleading guilty. He was involved, he told the court, in a
“conflict of duties”— on the one hand, not to set a bad example
as a lawbreaker; on the other hand, to render the
“humanitarian and national service” for which he had come.
He disregarded the order to leave, “not for want of respect for
lawful authority, but in obedience to the higher law of our
being, the voice of conscience”. He asked the penalty due.
The magistrate announced that he would pronounce
sentence after a two-hour recess and asked Gandhi to
furnish bail for those 120 minutes. Gandhi refused. The
judge released him without bail.
When the court reconvened, the judge said he would
not deliver the judgment for several days. Meanwhile he
allowed Gandhi to remain at liberty.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Indigo/51
Rajendra Prasad, Brij Kishor Babu, Maulana Mazharul
Huq and several other prominent lawyers had arrived from
Bihar. They conferred with Gandhi. What would they do if
he was sentenced to prison, Gandhi asked. Why, the senior
lawyer replied, they had come to advise and help him; if
he went to jail there would be nobody to advise and they
would go home.
What about the injustice to the sharecroppers, Gandhi
demanded. The lawyers withdrew to consult. Rajendra
Prasad has recorded the upshot of their consultations —
“They thought, amongst themselves, that Gandhi was totally
a stranger, and yet he was prepared to go to prison for the
sake of the peasants; if they, on the other hand, being not
only residents of the adjoining districts but also those who
claimed to have served these peasants, should go home, it
would be shameful desertion.”
They accordingly went back
to Gandhi and told him they were
ready to follow him into jail. ‘‘The
battle of Champaran is won,’’ he
exclaimed. Then he took a piece
of paper and divided the group
into pairs and put down the order
in which each pair was to court
arrest.
Several days later, Gandhi
received a written communication
from the magistrate informing
him that the Lieutenant-Governor of the province had
ordered the case to be dropped. Civil disobedience had
triumphed, the first time in modern India.
Gandhi and the lawyers now proceeded to conduct a
far -flung inquiry into the grievances of the farmers.
Depositions by about ten thousand peasants were written
down, and notes made on other evidence. Documents were
collected. The whole area throbbed with the activity of the
investigators and the vehement protests of the landlords.
In June, Gandhi was summoned to Sir Edward
Gait, the Lieutenant-Governor. Before he went he met
1. The events in this part of the
text illustrate Gandhi’s method
of working. Can you identify
some instances of this
method and link them to his
ideas of satyagraha and
non-violence?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
52/Flamingo
leading associates and again
laid detailed plans for civil
disobedience if he should not
return.
Gandhi had four protracted
interviews with the Lieutenant-
Governor who, as a result,
appointed an official commission
of inquiry into the indigo
sharecroppers’
situation.
The commission consisted of
landlords, government officials,
Gandhi
representative of the peasants.
Gandhi remained in Champaran for an initial
uninterrupted period of seven months and then again for
several shorter visits. The visit, undertaken casually on
the entreaty of an unlettered peasant in the expectation
that it would last a few days, occupied almost a year of
Gandhi’s life.
The official inquiry assembled a crushing mountain of
evidence against the big planters, and when they saw this
they agreed, in principle, to make refunds to the peasants.
“But how much must we pay?” they asked Gandhi.
They thought he would demand repayment in full of
the money which they had illegally and deceitfully extorted
from the sharecroppers. He asked only 50 per cent. “There
he seemed adamant,” writes Reverend J. Z. Hodge, a British
missionary in Champaran who observed the entire episode
at close range. “Thinking probably that he would not give
way, the representative of the planters offered to refund to
the extent of 25 per cent, and to his amazement Mr. Gandhi
took him at his word, thus breaking the deadlock.”
This settlement was adopted unanimously by the
commission. Gandhi explained that the amount of the
refund was less important than the fact that the landlords
had been obliged to surrender part of the money and, with
it, part of their prestige. Therefore, as far as the peasants
were concerned, the planters had behaved as lords above
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Indigo/53
the law. Now the peasant saw that he had rights and
defenders. He learned courage.
Events justified Gandhi’s position. Within a few years
the British planters abandoned their estates, which
reverted to the peasants. Indigo sharecropping disappeared.
Gandhi never contented himself with large political or
economic solutions. He saw the cultural and social
backwardness in the Champaran villages and wanted to
do something about it immediately. He appealed for
teachers. Mahadev Desai and Narhari Parikh, two young
men who had just joined Gandhi as disciples, and their
wives, volunteered for the work. Several more came from
Bombay, Poona and other distant
parts of the land. Devadas,
Gandhi’s youngest son, arrived
from the ashram and so did Mrs.
Gandhi. Primary schools were
opened in six villages. Kasturbai
taught the ashram rules on
personal
cleanliness
community sanitation.
Health conditions were miserable. Gandhi got a doctor
to volunteer his services for six months. Three medicines
were available — castor oil, quinine and sulphur ointment.
Anybody who showed a coated tongue was given a dose of
castor oil; anybody with malaria fever received quinine
plus castor oil; anybody with skin eruptions received
ointment plus castor oil.
Gandhi noticed the filthy state of women’s clothes. He
asked Kasturbai to talk to them about it. One woman took
Kasturbai into her hut and said, ‘‘Look, there is no box or
cupboard here for clothes. The sari I am wearing is the
only one I have.”
During his long stay in Champaran, Gandhi kept a
long distance watch on the ashram. He sent regular
instructions by mail and asked for financial accounts. Once
he wrote to the residents that it was time to fill in the old
latrine trenches and dig new ones otherwise the old ones
would begin to smell bad.
1. Why did Gandhi agree to a
settlement of 25 per cent
refund to the farmers?
2. How did the episode change
the plight of the peasants?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
54/Flamingo
The Champaran episode was a turning-point in
Gandhi’s life. ‘‘What I did,” he explained, “was a very
ordinary thing. I declared that the British could not order
me about in my own country.”
But Champaran did not begin as an act of defiance. It
grew out of an attempt to alleviate the distress of large
numbers of poor peasants. This was the typical Gandhi
pattern — his politics were intertwined with the practical,
day-to-day problems of the millions. His was not a loyalty
to abstractions; it was a loyalty to living, human beings.
In everything Gandhi did, moreover, he tried to mould
a new free Indian who could stand on his own feet and
thus make India free.
Early in the Champaran action, Charles Freer Andrews,
the English pacifist who had become a devoted follower of
the Mahatma, came to bid Gandhi farewell before going on
a tour of duty to the Fiji Islands. Gandhi’s lawyer friends
thought it would be a good idea for Andrews to stay in
Champaran and help them. Andrews was willing if Gandhi
agreed. But Gandhi was vehemently opposed. He said, ‘‘You
think that in this unequal fight it would be helpful if we
have an Englishman on our side. This shows the weakness
of your heart. The cause is just and you must rely upon
yourselves to win the battle. You should not seek a prop in
Mr. Andrews because he happens to be an Englishman’’.
‘‘He had read our minds correctly,’’ Rajendra Prasad
comments, “and we had no reply… Gandhi in this way taught
us a lesson in self-reliance’’.
Self-reliance, Indian independence and help to
sharecroppers were all bound together.
Understanding the text
Why do you think Gandhi considered the Champaran episode
to be a turning-point in his life?
How was Gandhi able to influence lawyers? Give instances.
What was the attitude of the average Indian in smaller localities
towards advocates of ‘home rule’?
How do we know that ordinary people too contributed to the
freedom movement?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Indigo/55
Talking about the text
Discuss the following.
“Freedom from fear is more important than legal justice for
the poor.”
Do you think that the poor of India are free from fear after
Independence?
The qualities of a good leader.
Working with words
List the words used in the text that are related to legal
procedures.
For example: deposition
List other words that you know that fall into this category.
Thinking about language
Notice the sentences in the text  which are in ‘direct speech’.
Why does the author use quotations in his narration?
Notice the use or non-use of the comma in the following sentences.
When I first visited Gandhi in 1942 at his ashram in
Sevagram, he told me what happened in Champaran.
He had not proceeded far when the police superintendent’s
messenger overtook him.
When the court reconvened, the judge said he would not
deliver the judgment for several days.
Things to do
Choose an issue that has provoked a controversy like the Bhopal
Gas Tragedy or the Narmada Dam Project in which the lives of
the poor have been affected.
Find out the facts of the case.
Present your arguments.
Suggest a possible settlement.
ABOUT THE UNIT
THEME
The leadership shown by Mahatma Gandhi to secure justice
for oppressed people through convincing argumentation and
negotiation.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
56/Flamingo
SUB-THEME
Contributions made by anonymous Indians to the freedom
movement.
READING COMPREHENSION
Intensive reading of factual writing to understand events and
facts. The think as you read questions at the end of each section
help in understanding descriptions of people, consolidating
facts and focusing on what is important to understand further
sections.
Scanning for specific instances in the text to support given
statements.
Inferential questions to reason out certain statements in the text.
TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT
Discussion as a take-off from the text and making pupils think
about issues such as freedom from fear as a prerequisite for
justice. Understanding leadership qualities – direct relevance
to pupils’ prospects. Fluency development.
WORKING WITH WORDS
Making  pupils notice the specialist vocabulary used in legal
parlance.
NOTICING FORM
Use of direct speech in narration. Pupils are already aware of
the form changes when  spoken words are reported. They should
now be able to notice the choice of form in contexts of use to
strengthen the effectiveness of narration.
Use of the comma to separate subordinate clause from main
clause if it precedes it, and its omission if it comes after the
main clause.
THINGS TO DO
Extension activity to help pupils understand the method of Gandhian
activism and relate it to current problems of national importance.
Investigation of facts
Presentation of arguments
Settlement
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
P e s a
P nca e
Poets and Pancakes
About the author
Asokamitran (1931), a Tamil writer, recounts his years
at Gemini Studios in his book My Years with Boss which
talks of the influence of movies on every aspect of life in
India. The Gemini Studios, located in Chennai, was set
up in 1940. It was one of the most influential film-
producing organisations of India in the early days of
Indian film-making. Its founder was S.S. Vasan. The
duty of Asokamitran in Gemini Studios was to cut out
newspaper clippings on a wide variety of subjects and
store them in files. Many of these had to be written out
by hand. Although he performed an insignificant
function he was the most well-informed of all the
members of the Gemini family. The following is an
excerpt from his book My Years with Boss.
Notice these words and expressions in the text.
Infer their meaning from the context.
 blew over
 was struck dumb
 catapulted into
 a coat of mail
 played into their hands
 the favourite haunt
 heard a bell ringing
Pancake was the brand name of the make-up material that
Gemini Studios bought in truck-loads. Greta Garbo1 must
have used it, Miss Gohar must have used it, Vyjayantimala2
must also have used it but Rati Agnihotri may not have
even heard of it. The make-up department of the Gemini
Studios was in the upstairs of a building that was believed
to have been Robert Clive’s stables. A dozen other buildings
1. A Swedish actress, in 1954 she received an Honorary Oscar for her unforgettable screen
performances. The Guinness Book of World Records named her the most beautiful woman
who ever lived. She was also voted Best Silent Actress of the country.
2. An Indian actress whose performance was widely appreciated in Bimal Roy’s Devdas. She
won three Best Actress awards for her acting. She is now an active politician.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
58/FLAMINGO
in the city are said to have been his residence. For his
brief life and an even briefer stay in Madras, Robert Clive
seems to have done a lot of moving, besides fighting some
impossible battles in remote corners of India and marrying
a maiden in St. Mary’s Church in Fort St. George in
Madras.
The make-up room had the look of a hair-cutting salon
with lights at all angles around half a dozen large mirrors.
They were all incandescent lights, so you can imagine the
fiery misery of those subjected to make-up. The make-up
department was first headed by a Bengali who became too
big for a studio and left. He was succeeded by a
Maharashtrian who was assisted by a Dharwar Kannadiga,
an Andhra, a Madras Indian Christian, an Anglo-Burmese
and the usual local Tamils. All this shows that there was a
great deal of national integration long before A.I.R. and
Doordarshan began broadcasting programmes on national
integration. This gang of nationally integrated make-up men
could turn any decent-looking person into a hideous crimson
hued monster with the help of truck-loads of pancake and a
number of other locally made potions and lotions. Those
were the days of mainly indoor shooting, and only five
per cent of the film was shot outdoors. I suppose the sets
and studio lights needed the girls and boys to be made to
look ugly in order to look presentable in the movie. A strict
hierarchy was maintained in the
make-up department. The chief
make-up man made the chief actors
and actresses ugly, his senior
assistant the ‘second’ hero and
heroine, the junior assistant the
main comedian, and so forth. The
players who played the crowd were
the responsibility of the office boy.
(Even the make-up department of the
Gemini Studio had an ‘office boy’!)
On the days when there was a crowd-
shooting, you could see him mixing
his paint in a giant vessel and
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Poets and Pancakes/59
slapping it on the crowd players. The idea was to close every
pore on the surface of the face in the process of applying
make-up. He wasn’t exactly a ‘boy’; he was in his early forties,
having entered the studios years ago in the hope of becoming
a star actor or a top screen writer,
director or lyrics writer. He was a
bit of a poet.
In those days I worked in a
cubicle, two whole sides of which
were French windows. (I didn’t
know at that time they were called
French windows.) Seeing me
sitting at my desk tearing up
newspapers day in and day out,
most people thought I was doing
next to nothing. It is likely that
the Boss thought likewise too. So
anyone who felt I should be given
some occupation would barge into
my cubicle and deliver an extended lecture. The ‘boy’ in the
make-up department had decided I should be enlightened
on how great literary talent was being allowed to go waste
in a department fit only for barbers and perverts. Soon I
was praying for crowd-shooting all the time. Nothing short
of it could save me from his epics.
In all instances of frustration, you will always find
the anger directed towards a single person openly or covertly
and this man of the make-up department was convinced
that all his woes, ignominy and neglect were due to
Kothamangalam Subbu. Subbu was the No. 2 at Gemini
Studios. He couldn’t have had a more encouraging opening
in films than our grown-up make-up boy had. On the
contrary he must have had to face more uncertain and
difficult times, for when he began his career, there were
no firmly established film producing companies or studios.
Even in the matter of education, specially formal education,
Subbu couldn’t have had an appreciable lead over our boy.
But by virtue of being born a Brahmin — a virtue, indeed!
— he must have had exposure to more affluent situations
1. What does the writer mean by
‘the fiery misery’ of those
subjected to make-up’?
2. What is the example of
national integration that the
author refers to?
3. What work did the ‘office boy’
do in the Gemini Studios? Why
did he join the studios? Why
was he disappointed?
4. Why did the author appear to
be doing nothing  at the
studios?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
60/FLAMINGO
and people. He had the ability to look cheerful at all times
even after having had a hand in a flop film. He always had
work for somebody — he could never do things on his own
— but his sense of loyalty made him identify himself with
his principal completely and turn his entire creativity to
his principal’s advantage. He was tailor-made for films.
Here was a man who could be inspired when commanded.
“The rat fights the tigress underwater and kills her but
takes pity on the cubs and tends them lovingly — I don’t
know how to do the scene,” the producer would say and
Subbu would come out with four ways of the rat pouring
affection on its victim’s offspring. “Good, but I am not sure
it is effective enough,” the producer would say and in a
minute Subbu would come out with fourteen more
alternatives. Film-making must have been and was so easy
with a man like Subbu around and if ever there was a man
who gave direction and definition to Gemini Studios during
its golden years, it was Subbu. Subbu had a separate
identity as a poet and though he was certainly capable of
more complex and higher forms, he deliberately chose to
address his poetry to the masses. His success in films
overshadowed and dwarfed his literary achievements — or
so his critics felt. He composed several truly original ‘story
poems’ in folk refrain and diction and also wrote a sprawling
novel Thillana Mohanambal with dozens of very deftly etched
characters. He quite successfully recreated the mood and
manner of the Devadasis of the early 20th century. He
was an amazing actor — he never aspired to the lead roles
— but whatever subsidiary role he played in any of the
films, he performed better than the supposed main players.
He had a genuine love for anyone he came across and his
house was a permanent residence for dozens of near and
far relations and acquaintances. It seemed against Subbu’s
nature to be even conscious that he was feeding and
supporting so many of them. Such a charitable and
improvident man, and yet he had enemies! Was it because
he seemed so close and intimate with The Boss? Or was it
his general demeanour that resembled a sycophant’s? Or
his readiness to say nice things about everything? In any
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Poets and Pancakes/61
case, there was this man in the make-up department who
would wish the direst things for Subbu.
You saw Subbu always with The Boss but in the
attendance rolls, he was grouped under a department called
the Story Department comprising a lawyer and an assembly
of writers and poets. The lawyer was also officially known
as the legal adviser, but everybody referred to him as the
opposite. An extremely talented actress, who was also
extremely temperamental, once blew over on the sets. While
everyone stood stunned, the lawyer quietly switched on
the recording equipment. When the actress paused for
breath, the lawyer said to her, “One minute, please,” and
played back the recording. There was nothing incriminating
or unmentionably foul about the actress’s tirade against
the producer. But when she heard her voice again through
the sound equipment, she was struck dumb. A girl from
the countryside, she hadn’t gone through all the stages of
worldly experience that generally precede a position of
importance and sophistication that she had found herself
catapulted into. She never quite recovered from the terror
she felt that day. That was the end of a brief and brilliant
acting career — the legal adviser,
who was also a member of the
Story
Department,
unwittingly brought about that
sad end. While every other
member of the Department wore
a kind of uniform — khadi dhoti
with a slightly oversized and
clumsily tailored white khadi
shirt — the legal adviser wore
pants and a tie and sometimes a
coat that looked like a coat of
mail. Often he looked alone and
helpless — a man of cold logic in
a crowd of dreamers — a neutral
man in an assembly of Gandhiites
and khadiites. Like so many of those who were close to
The Boss, he was allowed to produce a film and though a
1. Why was the office boy
frustrated? Who did he show
his anger on?
2. Who was Subbu’s principal?
3. Subbu is described as a
many-sided genius. List four of
his special abilities.
4. Why was the legal adviser
referred to as the opposite by
others?
5. What made the lawyer stand
out from the others at Gemini
Studios?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
62/FLAMINGO
lot of raw stock and pancake were used on it, not much
came of the film. Then one day The Boss closed down the
Story Department and this was perhaps the only instance
in all human history where a lawyer lost his job because
the poets were asked to go home.
Gemini Studios was the favourite haunt of poets like
S.D.S.Yogiar 3, Sangu Subramanyam, Krishna Sastry and
Harindranath Chattopadhyaya4. It had an excellent mess
which supplied good coffee at all times of the day and for
most part of the night. Those were the days when Congress
rule meant Prohibition and meeting over a cup of coffee
was rather satisfying entertainment. Barring the office boys
and a couple of clerks, everybody else at the Studios
radiated leisure, a pre-requisite for poetry. Most of them
wore khadi and worshipped Gandhiji but beyond that they
had not the faintest appreciation for political thought of
any kind. Naturally, they were all averse to the term
‘Communism’. A Communist was a godless man — he had
no filial or conjugal love; he had no compunction about
killing his own parents or his children; he was always out
to cause and spread unrest and violence among innocent
and ignorant people. Such notions which prevailed
everywhere else in South India at that time also, naturally,
floated about vaguely among the khadi-clad poets of Gemini
Studios. Evidence of it was soon forthcoming.
When Frank Buchman’s Moral Re-Armament army,
some two hundred strong, visited Madras sometime in 1952,
they could not have found a warmer host in India than the
Gemini Studios. Someone called the group an international
circus. They weren’t very good on the trapeze and their
acquaintance with animals was only at the dinner table,
but they presented two plays in a most professional manner.
Their ‘Jotham Valley’ and ‘The Forgotten Factor’ ran several
shows in Madras and along with the other citizens of the
city, the Gemini family of six hundred saw the plays over
and over again. The message of the plays were usually
plain and simple homilies, but the sets and costumes were
first-rate. Madras and the Tamil drama community were
3. A freedom fighter and a national poet.
4. A poet and a playwright.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Poets and Pancakes/63
terribly impressed and for some years almost all Tamil
plays had a scene of sunrise and sunset in the manner of
‘Jotham Valley’ with a bare stage, a white background
curtain and a tune played on the flute. It was some years
later that I learnt that the MRA was a kind of counter -
movement to international Communism and the big bosses
of Madras like Mr. Vasan simply played into their hands. I
am not sure however, that this was indeed the case, for
the unchangeable aspects of these big bosses and
their enterprises remained the same, MRA or no MRA,
international Communism or no international Communism.
The staff of Gemini Studios had a nice time hosting two
hundred people of all hues and sizes of at least twenty
nationalities. It was such a change from the usual collection
of crowd players waiting to be slapped with thick layers of
make-up by the office-boy in the make-up department.
A few months later, the telephone lines of the big bosses
of Madras buzzed and once again we at Gemini Studios
cleared a whole shooting stage to welcome another visitor.
All they said was that he was a poet from England. The
only poets from England the simple Gemini staff knew or
heard of were Wordsworth and Tennyson; the more literate
ones knew of Keats, Shelley and Byron; and one or two
might have faintly come to know of someone by the name
Eliot. Who was the poet visiting the Gemini Studios now?
“He is not a poet. He is an editor. That’s why The Boss
is giving him a big reception.” Vasan was also the editor of
the popular Tamil weekly Ananda Vikatan.
He wasn’t the editor of any of the known names of
British publications in Madras, that is, those known at
the Gemini Studios. Since the top men of The Hindu were
taking the initiative, the surmise was that the poet was
the editor of a daily — but not from The Manchester Guardian
or the London Times. That was all that even the most well-
informed among us knew.
At last, around four in the afternoon, the poet (or the
editor) arrived. He was a tall man, very English, very serious
and of course very unknown to all of us. Battling with half
a dozen pedestal fans on the shooting stage, The Boss read
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
64/FLAMINGO
1. Did the people at Gemini
Studios have any particular
political affiliations?
2.  Why was the Moral
Rearmament Army welcomed
at the Studios?
3. Name one example to show
that Gemini studios was
influenced by the plays staged
by MRA.
4.  Who was The Boss of Gemini
Studios?
5. What caused the lack of
communication between the
Englishman and the people at
Gemini Studios?
6. Why is the Englishman’s visit
referred to as unexplained
mystery?
out a long speech. It was obvious
that he too knew precious little
about the poet (or the editor). The
speech was all in the most general
terms but here and there it was
peppered with words like ‘freedom’
and ‘democracy’. Then the poet
spoke. He couldn’t have addressed a
more dazed and silent audience —
no one knew what he was talking
about and his accent defeated any
attempt to understand what he was
saying. The whole thing lasted about
an hour; then the poet left and we
all dispersed in utter bafflement —
what are we doing? What is an
English poet doing in a film studio
which makes Tamil films for the
simplest sort of people? People whose
lives least afforded them the
possibility of cultivating a taste for English poetry? The poet
looked pretty baffled too, for he too must have felt the sheer
incongruity of his talk about the thrills and travails of an
English poet. His visit remained an unexplained mystery.
The great prose-writers of the world may not admit it,
but my conviction grows stronger day after day that prose-
writing is not and cannot be the true pursuit of a genius.
It is for the patient, persistent, persevering drudge with a
heart so shrunken that nothing can break it; rejection
slips don’t mean a thing to him; he at once sets about
making a fresh copy of the long prose piece and sends it on
to another editor enclosing postage for the return of the
manuscript. It was for such people that The Hindu had
published a tiny announcement in an insignificant corner
of an unimportant page — a short story contest organised
by a British periodical by the name The Encounter. Of course,
The Encounter wasn’t a known commodity among the Gemini
literati. I wanted to get an idea of the periodical before I
spent a considerable sum in postage sending a manuscript
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Poets and Pancakes/65
to England. In those days, the British Council Library had
an entrance with no long winded signboards and notices
to make you feel you were sneaking into a forbidden area.
And there were copies of The Encounter lying about in
various degrees of freshness, almost untouched by readers.
When I read the editor’s name, I heard a bell ringing in my
shrunken heart. It was the poet who had visited the Gemini
Studios — I felt like I had found a long lost brother and I
sang as I sealed the envelope and wrote out his address. I
felt that he too would be singing the same song at the
same time — long lost brothers of Indian films discover
each other by singing the same song in the first reel
and in the final reel of the film. Stephen Spender 5.
Stephen — that was his name.
And years later, when I was out of Gemini Studios and
I had much time but not much money, anything at a
reduced price attracted my attention. On the footpath in
front of the Madras Mount Road Post Office, there was a
pile of brand new books for fifty paise each. Actually they
were copies of the same book, an elegant paperback of
American origin. ‘Special low-priced student edition, in
connection with the 50th Anniversary of the Russian
Revolution’, I paid fifty paise and picked up a copy of the
book, The God That Failed. Six
eminent men of letters in six
separate essays described ‘their
journeys into Communism and
their disillusioned return’; Andre
Gide6, Richard Wright7, Ignazio
Silone8, Arthur Koestler9, Louis
Fischer 10 and Stephen Spender.
Stephen Spender! Suddenly the
assumed
tremendous
1. Who was the English visitor to
the studios?
2. How did the author discover
who the English visitor to the
studios was?
3. What does The God that
Failed refer to?
5. An English poet essayist who concentrated on themes of social injustice and class struggle.
6. A French writer, humanist, moralist, received the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1947.
7. An American writer, known for his novel Native Son and his autobiography Black Boy.
8. An Italian writer, who was the founder member of the Italian communist party in 1921, and
is known for the book. The God That Failed, authored by him.
9. A Hungarian born British novelist, known for his novel Darkness at Noon.
10. A well known American journalist and a writer of Mahatma Gandhi’s biography entitled
The Life of Mahatma Gandhi. The Oscar winning film Gandhi is based on this biographical
account.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
66/FLAMINGO
significance. Stephen Spender, the poet who had visited
Gemini Studios! In a moment I felt a dark chamber of my
mind lit up by a hazy illumination. The reaction to Stephen
Spender at Gemini Studios was no longer a mystery. The
Boss of the Gemini Studios may not have much to do with
Spender’s poetry. But not with his god that failed.
Understanding the text
The author has used gentle humour to point out human foibles.
Pick out instances of this to show how this serves to make the
piece interesting.
Why was Kothamangalam Subbu considered No. 2 in Gemini
Studios?
How does the author describe the incongruity of an English poet
addressing the audience at Gemini Studios?
What do you understand about the author’s literary inclinations
from the account?
Talking about the text
Discuss in small groups taking off from points in the text.
Film-production today has come a long way from the early days
of the Gemini Studios.
Poetry and films.
Humour and criticism.
Noticing transitions
This piece is an example of a chatty, rambling style. One
thought leads to another which is then dwelt upon at length.
Read the text again and mark the transitions from one idea to
another. The first one is indicated below.
Make-up department                Office-boy               Subbu
Writing
You must have met some interesting characters in your
neighbourhood or among your relatives. Write a humourous
piece about their idiosyncrasies. Try to adopt the author’s
rambling style, if you can.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Poets and Pancakes/67
Things to do
Collect about twenty cartoons from newspapers and magazines
in any langauge to discuss how important people or events
have been satirised. Comment on the interplay of the words
and the pictures used.
ABOUT THE UNIT
THEME
An account of the events and personalities in a film company
in the early days of Indian cinema.
SUB-THEME
Poets and writers in a film company environment.
COMPREHENSION
Understanding humour and satire.
Following a rambling, chatty style and making inferences.
TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT
Discuss
Today’s film technology compared with that of the early days of
Indian cinema (comparing and contrasting).
Poetry and films; criticism and humour.
NOTICING TRANSITIONS
Focus on devices for achieving thematic coherence.
WRITING
Practice writing in the humorous style.
THINGS TO DO
Extension activity on cartoons as a vehicle of satirical comment
on human foibles.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
T e Int r
The Interview
From the Introduction to The Penguin Book of Interviews
edited by Christopher Silvester.
About the Author
Christopher Silvester (1959) was a student of history
at Peterhouse, Cambridge. He was a reporter for Private
Eye for ten years and has written features for Vanity
Fair. Following is an excerpt taken from his introduction
to the Penguin Book of Interviews, An Anthology from
1859 to the Present Day.
Part I
Since its invention a little over 130 years ago, the interview
has become a commonplace of journalism. Today, almost
everybody who is literate will have read an interview at
some point in their lives, while from the other point of
view, several thousand celebrities have been interviewed
over the years, some of them repeatedly. So it is hardly
surprising that opinions of the interview — of its functions,
methods and merits — vary considerably. Some might make
quite extravagant claims for it as being, in its highest form,
a source of truth, and, in its practice, an art. Others,
usually celebrities who see themselves as its victims, might
despise the interview as an unwarranted intrusion into
their lives, or feel that it somehow diminishes them, just
as in some primitive cultures it is believed that if one
takes a photographic portrait of somebody then one is
stealing that person’s soul. V. S. Naipaul 1 ‘feels that some
people are wounded by interviews and lose a part of
themselves,’ Lewis Carroll, the creator of Alice in
Wonderland, was said to have had ‘a just horror of the
interviewer’ and he never consented to be interviewed — It
1. Known as a cosmopolitan writer. In his travel books and in his documentary works he
presents his impressions of the country of his ancestors that is India. He received the Nobel
Prize in Literature in 2001.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
The Interview/69
was his horror of being lionized which made him thus repel
would be acquaintances, interviewers, and the persistent
petitioners for his autograph and he would afterwards
relate the stories of his success in silencing all such people
with much satisfaction and amusement. Rudyard Kipling2
expressed an even more condemnatory attitude towards
the interviewer. His wife, Caroline, writes in her diary for
14 October 1892 that their day was ‘wrecked by two reporters
from Boston’. She reports her husband as saying to the
reporters, “Why do I refuse to be interviewed? Because it
is immoral! It is a crime, just as much of a crime as an
offence against my person, as an assault, and just as much
merits punishment. It is cowardly and vile. No respectable
man would ask it, much less give it,” Yet Kipling had
himself perpetrated such an ‘assault’ on Mark Twain only
a few years before. H. G. Wells3 in an interview in 1894
referred to ‘the interviewing
ordeal’, but was a fairly frequent
interviewee and forty years later
found
himself
interviewing
Joseph Stalin4. Saul Bellow5, who
has consented to be interviewed
on several occasions, nevertheless
once described interviews as
being like thumbprints on his
windpipe.
despite
drawbacks of the interview, it is
a supremely serviceable medium
of communication. “These days,
more than at any other time,
our most vivid impressions of
our contemporaries are through
2. A prolific writer who was known as the poet of the common soldier. Kipling’s Jungle Book
which is a story of Kimball O’ Hara and his adventures in the Himalayas is considered as
a children’s classic all over the world.
3. An English novelist, journalist, sociologist and historian he is known for his works of
science fiction. Wells best known books are The Time Machine, The Invisible Man and
The War of the Worlds.
4. A great Russian revolutionary and an active political organiser.
5. A playwright as well as a novelist, Bellow’s works were influenced widely by World
War II. Among his most famous characters are Augie March and Moses. He published short
stories translated from Yiddish. He won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1976.
1. What are some of the positive
views on interviews?
2. Why do most celebrity writers
despise being interviewed?
3. What is the belief in some
primitive cultures about being
photographed?
6. What do you understand by the
expression “thumbprints on his
windpipe”?
5. Who, in today’s world, is our
chief source of information
about personalities?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
70/Flamingo
interviews,” Denis Brian has written. “Almost everything
of moment reaches us through one man asking questions
of another. Because of this, the interviewer holds a position
of unprecedented power and influence.”
Part II
so  w
“I am a professor who writes novels on Sundays” –
Umberto Eco
The following is an extract from an interview of Umberto
Eco. The interviewer is Mukund Padmanabhan from
The Hindu. Umberto Eco, a professor at the University
of Bologna in Italy had already acquired a formidable
reputation as a scholar for his ideas on semiotics (the
study of signs), literary interpretation, and medieval
aesthetics before he turned to writing fiction. Literary
fiction, academic texts, essays, children’s books,
newspaper articles— his written output is staggeringly
large and wide-ranging, In 1980, he acquired the
equivalent of intellectual superstardom with the
publication of The Name of the Rose, which sold more
than 10 million copies.
Mukund: The English novelist and academic David Lodge
once remarked, “I can’t understand how one man
can do all the things he [Eco] does.”
Umberto Eco: Maybe I give the impression of doing many
things. But in the end, I am convinced I am always
doing the same thing.
Mukund: Which is?
Umberto Eco: Aah, now that is more difficult to explain.
I have some philosophical interests and I pursue
them through my academic work and my novels.
Even my books for children are about non-violence
and peace...you see, the same bunch of ethical,
philosophical interests.
And then I have a secret. Did you know what will
happen if you eliminate the empty spaces from the
universe, eliminate the empty spaces in all the
atoms? The universe will become as big as my fist.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
The Interview/71
Similarly, we have a lot of empty spaces in our
lives. I call them interstices. Say you are coming
over to my place. You are in an elevator and while
you are coming up, I am waiting for you. This is an
interstice, an empty space. I work in empty spaces.
While waiting for your elevator to come up from
the first to the third floor, I have already written
an article! (Laughs).
Mukund: Not everyone can do that of course. Your
non-fictional writing, your scholarly work has a
certain playful and personal quality about it. It is
a marked departure from a regular academic
style — which is invariably depersonalised and
often dry and boring. Have you consciously adopted
an informal approach or is it something that just
came naturally to you?
Umberto Eco: When I presented my first Doctoral
dissertation in Italy, one of the Professors said,
“Scholars learn a lot of a certain subject, then they
make a lot of false hypotheses, then they correct them
and at the end, they put the conclusions. You, on the
contrary, told the story of your research. Even including
your trials and errors.” At the same time, he recognised
I was right and went on to publish my dissertation as
a book, which meant he appreciated it.
At that point, at the age of 22, I understood
scholarly books should be written the way I had
done — by telling the story of the research. This is
why my essays always have a narrative aspect.
And this is why probably I started writing narratives
[novels] so late — at the age of 50, more or less.
I remember that my dear friend Roland Barthes
was always frustrated that he was an essayist and
not a novelist. He wanted to do creative writing
one day or another but he died before he could do
so. I never felt this kind of frustration. I started
writing novels by accident. I had nothing to do one
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
72/Flamingo
day and so I started. Novels probably satisfied my
taste for narration.
Mukund: Talking about novels, from being a famous
academic you went on to becoming spectacularly
famous after the publication of The Name of the
Rose. You’ve written five novels against many more
scholarly works of non-fiction, at least more than
20 of them...
Umberto Eco: Over 40.
Mukund: Over 40! Among them a seminal piece of work
on semiotics. But ask most people about Umberto
Eco and they will say, “Oh, he’s the novelist.” Does
that bother you?
Umberto Eco: Yes. Because I consider myself a
university professor who writes novels on Sundays.
It’s not a joke. I participate in academic conferences
and not meetings of Pen Clubs and writers. I
identify myself with the academic community.
But okay, if they [most people] have read only the
novels... (laughs and shrugs). I know that by writing
novels, I reach a larger audience. I cannot expect
to have one million readers with stuff on semiotics.
Mukund: Which brings me to my next question. The
Name of the Rose is a very serious novel. It’s a
detective yarn at one level but it also delves into
metaphysics, theology, and medieval history. Yet
it enjoyed a huge mass audience. Were you puzzled
at all by this?
Umberto Eco: No. Journalists are puzzled. And
sometimes publishers. And this is because
journalists and publishers believe that people like
trash and don’t like difficult reading experiences.
Consider there are six billion people on this planet.
The Name of the Rose sold between 10 and 15
million copies. So in a way I reached only a small
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
The Interview/73
percentage of readers. But it is exactly these kinds
of readers who don’t want easy experiences. Or at
least don’t always want this. I myself, at 9 pm after
dinner, watch television and want to see either
‘Miami Vice’ or ‘Emergency Room’. I enjoy it and I
need it. But not all day.
Mukund: Could the huge success of the novel have
anything to do with the fact that it dealt with a
period of medieval history that...
Umberto Eco: That’s possible. But let me tell you
another story, because I often tell stories like a
Chinese wise man. My American publisher said
while she loved my book, she didn’t expect to sell
more than 3,000 copies in a country where nobody
has seen a cathedral or studies Latin. So I was
given an advance for 3,000 copies, but in the end
it sold two or three million in the U.S.
A lot of books have been written about the medieval
past far before mine. I think the success of the
book is a mystery. Nobody can predict it. I think if
I had written The Name of the Rose ten years earlier
or ten years later, it wouldn’t have been the same.
Why it worked at that time is a mystery.
Understanding the text
Do you think Umberto Eco likes being interviewed? Give reasons
for your opinion.
How does Eco find the time to write so much?
What was distinctive about Eco’s academic writing style?
Did Umberto Eco consider himself a novelist first or an academic
scholar?
What is the reason for the huge success of the novel, The Name
of the Rose?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
74/Flamingo
Talking about the text
Discuss in pairs or small groups.
Talk about any interview that you have watched on television or
read in a newspaper. How did it add to your understanding of
the celebrity, the interviewer and the field of the celebrity?
The medium you like best for an interview,  print,  radio, or television.
Every famous person has a right to his or her privacy.
Interviewers sometimes embarrass celebrities with very personal
questions.
Noticing discourse linkers and signallers
LINKERS
Notice how the utterances of the interviewer and the interviewee
are linked to one another.  The linkers have been italicised for
Linking is done either through the use of reference pronouns,
like ‘that’, ‘this’, ‘which’ etc. It can also be done through a
repetition of words.
I am convinced I am always doing the same thing.
Which is?
Aah, now that is more difficult to explain.
While waiting for your elevator to come up from the first to the
third floor, I have already written an article! (Laughs).
Not everyone can do that of course.
……………………………………….
Novels probably satisfied my taste for narration.
Talking about novels,
………………………………………….
at least more than 20 of them...
Over 40.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
The Interview/75
Over 40.
……………………………………………..
I cannot expect to have one million readers with stuff on
semiotics.
Which brings me to my next question.
………………………………………………………
Were you puzzled at all by this?
No. Journalists are puzzled.
……………………………………………………………..
Could the huge success of the novel have anything to do
with the fact that it dealt with a period of medieval history
that...
That’s possible
……………………………………………………………………………
The use of linkers is important in all continuous stretches of
text. It is very important in conversation, especially a structured
conversation like an interview.
SIGNALLERS
When there are shifts in the topic the speaker usually indicates
them through phrases that prepare the listener for the shift.
Notice these two examples taken from the interview:
“Which brings me to another question ….”
“But let me tell you another story…”
Without these preparatory signallers the flow of ideas in a
conversation will not be smooth and continuous.
Writing
If the interviewer Mukund Padmanabhan had not got the space
in the newspaper to reproduce the interview verbatim, he may
have been asked to produce a short report of the interview
with the salient points.
Write this report for him.
[The teacher should be able to help the pupils in what to include
and what can be omitted. We could also provide a short report of
an interview as a sample.]
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
76/Flamingo
Things to do
Interview a person whom you admire either in school or your
neighbourhood and record it in writing.
ABOUT THE UNIT
THEME
The interview as a communication genre .
SUB-THEME
An excerpt from an interview with an author.
COMPREHENSION
Understanding personal opinion.
Understanding conversation and the interview pattern.
TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT
Expressing personal opinion on the interview genre.
Comparing different media of communication.
NOTICING DISCOURSE LINKERS AND SIGNALLERS
Focus on cohesion and coherence features of discourse.
WRITING
Transfer of information from one genre to another, e.g., interview
to report.
THINGS TO DO
Extension activity giving practice in interviewing people and
personalities.
Questioning and information gathering techniques.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
ng la
Going Places
About the Author
A. R. Barton is a modern writer, who lives in Zurich
and writes in English. In the story Going Places, Barton
explores the theme of adolescent fantasising and hero
worship.
Notice these expressions in the text.
Infer their meaning from the context.
  incongruity
  arcade
  prodigy
  amber glow
  chuffed
  wharf
  solitary elm
  pangs of doubt
“When I leave,” Sophie said, coming home from school,
“I’m going to have a boutique.”
Jansie, linking arms with her along the street; looked
doubtful.
“Takes money, Soaf, something like that.”
“I’ll find it,” Sophie said, staring far down the street.
“Take you a long time to save that much.”
“Well I’ll be a manager then — yes, of course — to begin
with. Till I’ve got enough. But anyway, I know just how it’s
all going to look.”
“They wouldn’t make you manager straight off, Soaf.”
“I’ll be like Mary Quant,” Sophie said. “I’ll be a natural.
They’ll see it from the start. I’ll have the most amazing
shop this city’s ever seen.’”
Jansie, knowing they were both earmarked for the
biscuit factory, became melancholy. She wished Sophie
wouldn’t say these things.
When they reached Sophie’s street Jansie said, “It’s
only a few months away now, Soaf, you really should be
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
78/Flamingo
sensible. They don’t pay well for shop work, you know that,
your dad would never allow it.”
“Or an actress. Now there’s real money in that. Yes,
and I could maybe have the boutique on the side. Actresses
don’t work full time, do they? Anyway, that or a fashion
designer, you know — something a bit sophisticated”.
And she turned in through the open street door leaving
Jansie standing in the rain.
“If ever I come into money I’ll buy a boutique.”
“Huh - if you ever come into money... if you ever come
into money you’ll buy us a blessed decent house to live in,
thank you very much.”
Sophie’s father was scooping shepherd’s pie into his
mouth as hard as he could go, his plump face still grimy
and sweat — marked from the day.
“She thinks money grows on trees, don’t she, Dad?’
said little Derek, hanging on the back of his father’s chair.
Their mother sighed.
Sophie watched her back stooped over the sink and
wondered at the incongruity of the delicate bow which
fastened her apron strings. The delicate-seeming bow and
the crooked back. The evening had already blacked in the
windows and the small room was steamy from the stove
and cluttered with the heavy-breathing man in his vest at
the table and the dirty washing piled up in the corner.
Sophie felt a tightening in her throat. She went to look for
her brother Geoff.
He was kneeling on the floor in the next room tinkering
with a part of his motorcycle over some newspaper spread
on the carpet. He was three years out of school, an
apprentice mechanic, travelling to his work each day to the
far side of the city. He was almost grown up now, and she
suspected areas of his life about which she knew nothing,
about which he never spoke. He said little at all, ever,
voluntarily. Words had to be prized out of him like stones
out of the ground. And she was jealous of his silence. When
he wasn’t speaking it was as though he was away
somewhere, out there in the world in those places she had
never been. Whether they were only the outlying districts
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Going Places/79
of the city, or places beyond in the surrounding country —
who knew?  — they attained a special fascination simply
because they were unknown to her and remained out of
her reach.
Perhaps there were also people, exotic, interesting
people of whom he never spoke — it was possible, though
he was quiet and didn’t make new friends easily. She
longed to know them. She wished she could be admitted
more deeply into her brother’s
affections and that someday he
might take her with him. Though
their father forbade it and Geoff
had never expressed an opinion,
she knew he thought her too
young. And she was impatient.
She was conscious of a vast world
out there waiting for her and she
knew instinctively that she would
feel as at home there as in the
city which had always been her home. It expectantly awaited
her arrival. She saw herself riding there behind Geoff. He
wore new, shining black leathers and she a yellow dress
with a kind of cape that flew out behind. There was the
sound of applause as the world rose to greet them.
He sat frowning at the oily component he cradled in
his hands, as though it were a small dumb animal and he
was willing it to speak.
“I met Danny Casey,” Sophie said.
He looked around abruptly. “Where?”
“In the arcade — funnily enough.”
“It’s never true.”
“I did too.”
“You told Dad?”
She shook her head, chastened at his unawareness
that he was always the first to share her secrets.
“I don’t believe it.”
“There I was looking at the clothes in Royce’s window
when someone came and stood beside me, and I looked
around and who should it be but Danny Casey.”
1. Where was it most likely that
the two girls would find work
after school?
2. What were the options that
Sophie was dreaming of? Why
does Jansie discourage her
from having such dreams?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
80/Flamingo
“All right, what does he look like?”
“Oh come on, you know what he looks like.”
“Close to, I mean.”
“Well — he has green eyes. Gentle eyes. And he’s not
so tall as you’d think...” She wondered if she should say
about his teeth, but decided against it.
Their father had washed when he came in and his
face and arms were shiny and pink and he smelled of soap.
He switched on the television, tossed one of little Derek’s
shoes from his chair onto the sofa, and sat down with a
grunt.
“Sophie met Danny Casey,” Geoff said.
Sophie wriggled where she was sitting at the table.
Her father turned his head on his thick neck to look at
her. His expression was one of disdain.
“It’s true,” Geoff said.
“I once knew a man who had known Tom Finney,” his
father said reverently to the television. “But that was a
long time ago.”
“You told us,” Geoff said.
“Casey might be that good some day.”
“Better than that even. He’s the best.”
“If he keeps his head on his shoulders. If they look
after him properly. A lot of distractions for a youngster in
the game these days.”
“He’ll be all right. He’s with the best team in the
country.”
“He’s very young yet.”
“He’s older than I am.”
“Too young really for the first team.”
“You can’t argue with that sort of ability.”
“He’s going to buy a shop,” Sophie said from the table.
Her father grimaced. “Where’d you hear that?”
“He told me so.”
He muttered something inaudible and dragged himself
round in his chair. “This another of your wild stories?”
“She met him in the arcade,” Geoff said, and told him
how it had been.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Going Places/81
“One of these days you’re going to talk yourself into a
load of trouble,” her father said aggressively.
“Geoff knows it’s true, don’t you Geoff?”
“He don’t believe you-though he’d like to.”
*                  *
The table lamp cast an amber glow across her brother’s
bedroom wall, and across the large poster of United’s first
team squad and the row of coloured photographs beneath,
three of them of the young Irish prodigy, Casey.
“Promise you’ll tell no-one?” Sophie said.
“Nothing to tell is there?”
“Promise, Geoff — Dad’d murder me.”
“Only if he thought it was true.”
“Please, Geoff.”
“Christ, Sophie, you’re still at school. Casey must have
strings of girls.”
“No he doesn’t.”
“How could you know that?” he jeered.
“He told me, that’s how.”
“As if anyone would tell a girl something like that.”
“Yes he did. He isn’t like that. He’s... quiet.”
“Not as quiet as all that — apparently.”
“It was nothing like that, Geoff — it was me spoke
first. When I saw who it was, I said, “Excuse me, but aren’t
you Danny Casey?” And he looked
sort of surprised. And he said,
“Yes, that’s right.” And I knew it
must be him because he had the
accent, you know, like when they
interviewed him on the television.
So I asked him for an autograph
for little Derek, but neither of us
had any paper or a pen. So then
we just talked a bit. About the
clothes in Royce’s window. He
seemed lonely. After all, it’s a long
way from the west of Ireland. And
then, just as he was going, he
said, if I would care to meet him
1. Why did Sophie wriggle when
Geoff told her father that she
had met Danny Casey?
2. Does Geoff believe what
Sophie says about her meeting
with Danny Casey?
3. Does her father believe her
story?
4. How does Sophie include her
brother Geoff in her fantasy of
her future?
5. Which country did Danny
Casey play for?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
82/Flamingo
next week he would give me an autograph then. Of course,
I said I would.”
“As if he’d ever show up.”
“You do believe me now, don’t you?”
He dragged his jacket, which was shiny and shapeless,
from the back of the chair and pushed his arms into it. She
wished he paid more attention to his appearance. Wished
he cared more about clothes. He was tall with a strong
dark face. Handsome, she thought.
“It’s the unlikeliest thing I ever heard,” he said.
*                  *
On Saturday they made their weekly pilgrimage to
watch United. Sophie and her father and little Derek went
down near the goal — Geoff, as always, went with his
mates higher up. United won two-nil and Casey drove in
the second goal, a blend of innocence and Irish genius,
going round the two big defenders on the edge of the penalty
area, with her father screaming for him to pass, and beating
the hesitant goalkeeper from a dozen yards. Sophie glowed
with pride. Afterwards Geoff was ecstatic.
“I wish he was an Englishman,” someone said on the bus.
“Ireland’ll win the World Cup,” little Derek told his
mother when Sophie brought him home. Her father was
gone to the pub to celebrate.
“What’s this you’ve been telling?” Jansie said, next
week.
“About what?”
“Your Geoff told our Frank you met Danny Casey.”
This wasn’t an inquisition, just Jansie being nosey.
But Sophie was startled.
“Oh, that.”
Jansie frowned, sensing she was covering. “Yes — that.”
“Well-yes, I did.”
“You never did?” Jansie exclaimed.
Sophie glared at the ground. Damn that Geoff, this
was a Geoff thing not a Jansie thing. It was meant to be
something special just between them. Something secret.
It wasn’t a Jansie kind of thing at all. Tell gawky Jansie
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Going Places/83
something like that and the whole neighbourhood would
get to know it. Damn that Geoff, was nothing sacred?
“It’s a secret — meant to be.”
“I’ll keep a secret, Soaf, you know that.”
“I wasn’t going to tell anyone. There’ll be a right old
row if my dad gets to hear about it.”
Jansie blinked. “A row? I’d have thought he’d be chuffed
as anything.”
She realised then that Jansie didn’t know about the
date bit — Geoff hadn’t told about that. She breathed more
easily. So Geoff hadn’t let her down after all. He believed
in her after all. After all some things might be sacred.
“It was just a little thing really. I asked him for an
autograph, but we hadn’t any paper or a pen so it was no
good.” How much had Geoff said?
“Jesus, I wish I’d have been there.”
“Of course, my dad didn’t want to believe it. You know
what a misery he is. But the last thing I need is queues of
people round our house asking him, “What’s all this about
Danny Casey?” He’d murder me. And you know how my
mum gets when there’s a row.”
Jansie said, hushed, “You can trust me, Soaf, you know
that.”
*                  *
After dark she walked by the canal, along a sheltered
path lighted only by the glare of the lamps from the wharf
across the water, and the unceasing drone of the city was
muffled and distant. It was a place she had often played in
when she was a child. There was a wooden bench beneath
a solitary elm where lovers sometimes came. She sat down
to wait. It was the perfect place, she had always thought
so, for a meeting of this kind. For those who wished not to
be observed. She knew he would approve.
For some while, waiting, she imagined his coming. She
watched along the canal, seeing him come out of the
shadows, imagining her own consequent excitement. Not
until some time had elapsed did she begin balancing against
this the idea of his not coming.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
84/Flamingo
Here I sit, she said to herself, wishing Danny would
come, wishing he would come and sensing the time passing.
I feel the pangs of doubt stirring inside me. I watch for him
but still there is no sign of him. I remember Geoff saying
he would never come, and how none of them believed me
when I told them. I wonder what will I do, what can I tell
them now if he doesn’t come? But we know how it was,
Danny and me — that’s the main thing. How can you help
what people choose to believe? But all the same, it makes
me despondent, this knowing I’ll never be able to show
them they’re wrong to doubt me.
She waited, measuring in this way the changes taking
place in her. Resignation was no sudden thing.
Now I have become sad, she thought. And it is a hard
burden to carry, this sadness. Sitting here waiting and
knowing he will not come I can see the future and how I
will have to live with this burden. They of course will doubt
me, as they always doubted me, but I will have to hold up
my head remembering how it was. Already I envisage the
slow walk home, and Geoff’s disappointed face when I tell
him, “He didn’t come, that Danny.” And then he’ll fly out
and slam the door. “But we know how it was,” I shall tell
myself, “Danny and me.” It is a hard thing, this sadness.
She climbed the crumbling steps to the street. Outside
the pub she passed her father’s bicycle propped against
the wall, and was glad. He would not be there when she got
home.
“Excuse me, but aren’t you Danny Casey?”
Coming through the arcade she pictured him again
outside Royce’s.
He turns, reddening slightly. “Yes, that’s right.”
“I watch you every week, with my dad and my brothers.
We think you’re great.”
“Oh, well now — that’s very nice.”
“I wonder — would you mind signing an autograph?”
His eyes are on the same level as your own. His nose is
freckled and turns upwards slightly, and when he smiles
he does so shyly, exposing teeth with gaps between. His
eyes are green, and when he looks straight at you they
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Going Places/85
seem to shimmer. They seem gentle, almost afraid. Like a
gazelle’s. And you look away. You
let his eyes run over you a little.
And then you come back to find
them, slightly breathless.
And he says, “I don’t seem to
have a pen at all.”
You realise you haven’t either.
“My brothers will be very
sorry,” you say.
And afterwards you wait
there alone in the arcade for a
long while, standing where he
stood, remembering the soft melodious voice, the shimmer
of green eyes. No taller than you. No bolder than you. The
prodigy. The innocent genius. The great Danny Casey.
And she saw it all again, last Saturday — saw him
ghost past the lumbering defenders, heard the fifty
thousand catch their breath as he hovered momentarily
over the ball, and then the explosion of sound as he struck
it crisply into the goal, the sudden thunderous eruption of
exultant approbation.
Understanding the text
Sophie and Jansie were class-mates and friends. What were
the differences between them that show up in the story?
How would you describe the character and temperament of
Sophie’s father?
Why did Sophie like her brother Geoff more than any other
person? From her perspective, what did he symbolise?
What socio-economic background did Sophie belong to? What
are the indicators of her family’s financial status?
Talking about the text
Discuss in pairs.
Sophie’s dreams and disappointments are all in her mind.
1. Why didn’t Sophie want Jansie
to know about her story with
Danny?
2. Did Sophie really meet Danny
Casey?
3. Which was the only occasion
when she got to see Danny
Casey in person?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
86/Flamingo
It is natural for teenagers to have unrealistic dreams. What
would you say are the benefits and disadvantages of such
fantasising?
Working with words
Notice the following expressions. The highlighted words are
not used in a literal sense. Explain what they mean.
Words had to be prized out of him like stones out of a
ground.
Sophie felt a tightening in her throat.
If he keeps his head on his shoulders.
On Saturday they made their weekly pilgrimage to the
United.
She saw… him ghost past the lumbering defenders.
Noticing form
Notice the highlighted words in the following sentences.
“When I leave,’ Sophie said, coming home from school, “I’m going
to have a boutique.”
Jansie, linking arms with her along the street, looked doubtful.
“I’ll find it,” Sophie said, staring far down the street.
Jansie, knowing they were both earmarked for the biscuit
factory, became melancholy.
And she turned in through the open street door leaving Jansie
standing in the rain.
– When we add “ing” to a verb we get the present participle form.
The present participle form is generally used along with forms
of “be’, (is, was, are, were, am) to indicate the present continuous
tense as in “Sophie was coming  home from school.”
– We can use the present participle by itself without the helping
verb, when we wish to indicate that an action is happening
at the same time as another.
– In example 1, Sophie “said” something. “Said”, here, is the
main action.
– What Sophie was doing while she was “saying” is indicated
by “coming home from school”. So we get the information of
two actions happening at the same time. We convey the
information in one sentence instead of two.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Going Places/87
– Analyse the other examples in the same way.
– Pick out five other sentences from the story in which present
participles are used in this sense.
Thinking about language
Notice these words in the story.
“chuffed”, meaning delighted or very pleased
“nosey”, meaning inquisitive
“gawky”, meaning awkward, ungainly.
These are words that are used in an informal way in colloquial
speech.
Make a list of ten other words of this kind.
Writing
– Think of a person who you would like to have as your role-
model.
– Write down the points to be discussed or questions to be
asked, if you were asked to interview that person on a
television show.
Things to do
Look for other stories or movies where this theme of hero
worship and fantasising about film or sports icons finds a place.
ABOUT THE UNIT
THEME
Adolescent hero-worship and fantasising.
SUB-THEME
Relationships-family, friends.
COMPREHENSION
Inferential comprehension.
TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT
Discussion on a subject of immediate relevance to the life of
school-leavers.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
88/Flamingo
WORKING WITH WORDS
Metaphorical expressions.
NOTICING FORM
Focus on the use of present participles to indicate simultaneity
of action.
THINKING ABOUT LANGUAGE
Colloquial expressions, teenage slang.
THINGS TO DO
Extension activity:  Relating to other stories or films (any
language).
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
My Mother at Sixty-six
Kamala Das
An Elementary School
Classroom in a Slum
Stephen Spender
Keeping Quiet
Pablo Neruda
A Thing of Beauty
John Keats
A Roadside Stand
Robert Frost
Aunt Jennifer’s Tigers
Adrienne Rich
POETR
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
o h r
S xty s x
My Mother at Sixty-six
About the poet
Kamala Das (1934) was born in Malabar, Kerala. She
is recognised as one of India’s foremost poets. Her works
are known for their originality, versatility and the
indigenous flavour of the soil. Kamala Das has published
many novels and short stories in English and
Malayalam under the name ‘Madhavikutty’. Some of
her works in English include the novel Alphabet of Lust
(1977), a collection of short stories Padmavati the Harlot
and Other Stories (1992), in addition to five books of
poetry. She is a sensitive writer who captures the
complex subtleties of human relationships in lyrical
idiom, My Mother at Sixty-six is an example.
Before you read
Ageing is a natural process; have you ever thought what our elderly
parents expect from us?
Driving from my parent’s
home to Cochin last Friday
morning, I saw my mother,
beside me,
doze, open mouthed, her face
ashen like that
of a corpse and realised with
that she was as old as she
looked but soon
put that thought away, and
looked out at Young
Trees sprinting, the merry children spilling
out of their homes, but after the airport’s
security check, standing a few yards
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
My Mother at Sixty-six/91
away, I looked again at her, wan,
as a late winter’s moon and felt that
familiar ache, my childhood’s fear,
but all I said was, see you soon,
Amma,
all I did was smile and smile and
smile......
sprinting : short fast race, running
wan : colourless
Think it out
What is the kind of pain and ache that the poet feels?
Why are the young trees described as ‘sprinting’?
Why has the poet brought in the image of the merry children
‘spilling out of their homes’?
Why has the mother been compared to the ‘late winter’s moon’?
What do the parting words of the poet and her smile signify?
Notice that the whole poem is in a single sentence, punctuated
by commas.
It indicates a single thread of thought interspersed with
observations of the real world around and the way these are
connected to the main idea.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
nt r  c
An em
S hoo
An Elementary School
s oo  n  S um
C as r
Classroom in a Slum
About the poet
Stephen Spender (1909-1995) was an English poet and
an essayist. He left University College, Oxford without
taking a degree and went to Berlin in 1930. Spender
took a keen interest in politics and declared himself to
be a socialist and pacifist. Books by Spender include
Poems of Dedication, The Edge of Being, The Creative
Element, The Struggle of the Modern and an
autobiography, World Within World. In, An Elementary
School Classroom in a Slum, he has concentrated on
themes of social injustice and class inequalities.
Before you read
Have you ever visited or seen an elementary school in a slum?
What does it look like?
Far far from gusty waves these children’s faces.
Like rootless weeds, the hair torn round their pallor:
The tall girl with her weighed-down head. The paper-
seeming boy, with rat’s eyes. The stunted, unlucky heir
Of twisted bones, reciting a father’s gnarled disease,
His lesson, from his desk. At back of the dim class
One unnoted, sweet and young. His eyes live in a dream,
Of squirrel’s game, in tree room, other than this.
On sour cream walls, donations. Shakespeare’s head,
Cloudless at dawn, civilized dome riding all cities.
Belled, flowery, Tyrolese valley. Open-handed map
Awarding the world its world. And yet, for these
Children, these windows, not this map, their world,
Where all their future’s painted with a fog,
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
An Elementary School Classroom in a Slum/93
A narrow street sealed in with a lead sky
Far far from rivers, capes, and stars of words.
Surely, Shakespeare is wicked, the map a bad example,
With ships and sun and love tempting them to steal—
For lives that slyly turn in their cramped holes
From fog to endless night? On their slag heap, these children
Wear skins peeped through by bones and spectacles of steel
With mended glass, like bottle bits on stones.
All of their time and space are foggy slum.
So blot their maps with slums as big as doom.
Unless, governor, inspector, visitor,
This map becomes their window and these windows
That shut upon their lives like catacombs,
Break O break open till they break the town
And show the children to green fields, and make their world
Run azure on gold sands, and let their tongues
Run naked into books the white and green leaves open
History theirs whose language is the sun.
Tyrolese valley :
pertaining to the Tyrol, an Austrian Alpine province
catacombs
a long underground gallery with excavations in its sides for
tombs. The name catacombs, before the seventeenth
century was applied to the subterranean cemeteries, near
Think it out
Tick the item which best answers the following.
(a) The tall girl with her head weighed down means
The girl
is ill and exhausted
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
94/Flamingo
has her head  bent with shame
(iii)
has untidy hair
The paper-seeming boy with rat’s eyes means
The boy is
sly and secretive
thin, hungry and weak
(iii)
unpleasant looking
The stunted, unlucky heir of twisted bones means
The boy
has an inherited disability
was short and bony
His eyes live in a dream, A squirrel’s game, in the tree
room other than this means
The boy is
full of hope in the future
mentally ill
(iii)
distracted from the lesson
The children’s faces are compared to ‘rootless weeds’
This means they
are insecure
are ill-fed
(iii)
are wasters
What do you think is the colour of ‘sour cream’? Why do you
think the poet has used this expression to describe the
classroom walls?
The walls of the classroom are decorated with the pictures of
‘Shakespeare’, ‘buildings with domes’, ‘world maps’ and
beautiful valleys. How do these contrast with the world of these
children?
What does the poet want for the children of the slums? How
can their lives be made to change ?
Notice how the poet picturises the condition of the
slum children.
Notice the contrasting images in the poem — for example,
A narrow street sealed in with a lead sky
Far far from rivers, capes, and stars of words.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Keepi g
Keeping Quiet
About the poet
Pablo Neruda (1904-1973) is the pen name of Neftali
Ricardo Reyes Basoalto who was born in the town of
Parral in Chile. Neruda’s poems are full of easily
understood images which make them no less beautiful.
He won the Nobel Prize for Literature in the year 1971.
In this poem Neruda talks about the necessity of quiet
introspection and creating a feeling of mutual
understanding among human beings.
Before you read
What does the title of the poem suggest to you? What do you think
the poem is about?
Now we will count to twelve
and we will all keep still.
For once on the face of the Earth
let’s not speak in any language,
let’s stop for one second,
and not move our arms so much.
It would be an exotic moment
without rush, without engines,
we would all be together
in a sudden strangeness.
Fishermen in the cold sea
would not harm whales
and the man gathering salt
would look at his hurt hands.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
96/Flamingo
Those who prepare green wars,
wars with gas, wars with fire,
victory with no survivors,
would put on clean clothes
and walk about with their
brothers
in the shade, doing nothing.
What I want should not be
confused
with total inactivity.
Life is what it is about;
I want no truck with death.
If we were not so single-minded
about keeping our lives moving,
and for once could do nothing,
perhaps a huge silence
might interrupt this sadness
of never understanding ourselves
and of threatening ourselves with
death.
Perhaps the Earth can teach us
as when everything seems dead
and later proves to be alive.
Now I’ll count up to twelve
and you keep quiet and I will go.
to have no truck with : to refuse to associate or deal with, to refuse to
tolerate something
Think it out
What will counting upto twelve and keeping still help us achieve?
Do you think the poet advocates total inactivity and death?
What is the ‘sadness’ that the poet refers to in the poem?
What symbol from Nature does the poet invoke to say that there
can be life under apparent stillness?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Keeping Quiet/97
Try this out
Choose a quiet corner and keep still physically and mentally
for about five minutes. Do you feel any change in your state of
mind?
Notice the differing line lengths of the stanzas and
the shift in thought from stanza to stanza.
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
of Be
A h ng
A Thing of Beauty
About the poet
John Keats (1795-1821) was a British Romantic poet.
Although trained to be a surgeon, Keats decided to
devote himself wholly to poetry. Keats’ secret, his power
to sway and delight the readers, lies primarily in his
gift for perceiving the world and living his moods and
aspirations in terms of language. The following is an
excerpt from his poem ‘Endymion; A Poetic Romance’.
The poem is based on a Greek legend, in which
Endymion, a beautiful young shepherd and poet who
lived on Mount Latmos, had a vision of Cynthia, the
Moon Goddess. The enchanted youth resolved to seek
her out and so wandered away through the forest and
down under the sea.
Before you read
What pleasure does a beautiful thing give us? Are beautiful
things worth treasuring?
A thing of beauty is a joy forever
Its loveliness increases, it will never
Pass into nothingness; but will keep
A bower quiet for us, and a sleep
Full of sweet dreams, and health, and quiet breathing.
Therefore, on every morrow, are we wreathing
A flowery band to bind us to the earth,
Spite of despondence, of the inhuman dearth
Of noble natures, of the gloomy days,
Of all the unhealthy and o’er-darkened ways
Made for our searching: yes, in spite of all,
Some shape of beauty moves away the pall
From our dark spirits. Such the sun, the moon,
Trees old, and young, sprouting a shady boon
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
A Thing of Beauty/99
For simple sheep; and such are daffodils
With the green world they live in; and clear rills
That for themselves a cooling covert make
‘Gainst the hot season; the mid forest brake,
Rich with a sprinkling of fair musk-rose blooms;
And such too is the grandeur of the dooms
We have imagined for the mighty dead;
All lovely tales that we have heard or read;
An endless fountain of immortal drink,
Pouring unto us from the heaven’s brink.
rills
: small streams
brake : a thick mass of ferns
Think it out
List the things of beauty mentioned in the poem.
List the things that cause suffering and pain.
What does the line, ‘Therefore are we wreathing a flowery band
to bind us to earth’ suggest to you?
What makes human beings love life in spite of troubles and
sufferings?
Why is ‘grandeur’ associated with the ‘mighty dead’?
Do we experience things of beauty only for short moments or do
they make a lasting impression on us?
What image does the poet use to describe the beautiful bounty
of the earth?
Notice the consistency in rhyme scheme and line length. Also
notice the balance in each sentence of the poem, as in,
Of noble natures, of the gloomy days,
Of all the unhealthy and o’er-darkened ways
Made for our searching: yes in spite of all,
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
a s d  Sta
A Roadside Stand
About the poet
Robert Frost (1874-1963) is a highly acclaimed
American poet of the twentieth century. Robert Frost
wrote about characters, people and landscapes. His
poems are concerned with human tragedies and fears,
his reaction to the complexities of life and his ultimate
acceptance of his burdens. Stopping by the Woods on a
Snowy Evening, Birches, Mending walls are a few of
his well-known poems. In the poem A Roadside Stand,
Frost presents the lives of poor deprived people
with pitiless clarity and with the deepest sympathy
and humanity.
Before you read
Have you ever stopped at a roadside stand? What have you
observed there?
The little old house was out with a little new shed
In front at the edge of the road where the traffic sped,
A roadside stand that too pathetically pled,
It would not be fair to say for a dole of bread,
But for some of the money, the cash, whose flow supports
The flower of cities from sinking and withering faint.
The polished traffic passed with a mind ahead,
Or if ever aside a moment, then out of sorts
At having the landscape marred with the artless paint
Of signs that with N turned wrong and S turned wrong
Offered for sale wild berries in wooden quarts,
Or crook-necked golden squash with silver warts,
Or beauty rest in a beautiful mountain scene,
You have the money, but if you want to be mean,
Why keep your money (this crossly) and go along.
The hurt to the scenery wouldn’t be my complaint
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
A Roadside Stand/101
So much as the trusting sorrow of what is unsaid:
Here far from the city we make our roadside stand
And ask for some city money to feel in hand
To try if it will not make our being expand,
And give us the life of the moving-pictures’ promise
That the party in power is said to be keeping from us.
It is in the news that all these pitiful kin
Are to be bought out and mercifully gathered in
To live in villages, next to the theatre and the store,
Where they won’t have to think for themselves anymore,
While greedy good-doers, beneficent beasts of prey,
Swarm over their lives enforcing benefits
That are calculated to soothe them out of their wits,
And by teaching them how to sleep they sleep all day,
Destroy their sleeping at night the ancient way.
Sometimes I feel myself I can hardly bear
The thought of so much childish longing in vain,
The sadness that lurks near the open window there,
That waits all day in almost open prayer
For the squeal of brakes, the sound of a stopping car,
Of all the thousand selfish cars that pass,
Just one to inquire what a farmer’s prices are.
And one did stop, but only to plow up grass
In using the yard to back and turn around;
And another to ask the way to where it was bound;
And another to ask could they sell it a gallon of gas
They couldn’t (this crossly); they had none, didn’t it see?
No, in country money, the country scale of gain,
The requisite lift of spirit has never been found,
Or so the voice of the country seems to complain,
I can’t help owning the great relief it would be
To put these people at one stroke out of their pain.
And then next day as I come back into the sane,
I wonder how I should like you to come to me
And offer to put me gently out of my pain.
quarts : bottles or containers
squash : a kind of vegetable (gourd)
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
102/Flamingo
Think it out
The city folk who drove through the countryside hardly paid
any heed to the roadside stand or to the people who ran it. If at
all they did, it was to complain. Which lines bring this out? What
was their complaint about?
What was the plea of the folk who had put up the roadside stand?
The government and other social service agencies appear to help
the poor rural people, but actually do them no good. Pick out the
words and phrases that the poet uses to show their double
standards.
What is the ‘childish longing’ that the poet refers to? Why is it
‘vain’?
Which lines tell us about the insufferable pain that the poet
feels at the thought of the plight of the rural poor?
Talk about it
Discuss in small groups.
The economic well-being of a country depends on a balanced
development of the villages and the cities.
Try this out
You could stop at a dhaba or a roadside eatery on the outskirts of
your town or city to see
how many travellers stop there to eat?
how many travellers stop for other reasons?
how the shopkeepers are treated?
the kind of business the shopkeepers do.
the kind of life they lead.
Notice the rhyme scheme. Is it consistent or is there an
occasional variance? Does it indicate thought predominating
over sound pattern?
Notice the stanza divisions. Do you find a shift to a new idea
in successive stanzas?
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
t Jenni er
Aunt Jenniferí  s Tig
s Tigers
About the poet
Adrienne Rich (1929) was born in Baltimore, Maryland,
USA. She is widely known for her involvement in
contemporary women’s movement as a poet and
theorist. She has published  nineteen volumes of poetry,
three collections of essays and other writings. A strong
resistance to racism and militarism echoes through her
work. The poem Aunt Jennifer’s T igers addresses the
constraints of married life a woman experiences.
Before you read
What does the title of the poem suggest to you? Are you
reminded of other poems on tigers?
Aunt Jennifer’s tigers prance across a screen,
Bright topaz denizens of a world of green.
They do not fear the men beneath the tree;
They pace in sleek chivalric certainty.
Aunt Jennifer’s fingers fluttering through her wool
Find even the ivory needle hard to pull.
The massive weight of Uncle’s wedding band
Sits heavily upon Aunt Jennifer’s hand.
When Aunt is dead, her terrified hands will lie
Still ringed with ordeals she was mastered by.
The tigers in the panel that she made
Will go on prancing, proud and unafraid.
denizen : a person, an animal or a plant that lives, grows
or is often found in a particular place.
sleek
: elegant
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Think it out
How do ‘denizens’ and ‘chivalric’ add to our understanding of
the tiger’s attitudes?
Why do you think Aunt Jennifer’s hands are ‘fluttering through
her wool’ in the second stanza? Why is she finding the needle so
hard to pull?
What is suggested by the image ‘massive weight of Uncle’s
wedding band’?
Of what or of whom is Aunt Jennifer terrified with in the third
stanza?
What are the ‘ordeals’ Aunt Jennifer is surrounded by, why is it
significant that the poet uses the word ‘ringed’? What are the
meanings of the word ‘ringed’ in the poem?
Why do you think Aunt Jennifer created animals that are so
different from her own character? What might the poet be
suggesting, through this difference?
Interpret the symbols found in this poem.
Do you sympathise with Aunt Jennifer. What is the attitude of
the speaker towards Aunt Jennifer?
Notice the colours suggested in the poem.
Notice the repetitive use of certain sounds in the poem.
104/Flamingo
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
Notes
......
......
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
106/Flamingo
Notes
......
......
www.zero2zenith.in
www.zero2zenith.in
