AN INTRODUCTION TO
INDIAN ART
Textbook in Fine Arts
for Class XI
PART I
First Edition
September 2012   Asvina 1934
PD 5T MJ
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2012
` ??.??
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division by
the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training, Sri
Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and
printed at ....................................?
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise
without the prior permission of the publisher.
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way
of trade,  be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of
without the publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover
other than that in which it is published.
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this
page, Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a
sticker or by any other means is incorrect and should be
unacceptable.
Publication Team
Head, Publication
: A.K. Srivastava
Division
Chief Production
: Shiv Kumar
Officer
Chief Editor (Incharge) : Naresh Yadav
Chief Business
: Gautam Ganguly
Manager
Editorial Assistant
: Mathew John
Production Assistant
Cover
Surender Kumar
Layout
Seema Srivastava
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bangalore 560 085
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021
Phone :  0361-2674869
ISBN- 978-93-5007-187-8
FOREWORD
The National Council of Educational Research and Training
(NCERT) has constantly been working for the past fifty
years to bring in an impact on the country’s school
educational system. In the recent years, specially with the
National Curriculum Framework (NCF) - 2005, there has been
a significant shift in the development of textbooks, their
presentation and inter-disciplinary approach, the typology
of exercises, etc. All these efforts have made the textbooks
child friendly. At the senior secondary stage, which is also
the school leaving stage, students should have more options
to move further in different fields of higher education or
professional education. With this view, the NCERT for the
first time took the initiatives of developing the curriculum
and syllabi in different art related areas for this stage.
At this stage of education, the emphasis has been given
to a professional approach towards the subject of Fine Arts
making it a discipline rather than on creating awareness
and knowledge, which was generic in nature till secondary
classes. The teaching objectives also shift towards
sharpening of skills in fine arts and develop a perspective
of design and instead of free expression and doing arts
emphasis is on students’ expressing themselves in their
own style and medium. Also, there has been a need to
develop a historical perspective of art in context of the
world as well as India. Art History is a part of studies of
arts and in itself it is a major area of education from which
students learn about their cultural heritage.
It was observed that many of the education boards offer
Fine Arts as an optional subject at the senior secondary
stage which includes painting, sculpture, applied arts or
commercial arts. These were reviewed and a new syllabus
was formed. Since this course apart from the practical
component include theory which introduces students to
the art historical heritage of country’s diverse art and
architecture, the textbook ‘An Introduction to Indian Art’
has been developed for Classes XI and XII.
The textbook for Class XI extensively covers the tradition
of cave paintings in the pre-historic era and their
continuation in mural paintings of Buddhist era and later
on in various parts of the country, Buddhist, Jain and
Hindu sculptural and architectural developments. During
the Indo-Islamic period and before the Mughal rule,
another era dawned upon India, which saw massive
constructions in the form of forts and palaces. Different
aspects of all these styles have been discussed to introduce
students with the fabric of India’s culture.
The NCERT appreciates the hard work done by the
Textbook Development Committee responsible for making
this book. We wish to thank the Chief Advisor for this
textbook, Professor Ratan Parimoo, Retired Head,
Department of Art History and Dean, Faculty of Fine Arts,
M. S. University of Baroda, for guiding the work of this
committee. It was a challenge for other art historians
involved in making of this textbook for students at the
school level and their efforts are praiseworthy. We are
indebted to the institutions and organisations which have
generously permitted us to draw upon their resource
materials and personnel. We are especially grateful to the
members of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed
by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education,
Ministry of Human Resource Development under the
Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor
G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution.
As an organisation committed to the systemic reform and
continuous improvement in the quality of its products,
NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will
enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi
National Council of Educational
September 2012
Research and Training
PREFACE
During the nineteenth century (the period of British rule),
a few British colonial officers took active interest to study
India’s past in collaboration with some Indian scholars  and
it is out of such endeavours that a systematic study of
architectural monuments, sculptures and paintings began
in the Indian sub-continent. The first attempt in this regard
document the monuments as they represent a very visible
evidence of the bygone era. Over a period of time with the
archaeological explorations and excavations, many art-
historical sites were discovered. Decipherment of
inscriptions, and coins played a very significant role in
our understanding of the past art traditions. With the study
of religious texts, history of religion was studied and
identification of icons/sculptures and paintings was
initiated, which became a dominant area of early
scholarship. Study of art history has developed in
association with the archaeological studies, however, it is
now recognised as a specialised discipline. In the West,
mainly in Europe, the art-historical discipline has grown
considerably with numerous methodological inputs,
whereas in India it is still in the process of developing its
investigating mechanisms.
As the study of art history has grown out of extensive
documentations and excavations, one finds description of
art objects as a prominent method of study. There are a
few significant studies of the early twentieth century, where
the concerns are addressed beyond mere description.
Subsequently, several generations of outstanding Western
and Indian scholars of Indian art history have studied the
subject at great depth making us realise the glorious past
of the Indian civilisation through its creations reflected in
the architectural monuments, sculptures and paintings.
We can claim a distinct Indian approach to the arts of the
building edifices, the sculpture making and the language
of painting in comparison with the European art on one
hand and the far Eastern art on the other. Therefore, the
Indian art historical studies have emerged as a prestigious
academic discipline at a university level education.
While political and religious history contributed towards
reconstructing historical developments, sculptural and
architectural history has been reconstructed within the
time-frame of political history. The styles of many
monuments and sculptures have been attributed to the
dynastic affiliations like the Mauryan art, Satavahana art,
Gupta art, etc. Alternatively the periodisations of art follows
religious denominations such as the Buddhist, Hindu and
Islamic
periods.
However,
deterministic
nomenclatures are only partially useful for understanding
the art traditions.
Often the study of art objects is based on two important
approaches, (i) formalistic or stylistic analysis and
(ii) content and contextual studies. The first category
involves study of formalistic characteristics of architecture/
sculpture/paintings, whereas the second category
concentrates at various levels of content analysis which
has several components such as iconographic study,
iconology, narrative and semiotics.
Iconography involves identification of images through
certain symbols/signs and relevant myths or narrative
episodes, whereas iconology involves study of evolution of
such signs and symbols in its historical, social and
philosophical context. Today, the methodological framework
tries to explore various concerns and issues in the process
of art productions and attempts to go beyond  the traditional
meanings. It may be observed that the political intentions
of various religious ideologies are yet to become  the part
of the larger investigative process. Religious ideologies also
were instrumental in shaping the social and economic
formulations in ancient India. Therefore, it becomes
important to study such factors that have influenced art
forms. Large body of material has come from the religious
sites but it does not mean that there was no art in non-
religious domains. Terracotta figurines are the best examples
in this category, however, due to space constraint they have
been only mentioned but not extensively discussed. In the
present text, the authors have tried to move away from the
normative traditional descriptive writings to broader
development of art and architectural monuments in terms
of their stylistic developments as well as their social and
political affiliations.
Cultural manifestations have diverse ideologies in the
form of architecture, sculpture and paintings. They need
to be studied with their religious and social view points,
hence, unilinear projection of the cultural tradition needs
to be reconsidered as it is away from realities of the ancient
past. Different categories of artisans existed in the actual
working situation. A guild of artisans may have been
employed by the religious and political authorities for
making monuments and accordingly the artisans had to
work and devise their execution techniques along with
necessary innovations, etc. In this textbook only an
introductory outline has been attempted from pre- and
proto-historic times till the times of the Islamic monuments
during the late medieval period.
Considering the level of the young generation readers
belonging to the higher secondary stage, the present book
outlines just a few examples to create an understanding of
the nature of developments in Indian art. It is not intended
to discard such examples which we know are important
but all the contributors have made a conscious attempt to
present convincing holistic pictures. The chapters in the
book provide an outline of different forms of arts from most
of the regions of the country.
Human civilisation begins with the emergence of the
human being on the earth. In this book a simpler but at
the same time a distinct vocabulary has been introduced.
The idea is not only to present the vast amount of data
available but also to generate interest in understanding
the visual traditions of Indian art. For any student of fine
arts it is necessary to be aware of the visual tradition in
the past as to understand present art production.
Understanding of visual tradition enriches visual
understanding. Hope the young minds find the book
enriching as is intended.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We are thankful to Ratan Parimoo, Chief Advisor,
Y.S. Alone, Advisor and all the members of the Textbook
Development Committee for bringing out this textbook to
its present form. Apart from them various people and
institutions have been directly or indirectly involved in
the development of the syllabus and the textbook, we are
grateful to all of them. We especially acknowledge the
efforts of Surendra Kaul, the then Director General, Centre
for Cultural Resources and Training (CCR T), who
generously permitted us to draw upon the resources of
CCRT. We are also grateful to G.P. Bhagoria, Expert,
Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE).
Thanks are also due to Pawan Sudhir, Head, Department
of Education in Arts and Aesthetics, Vijayam
Sankaranarayan, Editor (Retd.) and Shveta Uppal, Chief
Editor, Publication Division, NCERT for going through the
manuscript and giving their valuable suggestions.
Special thanks are due to Surender Kumar, Publication
Division, NCERT and Tanveer Ahmad, DTP Operators.
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
Chief Advisor
Ratan Parimoo, Professor and Dean (Retd.), Faculty of Fine
Arts, M.S. University of Baroda
Advisor
Y.S. Alone, Assistant Professor, School of Arts and
Aesthetics, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
Members
K.C. Chitrabhanu, Professor of Art History (Retd.),
Government College of Fine Arts, Thiruvananthapuram
Naman Ahuja, Associate Professor, School of Arts and
Aesthetics, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
Seema S. Ojha, Assistant Professor, History
Department of Education in Social Sciences, NCERT,
New Delhi
Shama Mitra Chenoy, Associate Professor, History
Shivaji College, University of Delhi
Suchita Raut, PGT (Fine Arts), Delhi Public School, Bhopal
Santosh Jain, Head, Department of Painting, Delhi Public
School, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi
Member Coordinator
Jyotsna Tiwari, Associate Professor, Department of
Education in Arts and Aesthetics, NCERT, New Delhi
Gandhiji’s Talisman
Gandhiji’s Talisman
Gandhiji’s Talisman
Gandhiji’s Talisman
Gandhiji’s Talisman
I will give you a talisman. Whenever
you are in doubt or when the self
becomes too much with you, apply the
following test:
Recall the face of the poorest and
the weakest man whom you may have
seen and ask yourself if the step you
contemplate is going to be of any use
to him. Will he gain anything by it?
Will it restore him to a control over
his own life and destiny? In other
words, will it lead to Swaraj for the
hungry and spiritually starving
millions?
Then you will find your doubts and
your self melting away.
CONTENTS
FOREWORD
PREFACE
1. Prehistoric Rock Paintings
2. Arts of the Indus Valley
3. Arts of the Mauryan Period
4. Post-Mauryan Trends in Indian Art and
Architecture
5. Later Mural Traditions
6. Temple Architecture and Sculpture
7. Indian Bronze Sculpture
8. Some Aspects of Indo-Islamic
Architecture
GLOSSARY
Map showing prehistoric sites
(Outline map not to scale)
PREHISTORIC ROCK
PAINTINGS
HE distant past when there was no paper or language
or the written word, and hence no books or written
documents, is called prehistory, or, as we often say,
prehistoric times. How people lived in those times was
difficult to surmise until scholars began to discover the
places where prehistoric people lived. Excavation at these
places brought to light old tools, pottery, habitats, bones
of ancient human beings and animals, and drawings on
cave walls. By piecing together the information deduced
from these objects and the cave drawings, scholars have
constructed fairly accurate knowledge about what
happened and how people lived in prehistoric times. When
the basic needs of food, water, clothing and shelter were
fulfilled people felt the need to express themselves. Painting
and drawing were the oldest art forms practised by human
beings to express themselves, using the cave walls as their
canvas.
Why did prehistoric people draw these pictures? They
may have drawn and painted to make their homes more
colourful and beautiful or to keep a visual record of  their
day-to-day life, like some of us who maintain a diary.
The prehistoric period in the early development of
human beings is commonly known as the Old Stone
Age or the Palaeolithic Age.
Prehistoric paintings have been found in many parts of
the world. We do not really know if Lower Palaeolithic people
ever produced any art objects. But by the Upper Palaeolithic
times we see a proliferation of artistic activities. Around
the world the walls of many caves of this time are full of
finely carved and painted pictures of animals which the
cave-dwellers hunted. The subjects of their drawings were
human figures, human activities, geometric designs and
symbols. In India the earliest paintings have been reported
from the Upper Palaeolithic times.
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
It is interesting to know that the first discovery of rock
paintings was made in India in 1867–68 by an
archaeologist, Archibold Carlleyle, twelve years before the
discovery of Altamira in Spain. Cockburn, Anderson, Mitra
and Ghosh were the early archaeologists who discovered a
large number of sites in the Indian sub-continent.
Remnants of rock paintings have been found on the walls
of the caves situated in several districts of Madhya Pradesh,
Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Bihar. Some
paintings have been reported from the Kumaon hills in
Uttarakhand also. The rock shelters on banks of the River
Suyal at Lakhudiyar, about twenty kilometres on the Almora–
Barechina road, bear these prehistoric paintings.
Lakhudiyar literally means one lakh caves.The paintings
here can be divided into three categories: man, animal and
geometric patterns in white, black and red ochre. Humans
are represented in stick-like forms. A long-snouted animal,
a fox and a multiple legged lizard are the main animal motifs.
Wavy lines, rectangle-filled geometric designs, and groups
of dots can also be seen here. One of the interesting scenes
depicted here is of hand-linked dancing human figures.
There is some superimposition of paintings. The earliest are
in black; over these are red ochre paintings and the last
group comprises white paintings. From Kashmir two slabs
with engravings have been reported. The granite rocks of
Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh provided suitable canvases
to the Neolithic man for his paintings. There are several such
sites but more famous among them are Kupgallu, Piklihal
and Tekkalkota. Three types of paintings have been reported
from here—paintings in white, paintings in red ochre over
a white background and paintings in red ochre. These
Hand-linked dancing figures, Lakhudiyar,
Uttarakhand
Wavy lines, Lakhudiyar, Uttarakhand
PREHISTORIC ROCK PAINTINGS
paintings belong to late historical, early
historical and Neolithic periods. The subjects
depicted are bulls, elephants, sambhars,
gazelles, sheep, goats, horses, stylised
humans, tridents, but rarely, vegetal motifs.
But the richest paintings are reported from
the Vindhya ranges of Madhya Pradesh and
their Kaimurean extensions into Uttar
Pradesh. These hill ranges are full of
Palaeolithic and Mesolithic remains, and they
are also full of forests, wild plants, fruits,
streams and creeks, thus a perfect place for
Stone Age people to live. Among these the
largest and most spectacular rock-shelter is
located in the Vindhya hills at Bhimbetka in
Madhya Pradesh. Bhimbetka is located forty-
five kilometres south of Bhopal, in an area of
ten square kilometres, having about eight
hundred rock shelters, five hundred of which
bear paintings.
The caves of Bhimbetka were discovered
in 1957–58 by eminent archaeologist V.S.
Wakankar and later on many more were
discovered. Wakankar spent several years in
surveying these inaccessible hills and jungles
to study these paintings.
The themes of paintings found here are of great variety,
ranging from mundane events of daily life in those times to
sacred and royal images. These include hunting, dancing,
music, horse and elephant riders, animal fighting, honey
collection, decoration of bodies, and other household scenes.
The rock art of Bhimbetka has been classified into
various groups on the bases of style, technique and
superimposition. The drawings and paintings can be
catagorised into seven historical periods. Period I, Upper
Palaeolithic; Period II, Mesolithic; and Period III,
Chalcolithic. After Period III there are four
successive  periods. But we  will confine
ourselves here only to the first three phases.
Upper Palaeolithic Period
The paintings of the Upper Palaeolithic phase
are linear representations, in green and dark
red, of huge animal figures, such as bisons,
elephants, tigers, rhinos and boars besides
stick-like human figures. A few are wash
paintings but mostly they are filled with
Can you figure out what the
artist is trying to depict in
this painting?
Cave entrance, Bhimbetka,
Madhya Pradesh
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
geometric patterns. The green paintings are of dancers
and the red ones of hunters.
Mesolithic Period
The largest number of paintings belong to  Period II that
covers the Mesolithic paintings. During this period the
themes multiply but the paintings are smaller in size.
Hunting scenes predominate. The hunting scenes depict
people hunting in groups, armed with barbed spears,
pointed sticks, arrows and bows. In some paintings these
primitive men are shown with traps and snares probably
to catch animals. The hunters are shown wearing simple
clothes and ornaments. Sometimes, men have been
adorned with elaborate head-dresses, and sometimes
painted with masks also. Elephant, bison, tiger, boar, deer,
antelope, leopard, panther, rhinoceros, fish, frog, lizard,
squirrel and at times birds are also depicted. The
Mesolithic artists loved to paint animals. In some pictures,
animals are chasing men. In others they are being chased
and hunted by men. Some of the animal paintings,
especially in the hunting scenes, show a fear of animals,
but many others show a feeling of tenderness and love
for them. There are also a few engravings representing
mainly animals.
Though animals were painted in a naturalistic style,
humans were depicted only in a stylistic manner. Women
are painted both in the nude and clothed. The young and
the old equally find place in these paintings. Children are
painted running, jumping and playing. Community dances
provide a common theme. There are paintings of people
gathering fruit or honey from trees, and of women grinding
and preparing food. Some of the pictures of men, women
and children seem to depict a sort of family life. In many
of the rock-shelters we find hand prints,
fist prints, and dots made by the
fingertips.
Chalcolithic Period
Period III covers the Chalcolithic period.
The paintings of this period reveal the
association,
contact,
mutual
exchange of requirements of the cave
dwellers of this area with settled
agricultural communities of the Malwa
plains. Many a time Chalcolithic ceramics
and rock paintings bear common motifs,
e.g., cross-hatched squares, lattices.
One of the few images showing
only one animal, Bhimbetka
PREHISTORIC ROCK PAINTINGS
Pottery and metal tools are also shown. But
the vividness and vitality of the earlier
periods disappear from these paintings.
The artists of Bhimbetka used many
colours, including various shades of white,
yellow, orange, red ochre, purple, brown,
green and black. But white and red were
their favourite colours. The paints were
made by grinding various rocks and
minerals. They got red from haematite
(known as geru in India). The green came
from a green variety of a stone called
chalcedony. White might have been made out of limestone.
The rock of mineral was first ground into a powder. This
may then have been mixed with water and also with some
thick or sticky substance such as animal fat or gum or
resin from trees. Brushes were made of plant fibre. What
is amazing is that these colours have survived thousands
of years of adverse weather conditions. It is believed that
the colours have remained intact because of the chemical
reaction of the oxide present on the surface of the rocks.
The artists here made their paintings on the walls and
ceilings of the rock shelters. Some of the paintings are
reported from the shelters where people lived. But some
others were made in places which do not seem to have been
living spaces at all. Perhaps these places had some religious
importance. Some of the most beautiful paintings are very
high up on rock shelters or close to the ceilings of rock-
shelters. One may wonder why early human beings chose
to paint on a rock in such an uncomfortable position. The
paintings made at these places were perhaps for people to
be able to notice them from a distance.
The paintings, though from the remote past, do not lack
pictorial quality. Despite various limitations such as acute
working conditions, inadequate tools, materials, etc., there
is a charm of simple rendering of scenes of the
environment in which the artists lived. The men shown in
them appear adventurous and rejoicing in their lives. The
animals are shown more youthful and majestic than
perhaps they actually were. The primitive artists seem to
possess an intrinsic passion for storytelling. These pictures
depict, in a dramatic way, both men and animals engaged
in the struggle for survival. In one of the scenes, a group
of people have been shown hunting a bison. In the process,
some injured men are depicted lying scattered on the
ground. In another scene, an animal is shown in the agony
of death and the men are depicted dancing. These kinds
Why has the animal been
shown so big and man
so small?
Painting showing a man
being hunted by a beast,
Bhimbetka
DANCING SCENE
Hunting scenes predominate in Mesolithic paintings. This is one such scene
where a group of people are shown hunting a bison. Some injured men are
depicted lying scattered on the ground.  These paintings show mastery in the
skill of drawing these forms.
In this picture hand-linked figures in dancing mode are shown. In fact, this is a
recurrent theme. It also recalls the dancing scene from the Lakhudiyar rock
painting found in Uttarakhand.
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
HUNTING SCENE
EXERCISE
1. According to your observation how did the people of
prehistoric times select themes for their paintings?
2. What could have been the reasons for depicting more animal
figures than human figures in cave paintings?
3. Many visuals of prehistoric cave paintings have been given
in this chapter. Among these which one do you like the
most and why? Give a critical appreciation of the visual.
4. Other than Bhimbetka, which are the other major sites
where these prehistoric paintings have been found? Prepare
a report on different aspects of these paintings with pictures
or line drawings.
5. In modern times, how have walls been used as a surface to
make paintings, graphics, etc?
PREHISTORIC ROCK PAINTINGS
of paintings might have given man a sense of power over
the animals he would meet in the open.
This practice is common among primitive people of
today also. They engrave or paint on rocks as part of
the rituals they perform at birth, at death, at coming
of age and at the time of marriage. They dance,
masked, during hunting rites to help them kill
animals difficult to find or kill.
The paintings of individual animals show the mastery
of skill of the primitive artist in drawing these forms. Both,
proportion and tonal effect, have been realistically
maintained in them.
It is interesting to note that at many rock-art sites
often a new painting is painted on top of an older painting.
At Bhimbetka, in some places, there are as many as 20
layers of paintings, one on top of another. Why did the
artists paint in the same place again and again? Maybe,
this was because the artist did not like his creation and
painted another painting on the previous one, or some of
the paintings and places were considered sacred or special
or this was because the area may have been used by
different generations of people at different times.
These prehistoric paintings help us to understand about
early human beings, their lifestyle, their food habits, their
daily activities and, above all, they help us understand
their mind—the way they thought. Prehistoric period
remains are a great witness to the evolution of human
civilisation, through the numerous rock weapons, tools,
ceramics and bones. More than anything else, the rock
paintings are the greatest wealth the primitive human
beings of this period left behind.
Map of Indus Valley sites
(Outline map not to scale)
Mohenjo-daro
Kot diji
PAKISTAN
Sokhtakhoh
Chanhu-daro
Karachi
Surkotada
Lothal
Rangpur
Rojdi
Rehmandheri
Harappa
Gumla
Peshawar
Srinagar
Manda
Kathpalon
Nagar
Dadheri Ropar
Bhagwanpura
Hulas
Banawali
Siswal
Kalibangon
Delhi
AFGHANISTAN
NEPAL
INDIA
Bhagatrav
Daimabad
Mumbai
Chennai
BENGAL
Kolkata
Kagen-dor
Ancient cities
Modern towns
Alamgirpur
Lanka
HE arts of the Indus Valley Civilisation emerged during
the second half of the third millennium BCE. The forms
of art found from various sites of the civilisation include
sculptures, seals, pottery, gold jewellery, terracotta figures,
etc. The artists of that time surely had fine artistic
sensibilities and a vivid imagination. Their delineation of
human and animal figures was highly realistic in nature,
since the anatomical details included in them was unique,
and, in the case of terracotta art, the modelling of animal
figures was done in an extremely careful manner.
The two major sites of the Indus Valley Civilisation,
along the Indus river—the cities of Harappa in the north
and Mohenjodaro in the south—showcase one of earliest
examples of civic planning. Other markers were houses,
markets, storage facilities, offices, public baths, etc.,
arranged in a grid-like pattern. There was also a highly
developed drainage system. While  Harappa and
Mohenjodaro are situated in Pakistan, the important sites
excavated in India are Lothal and Dholavira in Gujarat,
Rakhigarhi in Haryana, Ropar in the Punjab,
Kalibangan and Balathal in Rajasthan, etc.
Statues whether in stone, bronze or terracotta
found in Harappan sites are not abundant, but refined.
Stone Statues
The stone statuaries found at Harappa and
Mohenjodaro are excellent examples of handling three-
dimensional volumes. In stone are two male figures—
one is a torso in red sandstone and the other is a
bust of a bearded man in steatite—which are
extensively discussed.
The figure of the bearded man interpreted as a
priest, is draped in a shawl coming under the right
arm and covering the left shoulder. This shawl is
decorated with trefoil patterns. The eyes are a little
elongated, and half-closed as in meditative
concentration. The nose is well formed and of medium
ARTS OF
THE INDUS VALLEY
Bust of a bearded priest
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
size; the mouth is of average size with close-cut moustache
and a short beard and whiskers; the ears resemble double
shells with a hole in the middle. The hair is parted in the
middle, and a plain woven fillet is passed round the head.
An armlet is worn on the right hand and holes around the
neck suggest a necklace.
Bronze Casting
The art of bronze-casting was practised on a wide scale by
the Harappans. Their bronze statues were made using the
‘lost wax’ technique in which the wax figures were first
covered with a coating of clay and allowed to dry. Then the
wax was heated and the molten wax was drained out
through a tiny hole made in the clay cover. The hollow
mould thus created was filled with molten metal which
took the original shape of the object. Once the metal cooled,
the clay cover was completely removed. In bronze we find
human as well as animal figures, the best example of the
former being the statue of a girl popularly titled ‘Dancing
Girl’. Amongst animal figures in bronze the buffalo with
its uplifted head, back and sweeping horns and the goat
are of artistic merit. Bronze casting was popular at all the
major centres of the Indus Valley Civilisation. The copper
dog and bird of Lothal and the bronze figure of a bull from
Kalibangan are in no way inferior to the human figures of
copper and bronze from Harappa and Mohenjodaro. Metal-
casting appears to be a continuous tradition. The late
Harappan and Chalcolithic sites like Daimabad in
Maharashtra yielded excellent examples of metal-cast
Mother goddess, terracotta
A terracotta figurine
Bronze casting
techniques of the
same nature are
practised even now
in many parts of the
country, having a
continuous
tradition.
ARTS OF THE INDUS VALLEY
sculptures. They mainly consist of human and animal
figures. It shows how the tradition of figure sculpture
continued down the ages.
Terracotta
The Indus Valley people made terracotta images also  but
compared to the stone and bronze statues the terracotta
representations of human form are crude in the Indus
Valley. They are more realistic in Gujarat sites and
Kalibangan. The most important among the Indus figures
are those representing the mother goddess. In terracotta,
we also find a few figurines of bearded males with coiled
hair, their posture rigidly upright, legs slightly apart, and
the arms parallel to the sides of the body. The repetition of
this figure in exactly the same position would suggest that
he was a deity. A terracotta mask of a horned deity has
also been found. Toy carts with wheels, whistles, rattles,
birds and animals, gamesmen and discs were also rendered
in terracotta.
Seals
Archaeologists have discovered thousands of seals, usually
made of steatite, and occasionally of agate, chert, copper,
faience and terracotta, with beautiful figures of animals,
such as unicorn bull, rhinoceros, tiger, elephant, bison,
goat, buffalo, etc. The realistic rendering of these animals
in various moods is remarkable. The purpose of producing
seals was mainly commercial. It appears that the seals
were also used as amulets, carried on the persons of their
owners, perhaps as modern-day identity cards. The
standard Harappan seal was a square plaque 2×2 square
inches, usually made from the soft river stone, steatite.
Every seal is engraved in a pictographic script which is
yet to be deciphered. Some seals have also been found in
gold and ivory. They all bear a great variety of motifs, most
often of animals including those of the bull, with or without
Terracotta
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
the hump, the elephant, tiger, goat and also
monsters. Sometimes trees or human figures
were also depicted. The most remarkable seal
is the one depicted with a figure in the centre
and animals around. This seal is generally
identified as the Pashupati Seal by some
scholars whereas some identify it as the female
deity. This seal depicts a human figure seated
cross-legged. An elephant and a tiger are
depicted to the right side of the seated figure,
while on the left a rhinoceros and a buffalo
are seen. In addition to these animals two
antelopes are shown below the seat. Seals
such as these date from between 2500 and
1500 BCE and were found in considerable
numbers in sites such as the ancient city of
Mohenjodaro in the Indus Valley. Figures and
animals are carved in intaglio on their
surfaces.
Square or rectangular copper tablets, with
an animal or a human figure on one side and
an inscription on the other, or an inscription
on both sides have also been found. The figures
and signs are carefully cut with a burin. These
copper tablets appear to have been amulets.
Unlike inscriptions on seals which vary in each
case, inscriptions on the copper tablets seem
to be associated with the animals portrayed
on them.
Pashupati seal/female deity
Unicorn seals
ARTS OF THE INDUS VALLEY
Pottery
A large quantity of pottery excavated from the sites, enable
us to understand the gradual evolution of various design
motifs as employed in different shapes, and styles. The
Indus Valley pottery consists chiefly of very fine wheel-
made wares, very few being hand-made. Plain pottery is
more common than painted ware. Plain pottery is generally
of red clay, with or without a fine red or grey slip. It includes
knobbed ware,  ornamented with rows of knobs. The black
painted ware has a fine coating of red slip on which
geometric and animal designs are executed in glossy black
paint.
Polychrome pottery is rare and mainly comprises small
vases decorated with geometric patterns in red, black, and
green, rarely white and yellow. Incised ware is also rare
and the incised decoration was confined to the bases of
the pans, always inside and to the dishes of offering stands.
Perforated pottery includes a large hole at the bottom and
small holes all over the wall, and was probably used for
straining liquor. Pottery for household purposes is found
in as many shapes and sizes as could be conceived of for
daily practical use. Straight and angular shapes are an
exception, while graceful curves are the rule. Miniature
vessels, mostly less than half an inch in height are,
particularly, so marvellously crafted as to evoke admiration.
Beads and Ornaments
The Harappan men and women decorated themselves with
a large variety of ornaments produced from every
conceivable material ranging from precious metals and
gemstones to bone and baked clay. While necklaces, fillets,
armlets and finger-rings were commonly worn by both
Pottery
Perforated pot
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
sexes, women wore girdles, earrings and anklets. Hoards
of jewellery found at Mohenjodaro and Lothal include
necklaces of gold and semi-precious stones, copper
bracelets and beads, gold earrings and head ornaments,
faience pendants and buttons, and beads of steatite and
gemstones. All ornaments are well crafted. It may be noted
that a cemetery has been found at Farmana in Haryana
where dead bodies were buried with ornaments.
The bead industry seems to have been well developed
as evident from the factories discovered at Chanhudaro
and Lothal. Beads were made of cornelian, amethyst,
jasper, crystal, quartz, steatite, turquoise, lapis lazuli, etc.
Metals like copper, bronze and gold, and shell, faience and
terracotta or burnt clay were also used for manufacturing
beads. The beads are in varying shapes—disc-shaped,
cylindrical, spherical, barrel-shaped, and segmented. Some
beads were made of two or more stones cemented together,
some of stone with gold covers. Some were decorated by
incising or painting and some had designs etched onto
them. Great technical skill has been displayed in the
manufacture of these beads.
The Harappan people also made brilliantly naturalistic
models of animals, especially monkeys and squirrels, used
as pin-heads and beads.
It is evident from the discovery of a large number of
spindles and spindle whorls in the houses of the Indus
Beadwork and jewellery items
ARTS OF THE INDUS VALLEY
Valley that spinning of cotton and wool was very common.
The fact that both the rich and the poor practised spinning
is indicated by finds of whorls made of the expensive faience
as also of the cheap pottery and shell. Men and women
wore two separate pieces of attire similar to the dhoti and
shawl. The shawl covered the left shoulder passing below
the right shoulder.
From archaeological finds it appears that the people of
the Indus Valley were conscious of fashion. Different
hairstyles were in vogue and wearing of a beard was popular
among all. Cinnabar was used as a cosmetic and face-
paint, lipstick and collyrium (eyeliner) were also known to
them. Many stone structural remains are also found at
Dholavira which show how the Indus Valley people used
stone in construction.
The artists and craftsmen of the Indus Valley were
extremely skilled in a variety of crafts—metal casting, stone
carving, making and painting pottery and making terracotta
images using simplified motifs of animals, plants and birds.
EXERCISE
Would you agree that the people of the Indus Valley
Civilisation were great art lovers? Give reasons for your
answer.
What kind of similarities and differences do you find
between present-day terracotta and the Indus Valley
terracotta?
Seals were made of different materials. With the Indus
Valley seals as a reference try to make seals with a
different medium. Which are the animals that you would
like to carve on your seals and why?
What do the art objects that have survived tell us about
the daily life of the people of the Indus Valley Civilisation?
Imagine you are a curator working in a museum and you
have been given the task to create a museum exhibit on
Indus art. Collect illustrations of at least ten objects made
of stone, metal and terracotta produced and used during
the Indus Valley Civilisation and create this exhibit.
Terracotta toys
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
This bronze figure of a bull from
Mohenjodaro deserves mention. The
massiveness of the bull and the fury
of the charge are eloquently
expressed. The animal is shown
standing with his head turned to the
right and with a cord around the
neck.
DANCING GIRL
One of the best known artefacts from the Indus Valley
is this approximately four-inch-high copper figure
of a dancing girl. Found in Mohenjodaro, this
exquisite casting depicts a girl whose long hair is
tied in a bun. Bangles cover her left arm, a bracelet
and an amulet or bangle adorn her right arm, and
a cowry shell necklace is seen around her neck.
Her right hand is on her hip and her left hand is
clasped in a traditional Indian dance gesture. She
has large eyes and flat nose. This figure is full of
expression and bodily vigour and conveys a lot of
information.
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
ARTS OF THE INDUS VALLEY
MOTHER GODDESS
The mother goddess figures are usually crude standing female
figures adorned with necklaces hanging over prominent breasts
and wearing a loin cloth and a girdle. The fan-shaped head-dress
with a cup-like projection on each side is a distinct decorative
feature of the mother goddess figures of the Indus Valley. The
pellet eyes and beaked nose of the figures are very crude, and the
mouth is indicated by a slit.
MALE TORSO
In this red sandstone figure, there are socket holes in the neck
and shoulders for the attachment of head and arms. The frontal
posture of the torso has been consciously adopted. The
shoulders are well baked and the abdomen slightly prominent.
PAINTED EARTHEN JAR
Found in Mohenjodaro, this jar is made on a
potter’s wheel with clay. The shape was
manipulated by the pressure of the crafty
fingers of the potter. After baking the clay
model, it was painted with black colour. High
polishing was done as a finishing touch. The
motifs are of vegetals and geometric forms.
Designs are simple but with a tendency
towards abstraction.
ARTS OF THE INDUS VALLEY
Map showing Mauryan sites
(Outline map not to scale)
IXTH century BCE marks the beginning of new
religious and social movements in the Gangetic valley
in the form of Buddhism and Jainism which were part of
the shraman tradition. Both religions became popular as
they opposed the varna and jati systems of the Hindu
religion. Magadha emerged as a powerful kingdom and
consolidated its control over the other regions. By the fourth
century BCE the Mauryas established their power and by
the third century BCE, a large part of India was under
Mauryan control. Ashoka emerged as the most powerful
king of the Mauryan dynasty who patronised the shraman
tradition in the third century BCE. Religious practices had
many dimensions and were not confined to just one
particular mode of worship. Worship of Yakshas and mother-
goddesses were prevalent during that time. So, multiple
forms of worship existed. Nevertheless, Buddhism became
the most popular social and religious movement. Yaksha
worship was very popular before and after the advent of
Buddhism and it was assimilated in Buddhism and Jainism.
Pillars, Sculptures and Rock-cut Architecture
Construction of stupas and viharas as part of monastic
establishments became part of the Buddhist tradition.
However, in this period, apart from stupas and viharas,
stone pillars, rock-cut caves and monumental figure
sculptures were carved at several places. The tradition of
constructing pillars is very old and it may be observed
that erection of pillars was prevalent in the Achamenian
empire as well. But the Mauryan pillars are different from
the Achamenian pillars. The Mauryan pillars are rock-cut
pillars thus displaying the carver’s skills, whereas the
Achamenian pillars are constructed in pieces by a mason.
Stone pillars were erected all over the Mauryan Empire
with inscriptions engraved on them. The top portion of the
pillar was carved with capital figures like the bull, the
lion, the elephant, etc. All the capital figures are vigorous
ARTS OF THE
MAURYAN PERIOD
Pillar capital and abacus
with stylised lotus
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
Yaksha, Parkham
and carved standing on a square or circular abacus. Abacuses
are decorated with stylised lotuses. Some of the existing pillars
with capital figures were found at Basarah-Bakhira, Lauriya-
Nandangarh, Rampurva, Sankisa and Sarnath.
The Mauryan pillar capital found at Sarnath popularly
known as the Lion Capital is the finest example of Mauryan
sculptural tradition. It is also our national emblem. It is
carved with considerable care—voluminous roaring lion
figures firmly standing on a circular abacus which is carved
with the figures of a horse, a bull, a lion and an elephant
in vigorous movement, executed with precision, showing
considerable mastery in the sculptural techniques. This
pillar capital symbolising Dhammachakrapravartana (the
first sermon by the Buddha) has become a standard symbol
of this great historical event in the life of the Buddha.
Monumental images of Yaksha, Yakhinis and animals,
pillar columns with capital figures, rock-cut caves belonging
to the third century BCE have been found in different parts
of India. It shows the popularity of Yaksha worship and
how it became part of figure representation in Buddhist
and Jaina religious monuments.
Large statues of Yakshas and Yakhinis are found at many
places like Patna, Vidisha and Mathura. These  monumental
images are mostly in the standing position. One of the
distinguishing elements in all these images is their polished
surface. The depiction of faces is in full round with pronounced
cheeks and physiognomic detail. One of the finest examples
is a Yakshi figure from Didarganj, Patna, which is tall and
well-built. It shows sensitivity towards depicting the human
physique. The image has a polished surface.
Terracotta figurines show a very different delineation of
the body as compared to the sculptures. Depiction of a
monumental rock-cut elephant at Dhauli in Orissa shows
modelling in round with linear rhythm. It also has Ashokan
rock-edict. All these examples are remarkable in their
execution of figure representation. The rock-cut cave carved
at Barabar hills near Gaya in Bihar is known as the Lomus
Rishi cave. The facade of the cave is decorated with the
semicircular chaitya arch as the entrance. The elephant
frieze carved in high relief on the chaitya arch shows
considerable movement. The interior hall of this cave is
rectangular with a circular chamber at the back. The
entrance is located on the side wall of the hall. The cave
was patronised by Ashoka for the Ajivika sect. The Lomus
Rishi cave is an isolated example of this period. But many
Buddhist caves of the subsequent periods were excavated
in eastern and western India.
ARTS OF THE MAURYAN PERIOD
Due to the popularity of Buddhism and Jainism, stupas
and viharas were constructed on a large scale. However,
there are also examples of a few Brahmanical gods in the
sculptural representations. It is important to note that the
stupas were constructed over the relics of the Buddha at
Rajagraha, Vaishali, Kapilavastu, Allakappa, Ramagrama,
Vethadipa, Pava, Kushinagar and Pippalvina. The textual
tradition also mentions construction of various other stupas
on the relics of the Buddha at several places including
Avanti and Gandhara which are outside the Gangetic valley.
Stupa, vihara and chaitya are part of Buddhist and Jaina
monastic complexes but the largest number belongs to the
Buddhist religion. One of the best examples of the structure
of a stupa in the third century BCE is at Bairat in
Rajasthan. It is a very grand stupa having a circular mound
with a circumambulatory path. The great stupa at Sanchi
(which will be discussed later) was built with bricks during
the time of Ashoka and later it was covered with stone and
many new additions were made.
Subsequently many such stupas were constructed which
shows the popularity of Buddhism. From the second
century BCE onwards, we get many inscriptional evidences
mentioning donors and, at times, their profession. The
pattern of patronage has been a very collective one and
there are very few examples of royal patronage. Patrons
range from lay devotees to gahapatis and kings. Donations
by the guilds are also mentioned at several sites. However,
there are very few inscriptions mentioning the names of
artisans such as Kanha at Pitalkhora and his disciple
Balaka at Kondane caves. Artisans’ categories like stone
carvers, goldsmiths, stone-polishers, carpenters, etc. are
also mentioned in the inscriptions. The method of working
Elephant, Dhauli
Lomus Rishi cave-entrance detail
LION CAPITAL, SARNATH
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
The Lion Capital discovered more than a hundred years ago
at Sarnath, near Varanasi, is generally referred to as Sarnath
Lion Capital. This is one of the finest examples of sculpture
from the Mauryan period. Built in commemoration of the
historical event of the first sermon or the Dhammachakrapravartana
by the Buddha at Sarnath, the capital was built by Ashoka.
The capital originally consisted of five component parts:
(i) the shaft (which is broken in many parts now), (ii) a lotus
bell base, (iii) a drum on the bell base with four animals
proceeding clockwise, (iv) the figures of four majestic addorsed
lions, and (v) the crowning element, Dharamchakra, a large
wheel, was also a part of this pillar. However, this wheel is
lying in a broken condition and is displayed in the site museum
at Sarnath. The capital without the crowning wheel and the
lotus base has been adopted as the National Emblem of
Independent India.
Now kept in the archaeological museum at Sarnath, the
capital has four lions firmly seated back to back on a circular
abacus. The lion figures of the capital are very impressive and
massive. The monumentality of the image is easily noticeable.
The facial musculature of the lions is very strong. The inversed
lines of the lips and its subsequent effect of projection at the
end of the lips show the sculptor’s observation for naturalistic
depiction. The lions appear as if they have held their breath.
The lines of the mane are sharp and follow the conventions
that were in practice during that time. The surface of the
sculpture is heavily polished which is typical of the Mauryan
Period. Their curly manes have protruding volume. The weight
of the body of each lion is firmly shown by the stretched muscles
of the feet. The abacus has the depiction of a chakra (wheel)
having twenty-four spokes in all the four directions and a bull,
a horse, an elephant and a lion between every chakra is finely
carved. The motif of the chakra becomes significant as a
representation of the Dhammachkra in the entire Buddhist art.
Each animal figure, despite sticking to the surface, is
voluminous, its posture creating movement in the circular
abacus. Despite having limited space between each chakra,
these animal figures display considerable command over the
depiction of movement in a limited space. The circular abacus
is supported by an inverted lotus capital. Each petal of the
lotus is sculpted keeping in mind its density. The lower portion
has curved planes neatly carved. Being a pillar image, it was
conceived to be viewed from all the side, thus there are no
boundations of fixed view points. A lion capital has also been
found at Sanchi but is in a dilapidated condition. The motif of
lion-capital-pillar continued even in the subsequent period.
ARTS OF THE MAURYAN PERIOD
DIDARGUNJ YAKSHINI
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
The life-size standing image of a Yakshini holding a chauri (flywhisk)
from Didargunj near modern Patna is another good example of the
sculptural tradition of the Mauryan Period. Kept in Patna Museum,
it is a tall, well-proportioned, free-standing sculpture in round made
in sandstone with a polished surface. The chauri is held in the right
hand whereas the left hand is broken. The image shows
sophistication in the treatment of form and medium. The sculptor’s
sensitivity towards the round muscular body is clearly visible. The
face has round, fleshy cheeks, while the neck is relatively small in
proportion; the eyes, nose and lips are sharp. Folds of muscles are
properly rendered. The necklace beads are in full round, hanging to
the belly. The tightening of garment around the belly creates the
effect of a bulging belly. The lower garment has been rendered with
great care. Every fold of the garment on the legs is shown by
protruding lines clinging to the legs, which also create a somewhat
transparent effect. The middle band of the garment falls till the feet.
Thick bell-ornaments adorn the feet. The image stands firmly on its
legs. Heaviness in the torso is depicted by heavy breasts. The back
is equally impressive. The hair is tied in a knot at the back. The
back is bare. Drapery at the back covers both legs. The flywhisk in
the right hand is shown with incised lines continued on the back of
the image.
ARTS OF THE MAURYAN PERIOD
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
was collective in nature and at times only a specific portion
of the monument is said to have been patronised by a
particular patron. Traders recorded their donation along
with their place of origin.
In the subsequent century, stupas were elaborately built
with certain additions like the enclosing of the
circumambulatory path with railings and sculptural
decoration. There were numerous stupas constructed earlier
but expansions or new additions were made in the second
century BCE. The stupa consists of a cylindrical drum
and a circular anda with a harmika and chhatra on the
top which remain consistent throughout with minor
variations and changes in shape and size. Apart from the
circumambulatory path, gateways were added. Thus, with
the elaborations in stupa architecture, there was ample
space for the architects and sculptors to plan elaborations
and to carve out images.
During the early phase of Buddhism, Buddha is depicted
symbolically through footprints, stupas, lotus throne,
chakra, etc. This indicates either  simple worship, or paying
respect, or at times depicts historisisation of life events.
Gradually narrative became a part of the Buddhist
tradition. Thus events from the life of the Buddha, the
Jataka stories, were depicted on the railings and torans of
the stupas. Mainly synoptic narrative, continuous narrative
and episodic narrative are used in the pictorial tradition.
While events from the life of the Buddha became an
important theme in all the Buddhist monuments, the Jataka
stories also became equally important for sculptural
decorations. The main events associated with the Buddha’s
life which were frequently depicted were events related to
the birth, renunciation, enlightenment, dhammachakra-
pravartana, and mahaparinibbana (death).  Among the
Jataka stories that are frequently depicted are Chhadanta
Jataka, Vidurpundita Jataka, Ruru Jataka, Sibi Jataka,
Vessantara Jataka and Shama Jataka.
Stupa worship, Bharhut
EXERCISE
1. Do you think that the art of making sculptures in India
began during the Mauryan period?
2. What was the significance of the stupa and how did stupa
architecture develop?
3. Which were the four events in the life of the Buddha which
have been depicted in different forms of Buddhist art? What
did these events symbolise?
4. What are the Jatakas? How do the Jatakas relate to
Buddhism? Find out.
ROM the second century BCE onwards, various rulers
established their control over the vast Mauryan Empire:
the Shungas, Kanvas, Kushanas and Guptas in the north
and parts of central India; the Satvahanas, Ikshavakus,
Abhiras, Vakataks in southern and western India.
Incidentally, the period of the second century BCE also
marked the rise of the main Brahmanical sects such as
the Vaishnavas and the Shaivas. There are numerous sites
dating back to the second century BCE in India. Some of
the prominent examples of the finest sculpture are found
at Vidisha, Bharhut (Madhya Pradesh), Bodhgaya (Bihar),
Jaggayyapeta (Andhra Pradesh), Mathura (Uttar Pradesh),
Khandagiri-Udaigiri (Odisha), Bhaja near Pune and Pavani
near Nagpur (Maharashtra).
Bharhut
Bharhut sculptures are tall like the images of Yaksha and
Yakhshini in the Mauryan period, modelling of the
sculptural volume is in low relief maintaining linearity.
Images stick to the picture plane. In the relief panels
depicting narratives, illusion of three-dimensionality is
shown with tilted perspective. Clarity in the narrative is
enhanced by selecting main events. At Bharhut, narrative
panels are shown with fewer characters but as the time
progresses, apart from the main character in the story,
others also start appearing in the picture space. At times
more than one event at one geographical place is clubbed
in the picture space or only a single main event is depicted
in the pictorial space.
Availability of the space is utilised to the maximum by
the sculptors. Folded hands in the narratives as well as
single figures of the Yakhshas and Yakshinis are shown
flat clinging to the chest. But in some cases, especially in
later times, the hands are shown with the natural
projection against the chest. Such examples show how
artisans who were working at a collective level had to
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN
INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
Yakshini, Bharhut
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
understand the method of carving. Initially, dressing the
surface of stone slabs appears as the main concern. Later
the human body and other forms were sculpted. Due to
shallow carving of the picture surface, projection of hands
and feet was not possible, hence, the folded hands and
awkward position of the feet. There is a general stiffness
in the body and arms. But gradually, such visual
appearance was modified by making images with deep
carvings, pronounced volume and a very naturalistic
representation of human and animal bodies.  Sculptures
at Bharhut, Bodhgaya, Sanchi Stupa-2, and Jagayyapetta
are good examples.
Narrative reliefs at Bharhut show how artisans used
the pictorial language very effectively to communicate stories.
In one such narrative, showing Queen Mayadevi’s (mother
of Siddhartha Gautam) dream, a descending elephant is
shown. The queen is shown reclining on the bed whereas
an elephant is shown on the top heading towards the womb
of Queen Mayadevi. On the other hand, the depiction of a
Jataka story is very simple—narrated by clubbing the events
according to the geographical location of the story like the
depiction of Ruru Jataka where the Boddhisattva deer is
rescuing a man on his back. The other event in the same
picture frame depicts the King standing with his army and
about to shoot an arrow at the deer, and the man who was
Queen Maya’s dream, Bharhut
Jataka panel , Bharhut
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
rescued by the deer is also shown along with the king
pointing a finger at the deer. According to the story, the
man promised the deer after his rescue that he would not
disclose his identity to anybody. But when the king makes
a proclamation of reward for disclosing the identity of the
deer, he turns hostile and takes the king to the same jungle
where he had seen the deer. Such Jataka stories became
part of stupa decoration. Interestingly, with the rise in the
construction of stupas in various parts of the country,
regional stylistic variations also began to emerge. One main
characteristic in all the male images of first–second
centuries BCE is the knotted headgear. In many sculptures
it is very consistent. Some of the sculptures found at
Bharhut are displayed in Indian Museum, Kolkata.
Sanchi
The next phase of sculptural development at Sanchi Stupa-1,
Mathura, and Vengi in Andhra Pradesh (Guntur District)
is noteworthy in the stylistic progression. Stupa-1 at Sanchi
has upper as well as lower pradakshinapatha or
circumambulatory path. It has four beautifully decorated
toranas depicting various events from the life of the Buddha
and the Jatakas. Figure compositions are in high relief,
filling up the entire space. Depiction of posture gets
naturalistic and there is no stiffness in the body. Heads
have considerable projection in the picture space. Rigidity
Chhatri
Harmika
Medhi
Vedika
Pradakshina
patha
Torana
Plan of  Stupa-1, Sanchi
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
in the contours gets reduced and images are given
movement. Narration gets elaborated. Carving techniques
appear more advanced than Bharhut. Symbols continue
to be used representing the Buddha and the Manushi
Buddhas or the past Buddhas (according to the textual
tradition, there are twenty-four Buddhas but only the first
one, Dipankar, and the last six are pictorially represented).
At Sanchi Stupa-1, narratives get more elaborated;
however, the depiction of the dream episode remains very
simple showing the reclining image of the queen and the
elephant at the top. The historical narratives such as the
siege of Kushinara, Buddha’s visit to Kapilavastu, visit of
Ashoka to the Ramgrama Stupa are carved with
considerable details. In Mathura, images of this period
bear the same quality but are different in the depiction of
physiognomic details.
Mathura, Sarnath and Gandhara Schools
The first century CE onwards, Gandhara (now in Pakistan),
Mathura in northern India and Vengi in Andhra Pradesh
emerged as important centres of art production. Buddha
in the symbolic form got a human form in Mathura and
Gandhara. The sculptural tradition in Gandhara had the
confluence of Bactria, Parthia and the local Gandhara
tradition. The local sculptural tradition at Mathura became
so strong that the tradition spread to other parts of northern
India. The best example in this regard is the stupa sculptures
found at Sanghol in the Punjab. The Buddha image at
Mathura is modelled on the lines of earlier Yaksha images
whereas in Gandhara it has Hellenistic features.
Images of Vaishnava (mainly Vishnu and his various
forms) and Shaiva (mainly the lingas and mukhalingas)
faiths are also found at Mathura but Buddhist images are
found in large numbers. It may be noted that the images
of Vishnu and Shiva are represented by their ayudhas
(weapons). There is boldness in carving the large images,
the volume of the images is projected out of the picture
plane, the faces are round and smiling, heaviness in the
sculptural volume is reduced to relaxed flesh. The garments
of the body are clearly visible and they cover the left
shoulder. Images of the Buddha, Yakshas, Yakshinis,
Shaivite and Vaishnavite deities and portrait statues are
profusely sculpted. In the second century CE, images in
Mathura get sensual, rotundity increases, they become
fleshier. In the third century CE, treatment of sculptural
volume changes by reducing the extreme fleshiness,
movement in the posture is shown by increasing distance
Part of railing, Sangol
Stone carving, Stupa-1,
Sanchi
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
between the two legs as well as by using bents in the body
posture. Softness in the surface continues to get refined.
The trend continues in the fourth century CE but in the
late fourth century CE, the massiveness and fleshiness is
reduced further and the flesh becomes more tightened,
the volume of the drapery also gets reduced and in the
fifth and sixth centuries CE, the drapery is integrated into
the sculptural mass. Transparent quality in the robes of
the Buddha images is evident. In this period, two important
schools of sculptures in northern India are worth noting.
The traditional centre, Mathura, remained the main art
production site whereas Sarnath and Kosambi also emerged
as important centres of art production. Many Buddha
images in Sarnath have plain transparent drapery covering
both shoulders, and the halo around the head has very
little ornamentation whereas the Mathura Buddha images
continue to depict folds of the drapery in the Buddha images
and the halo around the head is profusely decorated. One
can visit museums at Mathura, Sarnath, Varanasi, New
Delhi, Chennai, Amaravati, etc. to study the features of
early sculptures.
Bodhisattva, Gandhar, fifth–sixth century CE
Meditating Buddha, Gandhar,
third–fourth century CE
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
Early Temples
While construction of stupas continued, Brahmanical
temples and images of gods also started getting
constructed. Often temples were decorated with the images
of gods. Myths mentioned in the Puranas became part of
narrative representation of the Brahmanical religion. Each
temple had a principal image of a god. The shrines of the
temples were of three kinds—(i) sandhara type (without
pradikshinapatha),
nirandhara
(with
pradakshinapatha), and (iii) sarvatobhadra (which can be
accessed from all sides). Some of the important temple
sites of this period are Deogarh in Uttar Pradesh, Eran,
Nachna-Kuthara and Udaygiri near Vidisha in Madhya
Pradesh. These temples are simple structures consisting
of a veranda, a hall and a shrine at the rear. They will be
discussed in detail in the next chapter.
Among the important stupa sites outside the Gangetic
valley is Devnimori in Gujarat. In the subsequent centuries
sculptures had little variations while slender images with
transparent drapery remained a dominant aesthetic
sensibility.
Shiva temple, Nachna-Kuthara, Madhya Pradesh, fifth century CE
Buddhist Monuments of South India
Vengi in Andhra Pradesh has many stupa sites like
Jagayyapetta, Amaravati, Bhattiprolu, Nagarjunkonda,
Goli, etc. Amaravati has a mahachaitya and had many
sculptures which are now preserved in Chennai Museum,
Chatur Mukhlinga,
Nachna- Kuthara (Inset)
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
Amaravati Site Museum, National Museum, New Delhi and
the British Museum, London. Like the Sanchi Stupa, the
Amaravati Stupa also has pradakshinapatha enclosed
within a vedika on which many narrative sculptures are
depicted. The domical stupa structure is covered with relief
stupa sculptural slabs which is a unique feature. The torana
of the Amaravati Stupa has disappeared over a period of
time. Events from the life of the Buddha and the Jataka
stories are depicted. Though in the Amaravati Stupa there
is  evidence of construction activity in the third century
BCE, it was best developed in the first and second centuries
CE. Like Sanchi, the early phase is devoid of Buddha images
but during the later phase, in the second and third
centuries CE, the Buddha images are carved on the drum
slabs and at many other places. Interior space in the
composition is created by different postures of the figures
such as semi-back, back, profile, frontal, semi-frontal,
side, etc.
Sculptural form in this area is characterised by intense
emotions. Figures are slender, have a lot of movement,
bodies are shown with three bents (i.e. tribhanga), and the
sculptural composition is more complex than at Sanchi.
Linearity becomes flexible, dynamic movement breaks the
staticness of form. The idea of creating three-dimensional
space in the relief sculpture is devised by using pronounced
volume, angular bodies and complex overlapping. However,
Carving on outer wall of Stupa, Amaravati
Stupa drum slab, Amravati, second
century CE
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
absolute attention has been paid to the clarity of form
despite its size and role in the narrative. Narratives are
profusely depicted which include events from the life of
the Buddha and the Jataka stories. There are a number of
Jataka scenes that have not been completely identified. In
the depiction of the birth event, the queen is shown
reclining on a bed surrounded by female attendants and a
small-sized elephant is carved on the upper frame of the
composition showing the dream of Queen Mayadevi. In
another relief, four events related to the birth of the Buddha
are shown. These represent varied ways of depicting the
narratives.
The animated movement in the figures gets reduced in
the sculptures of Nagarjunkonda and Goli in the third
century CE. Even within the relatively low relief volume
Amaravati
sculptures,
artists
Nagarjunkonda and Goli managed to create the effect of
protruding surfaces of the body which is suggestive in
nature and look very integral. Independent Buddha images
are also found at Amaravati, Nagarjunkonda and
Guntapalle. Guntapalle is a rock-cut cave site near Eluru.
Small apsidal and circular chaitya halls have been
excavated belonging to the second century BCE. The other
important site where rock-cut stupas have been excavated
is Anakapalle near Vishakhapatanam. In Karnataka,
Sannati is the largest stupa site excavated so far. It also
has a stupa like the one in Amaravati decorated with
sculptural relief.
Panel, Nagarjunkonda
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
Construction of a large number of stupas does not mean
that there were no structured temples or viharas or chaityas.
We do get evidences but no structured chaitya or vihara
survived. Among the important structured viharas, mention
may be made of the Sanchi apsidal chaitya structure, i.e.,
temple 18, which is a simple shrine temple having front
pillars and a hall at the back. Similar structured temples
at Guntapalle are also worth mentioning. Along with the
images of the Buddha, other Buddhist images of
Boddhisattvas like Avalokiteshvara, Padmapani, Vajrapani,
Amitabha, and Maitreya Buddha started getting sculpted.
However, with the rise of Vajrayana Buddhism many
Boddhisattva images were added as a part of the personified
representations of certain virtues or qualities as propagated
by the Buddhist religious principles for the welfare of
the masses.
Cave Tradition in Western India
In western India, many Buddhist caves dating back to the
second century BCE onwards have been excavated. Mainly
three architectural types were executed—(i) apsidal vault-
roof chaitya halls (found at Ajanta, Pitalkhora, Bhaja); (ii)
apsidal vault-roof pillarless hall (found at Thana-Nadsur);
and (iii) flat-roofed quadrangular hall with a circular
chamber at the back (found at Kondivite). The front of the
chaitya hall is dominated by the motif of a semi-circular
chaitya arch with an open front which has a wooden facade
and, in some cases, there is no dominating chaitya arch
window such as found at Kondivite. In all the chaitya caves
a stupa at the back is common.
In the first century BCE some modifications were made
to the standard plan of the apsidal vault-roof variety where
the hall becomes rectangular like at Ajanta Cave No. 9
Unfinished chaitya cave, Kanheri
Chaitya hall, Karla
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
with a stone-screen wall as a facade.
It is also found at Bedsa, Nashik,
Karla and Kanheri. Many cave sites
have the standard first type of chaitya
halls in the subsequent period. In
Karla, the biggest rock-cut chaitya
hall was excavated. The cave consists
of an open courtyard with two pillars,
a stone screen wall to protect from
rain, a veranda, a stone-screen wall
as facade, an apsidal vault-roof
chaitya hall with pillars, and a stupa
at the back. Karla chaitya hall is
decorated with human and animal
figures. They are heavy in their
execution, and move in the picture space. Further
elaboration over the Karla chaitya hall plan is observed at
Kanheri Cave No.3. Though the cave’s interior was not
fully finished, it shows how the carving progressed from
time to time. Subsequently, the quadrangular flat-roofed
variety became the most preferred design and is extensively
found at many places.
The viharas are excavated in all the cave sites. The
plan of the viharas consists of a veranda, a hall and cells
around the walls of the hall. Some of the important vihara
caves are Ajanta Cave No. 12, Bedsa Cave No. 11, Nashik
Cave Nos. 3, 10 and 17. Many of the early vihara caves are
carved with interior decorative motifs like chaitya arches
and the vedica designs over the cell doors of the cave.
Facade design in Nashik Cave Nos. 3, 10, and 17 became a
distinct achievement. The vihara caves at Nashik were
excavated with front pillars carved
with ghata-base and ghata-capital
with human figures. One such vihara
cave was also excavated at Junnar
which is popularly known as
Ganeshleni because an image of
Ganesha belonging to a later period
was installed in it. Later, a stupa was
added at the back of the hall of the
vihara and it became a chaitya-vihara.
The stupas in the fourth and fifth
centuries CE have Buddha images
attached. Junnar has the largest
cave excavations— more than two
hundred caves around the hills of the
town—whereas Kanheri in Mumbai
Chaitya, Cave No. 12, Bhaja
Nashik Cave No. 3
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
has a hundred and eight excavated caves. The most
important sites are Ajanta, Pitalkhora, Ellora, Nashik,
Bhaja, Junnar, Karla, Kanheri. Ajanta, Ellora, and Kanheri
continue to flourish. Earlier it was presumed that because
of the absence of the Buddha image, the caves were
considered belonging to the orthodox faith of Buddhism,
i.e., the Thervadins, but with the discovery of the Konkan
Maurya inscription mentioning the Saka era 322, i.e., 400
CE, it is now satisfactorily proved that the cave activity in
western Deccan was an ongoing process and many caves
had been carved with Buddha images where the image
does not exist any more. It may also be noted that many
caves are converted into modern Hindu shrines and have
become popular worshipping sites.
Ajanta
The most famous cave site is Ajanta. It is located in
Aurangabad District of Maharashtra State. Ajanta has
twenty-nine caves. It has four chaitya caves datable to the
earlier phase, i.e., the second and the first century BCE
(Cave  Nos. 10 and 9) and the later phase, i.e., the fifth
century CE (Cave Nos. 19 and 26). It has large chaitya-
viharas and is decorated with sculptures and paintings.
Ajanta is the only surviving example of painting of the
first century BCE and the fifth century CE. The caves at
Ajanta as well as in western Deccan in general have no
precise chronology because of the lack of known dated
inscriptions.
Cave Nos. 10, 9, 12 and 13 belong to the early phase,
Caves Nos. 11, 15 and 6 upper and lower, and Cave No. 7
belong to the phase earlier than late fifth century CE. The
rest of the caves belong to late fifth century CE to early
sixth century CE. The chaitya Cave Nos. 19 and 26 are
elaborately carved. Their
facade is decorated with
Buddha and, Boddhisattva
images. They are of the
apsidal-vault-roof variety.
Cave No. 26 is very big and
the entire interior hall is
carved with a variety of
Buddha images, the biggest
one being the Mahaparinibbana
image. The rest of the caves
are vihara-chaitya caves. They
consist of a pillared veranda,
a pillared hall and cells along
View, Ajanta Caves
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
the walls. The back wall has the main Buddha shrine.
Shrine images at Ajanta are grand in size. Some of the
vihara caves are unfinished such as Cave Nos. 5, 14, 23
24, 28 and 29. Among the important patrons at Ajanta
were Varahadeva (patron of Cave No. 16), the prime minister
of the Vakataka king, Harishena; Upendragupta (patron of
Cave Nos. 17–20) the local king of the region and
feudatory of the Vakataka king, Harishena;
Buddhabhadra (patron of Cave No. 26); and
Mathuradasa (patron of Cave No. 4). Many
paintings have survived in Cave Nos. 1, 2, 16
and 17.
Paintings have a lot of typological variations.
Outward projections are used in the Ajanta
paintings of the fifth century CE. Lines are clearly
defined and are very rhythmic. Body colour gets
merged with the outer line creating the effect of
volume. The figures are heavy like the sculptures
of western India.
The caves of the early phase also have paintings
especially Cave Nos. 9 and 10. Paintings in Cave
No. 10 are an afterthought as is evident from the
plastering over the early inscriptions inside the
cave. On the other hand the paintings in Cave No.
9 are part of the preplanning. They belong to the
first century BCE. The figures are broad with heavy
proportion and arranged in the picture space in a
linear way. Lines are sharp. Colours are limited.
Sculptural panel in the veranda of Cave No. 2, Ajanta
Painting of the Buddha,
Yashodhra and Rahul,
Cave No. 17, Ajanta
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
Figures in these caves are painted
with considerable naturalism and
there is no over -stylisation.
Events are grouped together
according
geographical
location. Tiered, horizontally-
arranged figures appear as a
convenient choice of the artisans.
Separation of geographic location
has been indicated by using
outward architectural bands.
Figures appear like the Sanchi
sculptures which indicate how
the lithic and painting traditions
were progressing simultaneously.
The frontal knot of the headgear of the figures follows the
same pattern as that of the sculptures. However, there
are a few different patterns of headgear.
The second phase of paintings can be studied from the
images of the Buddhas painted on the walls and pillars of
Cave Nos. 10 and 9. These Buddha figures are different
from the figures painted in the fifth century CE. Such
developments in paintings need to be understood in the
context of the religious requirement. Cave excavation and
Apsara, Cave No. 17, Ajanta
Painted ceiling, Cave No. 10, Ajanta
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
painting were simultaneous processes and dating of the
paintings follows the date of the cave excavations. The
next stage of development is observed mainly in the
paintings of Cave Nos. 16, 17, 1, and 2. However, it does
not mean that pictures had not been painted in other caves.
Infact almost in all the finished excavations, pictures have
been painted but very few have survived. Paintings have
typological variations in these caves. It may also be
observed that various skin colours are used in the paintings
such as brown, yellowish brown, greenish, yellow ochre,
etc. which represent a multicoloured population. Paintings
of Cave Nos. 16 and 17 have precise and elegant painterly
quality. They do not bear the ponderous volume of the
sculptures in the caves. Movements in the figures are very
rhythmic. Brown thick dark lines are used as contours.
Lines are forceful and full of energy. Attempts are also
made to give highlights in the figural compositions.
The paintings of Cave Nos. 1 and 2 are very orderly and
naturalistic, well integrated with the sculptures in the caves.
Architectural setting is simple and the arrangement of
figures is delineated in the circular form to create three-
dimensionality and the special effects. Half-closed, elongated
eyes are employed. Different guilds of artisans seem to have
worked on the paintings of these caves which can be inferred
from their typological and stylistic variations. Naturalistic
postures and unexaggerated facial features are used as
exceptional types.
The themes of the paintings are the events from the
life of the Buddha, the Jatakas and the Avadanas. Some
Paintings, Cave No. 9, Ajanta
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
paintings such as Simhala Avadana, Mahajanaka Jataka
and Vidhurpundita Jataka cover the entire wall of the cave.
It is worth noting that Chaddanta Jataka has been painted
in the early Cave No. 10 with many details and events
grouped according to their geographical locations. Events
that happened in the jungle and events that happened in
the palace are separated by their locations. In Cave No. 10
Chaddanta faithfully follows the Pali text whereas the one
painted in Cave No. 17 is very different. In one of the events,
the Boddhisattva, Chaddanta, is shown removing his own
tusk and giving it to the hunter, Sonuttar. The other
important paintings are the famous Padmapani and
Vajrapani in Cave No. 1. However, it may be observed that
the images of Padmapani and Vajrapani are very common
in Ajanta but the best preserved paintings are in Cave No.
1. Some figures in Cave No. 2 have affiliation with the
Vengi sculptures and at the same time, the influence of
the Vidarbha sculptural tradition is also observed in the
delineation of some sculptures. The subsequent
development of the painting tradition has been discussed
in the next chapter.
Ellora
Another important cave site located in Aurangabad District
is Ellora. It is located a hundred kilometres from Ajanta
and has thirty-two Buddhist, Brahmanical and Jain caves.
It is a unique art-historical site in the country as it has
monastries associated with the three religions dating from
the fifth century CE onwards to the eleventh century CE.
Seated Buddha, chaitya hall,
Cave No. 10, Ellora
Courtyard, Kailash Temple,
Cave No.16, Ellora
Part of Mahajanaka Jataka
panel, Cave No. 1, Ajanta
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
It is also unique in terms of stylistic eclecticism, i.e.,
confluence of many styles at one place. The caves of Ellora
and Aurangabad show the ongoing differences between the
two religions—Buddhism and  Brahmanical. There are
twelve Buddhist caves having many images belonging to
Vajrayana Buddhism like Tara, Mahamayuri, Akshobhya,
Avalokiteshwara, Maitrya, Amitabha, etc. Buddhist caves
are big in size and are of single, double and triple storeys.
Their pillars are massive. Ajanta also has excavated
double-storeyed caves but at Ellora, the triple storey is a
unique achievement. All the caves were plastered and
painted but nothing visible is left. The shrine Buddha
images are big in size; they are generally guarded by the
images of Padmapani and Vajrapani. Cave No. 12, which
is a triple-storey excavation, has images of Tara,
Avalokiteshwara, Manushi Buddhas and the images of
Vairochana, Akshobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha,
Amoghsiddhi, Vajrasatva and Vajraraja. On the other hand,
the only double-storey cave of the Brahmanical faith is
Cave No. 14. Pillar designs grow from the Buddhist caves
and when they reach the Jain caves belonging to the ninth
century CE, they become very ornate and the decorative
forms gain heavy protrusion.
The Brahmanical cave Nos. 13–28 have many
sculptures. Many caves are dedicated to Shaivism, but
the images of both Shiva and Vishnu and their various
Gajasur Shiva, Cave No.15, Ellora
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
forms according to Puranic narrative are depicted. Among
the Shaivite themes, Ravana shaking Mount Kailash,
Andhakasurvadha, Kalyanasundara are profusely depicted
whereas among the Vaishnavite themes, the different
avatars of Vishnu are depicted. The sculptures at Ellora
are monumental, and have protruding volume that create
deep recession in the picture space. The images are heavy
and show considerable sophistication in the handling of
sculptural volume. Various guilds at Ellora came from
different places like Vidarbha, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu
and carved the sculptures. Thereby it is the most diverse
site in India in terms of the sculptural styles. Cave No. 16
is known as Kailash leni. A rock-cut temple has been carved
out of a single rock, a unique achievement of the artisans,
which will be discussed in the next chapter. Among the
important Shaivite caves are Cave No. 29 and Cave No. 21.
The plan of Cave No. 29 is almost like that of the main cave
at Elephanta. The sculptural quality of Cave Nos. 29, 21,
17, 14 and 16 is amazing for its monumentality and vigorous
movements in the picture space.
Elephanta Caves and Other Sites
The Elephanta Caves located near Mumbai, were originally
a Buddhist site which was later dominated by the Shaivite
faith. It is contemporary with Ellora, and its sculptures
show slenderness in the body, with stark light and dark
effects. The other noteworthy cave site is Bagh located
near Indore in Madhya Pradesh.
Entrance to Elephanta Caves
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
The tradition of rock-cut caves continued in the Deccan
and they are found not only in Maharashtra but also in
Karnataka, mainly at Badami and Aiholi, executed under
the patronage of the Chalukyas; in Andhra Pradesh in the
area of Vijayawada; and in Tamil Nadu, mainly at
Mahabalipuram, under the patronage of the Pallavas. The
post-sixth-century development of art history in the country
depended more on political patronage than the collective
public patronage of the early historic periods.
Mention may also be made of the terracotta figurines
that are found at many places all over the country. They
show a parallel tradition with the religious lithic sculptures
as well as the independent local tradition. Many terracotta
figures of various sizes are found which show their
popularity. They are toys, religious figurines as well as
figurines made for healing purposes as part of the belief
systems.
Cave Tradition in Eastern India
Like in western India, Buddhist caves have also been
excavated in eastern India, mainly in the coastal region of
Andhra Pradesh, and in Odisha. One of the main sites in
Andhra Pradesh is Guntapalle in Eluru district. The caves
have been excavated in the hills along with the structured
monasteries. Perhaps it is among the very unique sites
where the structured stupas, viharas and the caves are
excavated at one place. The Guntapalle chaitya cave is
circular with a stupa in the circular hall and a chaitya
arch carved at the entrance. The cave is relatively small
when compared to the caves in western India. A number
of vihara caves have been excavated. The main vihara caves,
despite the small dimensions, have been decorated with
Details of the veranda, Udaigiri-Khandagiri
Udaigiri-Khandagiri caves near Bhubaneswar
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
EXERCISE
1. Describe the physical and aesthetic features of Sanchi
Stupa-I.
2. Analyse the stylistic trends of the sculptures in North India
during the fifth and sixth centuries.
3. How did cave architecture develop in different parts of
India, from cave shelters to the monolitic temple at Ellora?
4. Why are the mural paintings of Ajanta renowned?
chaitya arches on the exterior. They are rectangular with
vaulted roof and are carved single-storeyed or double-
storeyed without a large central hall. These excavations
date back to the second century BCE. There are some
excavations which were added in the subsequent centuries
but all are of the vihara type. Apart from Guntapalle, the
other important cave site is Rampaerrampallam which has
very moderate small excavations but there are rock-cut
stupas on the hillock. At Anakapalli near Vishakhapatnam,
caves were excavated and a huge rock-cut stupa was carved
out of the hillock during the fourth–fifth centuries CE. It
is a unique site as it has the biggest rock-cut stupas in
the country. Many votive rock-cut stupas all around the
hillock have also been excavated.
The rock-cut cave tradition also existed in Odisha. The
earliest examples are the Udaigiri-Khandagiri caves in the
vicinity of Bhubaneswar. These caves are scattered and
have inscriptions of Kharavela kings. According to the
inscriptions, the caves were meant for Jain monks. There
are numerous single-cell excavations. Some have been
carved in huge independent boulders and given the shape
of animals. The big caves include a cave with a pillared
veranda with cells at the back. The upper part of the cells
is decorated with a series of chaitya arches and narratives
that still continue in the folklores of the region. The figures
in this cave are voluminous, move freely in the picture
space, and are an excellent example of qualitative carving.
Some caves in this complex were excavated later, some
time in the eighth–ninth centuries CE.
STUPA-1, SANCHI
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
Sanchi, about 50 km from Bhopal, the capital of Madhya Pradesh,
is a world heritage site. Along with other relatively small stupas,
there are three main stupas at Sanchi. Stupa-1 is presumed to have
the relics of the Buddha, Stupa-2, the relics of ten less famous arhats
belonging to three different generations. Their names are found on
the relic casket. Stupa-3 has the relics of Sariputta and
Mahamougalayana.
Stupa-1, known for the carvings on its gateways is one of the
finest examples of stupa architecture. Originally the stupa was a
small brick structure which expanded over a period and was covered
with stone, vedika and the torana (gateways). The Ashokan lion-
capital pillar with an inscription is found on the southern side of
the stupa, indicating how Sanchi became a centre of monastic and
artistic activities. The south gateway was made first followed by the
others. The pradakshinapath around the stupa is covered with the
vedika. There is also the upper pradakshinapath which is unique to
this site. The four gateways are decorated profusely with sculptures.
Buddha is shown symbolically as an empty throne, feet, chhatra,
stupas, etc. Toranas are constructed in all four directions. Their
stylistic differences indicate their possible chronology from the first
century BCE onwards. Though Stupa-1 is the oldest stupa, the
carving of images on the vedica of Stupa-2 are earlier than those on
Stupa-1. Jatakas also become an important part of the narratives
in stupas. The figures at Sanchi, despite being small in dimension,
show considerable mastery of sculpting. Their physiognomic
treatment of the body shows both depth and dimension which are
very naturalistic. There are guardian images on pillars and the
shalbhanjika (i.e., lady holding the branch of a tree) sculptures are
remarkable in their treatment of volume. The rigidity of the earlier
sculptures of Stupa-2 is no more there. Each torana consists of two
vertical pillars and three horizontal bars on the top. Each horizontal
bar is decorated with different sculptural themes on the front as
well as at the back. Supporting the extensions of the lowermost
horizontal bar from below are the images of shalbhanjikas.
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
SEATED BUDDHA, KATRA MOUND, MATHURA
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
Mathura was a great centre for making sculptures
during the early historic period and many images have
been found here. A large number of images dating
back to the Kushana Period is from Mathura. A
distinct way of sculpting practised at Mathura makes
the images found here different from those at other
centres in the country. The image of the Buddha from
the Katra mound belongs to the second century CE.
It represents the Buddha with two Boddhisattva
attendants. The Buddha is seated in padmasana
(cross-folded legs) and the right hand is in the
abhayamudra, raised a little above the shoulder level
whereas the left hand is placed on the left thigh. The
ushanisha, i.e., hair knot, is shown with a vertically
raised projection. Mathura sculptures from this period
are made with light volume having fleshy body. The
shoulders are broad. The sanghati (garment) covers
only one shoulder and has been made prominently
visible covering the left hand whereas while covering
the torso, the independent volume of the garment is
reduced to the body torso. The Buddha is seated on a
lion throne. The attendant figures are identified as
the images of the Padmapani and Vajrapani
Boddhisattvas as one holds a lotus and the other a
vajra (thunderbolt). They wear crowns and are on
either side of the Buddha. The halo around the head of the Buddha
is very large and is decorated with simple geometric motifs. There
are two flying figures placed diagonally above the halo. They bear a
lot of movement in the picture space. Flexibility replaces the earlier
rigidity in the images giving them a more earthy look. Curves of the
body are as delicately carved. The upright posture of the Buddha
image creates movement in space. The face is round with fleshy
cheeks. The bulge of the belly is sculpted with controlled
musculature. It may be noted that there are numerous examples of
sculptures from the Kushana Period at Mathura, but this image is
representative and is important for the understanding of the
development of the Buddha image in the subsequent periods.
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
BUDDHA HEAD, TAXILA
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
The Buddha head from Taxila in the Gandhara region, now in
Pakistan, dates back to the second century CE and belongs
to the Kushana Period. The image shows hybridised pictorial
conventions that developed during the Gandhara period.
It has Greco-Roman elements in the treatment of
sculpture. The Buddha head has typical Hellenistic
elements that have grown over a period of time. The
curly hair of the Buddha is thick having a covered
layer of sharp and linear strokes over the head.
The forehead plane is large having protruding
eyeballs, the eyes are half-closed and the face
and cheeks are not round like the images found
in other parts of India. There is a certain amount
of heaviness in the figures of the Gandhara
region. The ears are elongated especially the
earlobes. The treatment of the form bears linearity
and the outlines are sharp. The surface is
smooth. The image is very expressive. The
interplay of light and dark is given
considerable attention by using the curving
and protruding planes of the eye-socket and
the planes of the nose. The expression of
calmness is the centre point of attraction.
Modelling of the face enhances the naturalism
of three-dimensionality. Assimilating various
traits of Acamenian, Parthian and Bactrian
traditions into the local tradition is a hallmark
of the Gandhara style. The Gandhara images
have physiognomic features of the Greco-Roman tradition
but they display a very distinct way of treating physiognomic
details that are not completely Greco-Roman. The source of
development of Buddha images as well as others has its
genesis in its peculiar geo-political conditions. It may also
be observed that the north-western part of India, which is
now Pakistan, always had continuous habitation from proto-
historic times. It continued in the historical period as well.
A large number of images have been found in the Gandhara
region. They consist of narratives of the life of the Buddha,
narrations from the Jataka stories, and Buddha and
Boddhisattva images.
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
SEATED BUDDHA, SARNATH
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
This image of the Buddha from Sarnath belonging to the late fifth
century CE is housed in the site museum at Sarnath. It has been
made in Chunar sandstone. The Buddha is shown seated on a
throne in the padmasana. It represents dhammachackrapravartana
as can be seen from the figures on the throne. The panel below the
throne depicts a chakra (wheel) in the centre and a deer on either
side with his disciples. Thus, it is the representation of the historical
event of dhammachakrapravartana or the preaching of the dhamma.
This Buddha image is a fine example of  the Sarnath school of
sculpture. The body is slender and well-proportioned but slightly
elongated. The outlines are delicate, very rhythmic. Folded legs are
expanded in order to create a visual balance in the picture space.
Drapery clings to the body and is transparent to create the effect of
integrated volume. The face is round, the eyes are half-closed, the
lower lip is protruding, and the
roundness of the cheeks has
reduced as compared to the earlier
images from the Kushana Period
at Mathura. The hands are shown
in dhammachakrapravartana
mudra placed just below the chest.
the neck is slightly elongated with
two incised lines indicating folds.
The ushanisha has circular curled
hairs. The aim of the sculptors in ancient India had always been to
represent the Buddha as a great human being who achieved nibbana
(i.e., cessation of anger and hate). The back of the throne is profusely
decorated with different motifs of flowers and creepers placed in a
concentric circle. The central part of the halo is plain without any
decoration. It makes the halo visually impressive. Decoration in halo
and the back of the throne indicates the artisan’s sensitivity.
Sarnath Buddha images of this period show considerable softness
in the treatment of the surface and volume. Transparent drapery
becomes part of the physical body. Such refinement comes over a
period of time and these features continued in subsequent periods.
There are many other Buddha images in the standing position
from Sarnath having features like transparent drapery, subtle
movement, carved separately and
placed about the memorial stupas
around the Dharmarajika Stupa. These
images are now preserved in the
Sarnath Museum. They are either
single or with the attendant figures of
Boddhisattvas, Padmapani and
Vajrapani.
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
PADMAPANI BODDHISATTVA
AJANTA CAVE NO. 1
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
This painting on the back wall of the interior
hall before the shrine-antechamber in Cave No. 1
at Ajanta dates back to the late fifth century
CE. The Boddhisattva is holding a padma (lotus),
has large shoulders, and has three bents in the
body creating a movement in the picture space.
The modelling is soft. Outlines are merged with
the body volume creating the effect of three-
dimensionality. The figure of the Boddhisattva
is wearing a big crown in which detailed
rendering is visible. The head is slightly bent to
the left. The eyes are half-closed and are slightly
elongated. The nose is sharp and straight. Light
colour all over the projected planes of the face
is aimed at creating an effect of three-
dimensionality. The beaded necklace too has
similar features. Broad and expanded
shoulders create heaviness in the body. The
torso is relatively round. Lines are delicate,
rhythmic, and define the contours of the body. The right hand is
holding a lotus and the left hand is extended in the space. The
Boddhisattva is surrounded by small figures. The foreshortened right
hand of the Boddhisattva makes the image more solid, and effectively
dense. The thread over the torso is shown with fine spiral lines
indicating its dimensions. Each and every part of the body is given
equal attention. Light red, brown, green and blue colours are used.
Nose projections, incised end of lips with lower lip projection and
small chin contribute to the overall effect of solidity in the figure
composition. The paintings in Cave No.1 are of good quality and are
better preserved. One can observe certain typological and stylistic
variations in the paintings of Ajanta indicating different guilds of
artisans working on the cave paintings at Ajanta over the centuries.
On the other side of the image Vajrapani Bodhisattva has been
painted. He holds a vajra in his right hand and wears a crown. This
image also bears the same pictorial qualities as the Padmapani.
Cave No. 1 has many interesting paintings
of Buddhist themes such as Mahajanak
Jataka, Umag Jataka, etc. The Mahajanak
Jataka is painted on the entire wall side and
is the biggest narrative painting. It may be
observed that the paintings of Padmapani
and Vajrapani and the Bodhisattvas are
painted as shrine guardians. Similar such
iconographic arrangement is also observed
in other caves of Ajanta. However
Padmapani and Vajrapani in Cave No. 1 are
among the best survived paintings of Ajanta.
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
Ajanta Cave No. 2
Painting of Mahajanak Jataka,
Ajanta Cave No. 1
MARA VIJAYA, AJANTA CAVE NO. 26
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
The theme of Mara Vijaya has been painted
in the caves of  Ajanta. This is the only
sculptural representation sculpted on the
right wall of Cave No. 26. It is sculpted near
colossal
Buddha
image
Mahaparinibbana. The panel shows the
image of the Buddha in the centre
surrounded by Mara’s army along with his
daughter. The event is part of the
enlightenment. It is a personification of the
commotion of mind which the Buddha
through
enlightenment. Mara represents  desire.
According to the narrative, there is a
dialogue between the Buddha and Mara,
and the Buddha is shown with his right hand indicating towards
earth as a witness to his generosity. This relief sculptural panel is
highly animated and shows a very matured sculptural style at
Ajanta. The composition is very complex with  highly voluminous
images. Their complex arrangement in the picture space is highly
dynamic and generates considerable movement. The figure on the
right shows Mara coming with his army consisting of various kinds
of people including some with grotesque animal faces. The dancing
figures at the lower base with the musicians have forward bulging
waist, and one of the dancing figures has expanded her hands in
the dancing posture with an angular frontal look. On the left lower
end, the image of Mara is shown contemplating how to disturb
Siddhartha, the name of the Buddha before enlightenment. The
army of Mara is shown marching towards the Buddha in the first
half of the panel whereas the lower half of the panel shows the
departing army of Mara giving him adorations. The centrally placed
Buddha is in padmasana and a tree at the back is shown by dense
leaves. Some of the facial features of the Mara army has tacit
characters of the sculptures from
Vidarbha. The artisans at Ajanta worked
in guilds and their stylistic affiliations can
be traced by identifying such stylistic
features. This is the largest sculptural
panel at Ajanta. Though there are several
big images in the caves of Ajanta and
especially located in the shrine-
antechamber as well as facade walls, such
a complex arrangement of figures is
unique. On the other hand, painted panels
exhibit such complexities in their
arrangement. A similar kind of
arrangement of dancing figures in a panel
is also observed at the Aurangabad caves.
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
MAHESHMURTI, ELEPHANTA
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
The image of Maheshmurti at Elephanta dates back to the early
sixth century CE. It is located in the main cave shrine. In the
tradition of western Deccan sculpting it is one of the best
examples of qualitative achievement in sculpting images in rock-
cut caves. The image is large in size. The central head is the
main Shiva figure whereas the other two visible heads are of
Bhairava and Uma. The central face is in high relief having a
round face, thick lips and heavy eyelids. The lower lip is
prominently protruded showing a very different characteristic.
The all-inclusive aspect of Shiva is exhibited in this sculpture
by soft-modelling, smooth surface and large face. The face of
Shiva-Bhairava is clearly shown in profile in anger with bulging
eye and mustache. The other face showing feminine characters
is of Uma who is the consort of Shiva. One of the shilpa texts
mentions five integrated faces of Shiva and this image, despite
being shown with only three faces, is considered as of the same
variety and the top and back faces are deemed as invisible. Each
face has a different crown as per its iconographic prescription.
This sculpture has been sculpted on the south wall of the cave
along with the sculpture of Ardhanarishwara and the
Gangadhara panel. Elephanta sculptures are known for their
remarkable qualities of surface smoothness, elongation and
rhythmic movement. Their composition is very complex. The
iconographic arrangement of this cave is replicated in Cave No.
29 at Ellora.
POST-MAURYAN TRENDS IN INDIAN ART AND ARCHITECTURE
MURAL TRADITIONS OF INDIA
A. Anantha from Ananthapadmanabh
Temple, Kasarghod
B. Shiva chasing the boar—a scene from
Kiratarjuniya, Lepaksh temple
C. Chola king Rajaraja and court poet
Karuvar Dever, Thanjavoor, eleventh
century
D. Shiva killing Tripuraasura, Thanjavoor
E. Rama kills Ravana, a scene from
Ramayana panel, Mattancheri Palace
F. Shasta, Padmanabhapuram Palace,
Thakkala
VEN after Ajanta, very few sites with paintings have
survived which provide valuable evidences to
reconstruct the tradition of paintings. It may also be noted
that the sculptures too were plastered and painted. The
tradition of cave excavations continued further at many
places where sculpting and painting were done
simultaneously.
Badami
One such site is Badami in the State of Karnataka. Badami
was the capital of the western Chalukyan dynasty which
ruled the region from 543 to 598 CE. With
the decline of the Vakataka rule, the
Chalukyas established their power in the
Deccan. The Chalukya king, Mangalesha,
patronised the excavation of the Badami
caves. He was the younger son of the
Chalukya king, Pulakesi I, and the brother
of Kirtivarman I. The inscription in Cave No.4
mentions the date 578–579 CE, describes the
beauty of the cave and includes the dedication
of the image of Vishnu. Thus it may be
presumed that the cave was excavated in the
same era and the patron records his
Vaishnava affiliation. Therefore, the cave is
popularly known as the Vishnu Cave. Only a
fragment of the painting has survived on the
vaulted roof of the front mandapa.
Paintings in this cave depict palace
scenes. One shows Kirtivarman, the son of
Pulakesi I and the elder brother of
Mangalesha, seated inside the palace with
his wife and feudatories watching a dance
scene. Towards the corner of the panel are
figures of Indra and his retinue. Stylistically
speaking, the painting represents an
LATER MURAL
TRADITIONS
Queen and
attendants, Badami
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
extension of the tradition of mural painting from Ajanta to
Badami in South India. The sinuously drawn lines, fluid
forms and compact composition exemplify the proficiency
and maturity the artists had achieved in the sixth century
CE. The gracefully drawn faces of the king and the queen
remind us of the style of modelling in Ajanta. Their eye-
sockets are large, eyes are half-closed, and lips are
protruding. It is noteworthy to observe that the contours
of different parts of the face create protruding structures
of the face itself. Thus, with simple line treatment artists
could create volume.
Murals under the Pallava, Pandava and
Chola Kings
The tradition of painting extended further down south in
Tamil Nadu in the preceding centuries with regional
variations during the regimes of Pallava, Pandya and Chola
dynasties. The Pallava kings who succeeded the Chalukya
kings in parts of South India, were also patrons of arts.
Mahendravarma I who ruled in the seventh century was
responsible for building temples at Panamalai,
Mandagapattu and Kanchipuram. The inscription at
Mandagapattu mentions Mahendravarman I with
numerous  titles such as Vichitrachitta (curious-minded),
Sittanvasal — early Pandya period, ninth century CE
LATER MURAL TRADITIONS
Chitrakarapuli (tiger among artists), Chaityakari (temple
builder), which show his interest in art activities. The
paintings in these temples too were done at his initiative,
though only fragments remain. The Panamalai figure of a
female divinity is drawn gracefully. Paintings at the
Kanchipuram temple were patronised by the Pallava king,
Rajsimha. Only traces of paintings  remain now which
depict Somaskanda. Faces are round and large. Lines are
rhythmic with increased ornamentation when compared
with the paintings of an earlier periods. Depiction of torso
still remains like the earlier sculptural tradition but is
elongated.
When the Pandyas rose to power, they too patronised
art. Tirumalaipuram caves and Jaina caves at Sittanvasal
are some of the surviving examples. A few fragmented
layers of paintings can be seen in Tirumalaipuram. In
Sittanavasal, the paintings are visible on the ceilings of
shrines, in verandas, and on the brackets.
On the pillars of the veranda are seen dancing figures
of celestial nymphs. The contours of figures are firmly
drawn and painted in vermilion red on a lighter
background. The body is rendered in yellow with subtle
modelling. Supple limbs, expression on the faces of dancers,
rhythm in their swaying movement, all speak of the artists’
skill in creative imagination in visualising the forms in
Devi — seventh century CE, Panamalai
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
the architectural context. Their eyes are slightly elongated
and at times protrude off the face. This feature is observed
in many subsequent paintings in the Deccan and South
India.
The tradition of building temples and embellishing them
with carvings and paintings continued during the reign of
the Chola  kings who ruled over the region from the ninth
to the thirteenth century. But it was in the eleventh
century, when the Cholas reached their zenith of power,
that masterpieces of Chola art and architecture began to
appear. The temples of Brihadeswara at Thanjavur,
Gangaikonda Cholapuram and Darasuram were built
during the reigns of Rajaraja Chola and his son, Rajendra
Chola.
Though Chola paintings are seen in Nartamalai, the
most important are those in Brihadeswara temple. The
paintings were executed on the walls of the narrow passage
surrounding the shrine. Two layers of paint were found
when they were discovered. The upper layer was painted
during the Nayak period, in the sixteenth century. Thanks
to the cleaning of the surface painting, examples of the
great tradition of painting during the Chola Period were
unveiled. The paintings show narrations and aspects
related to Lord Shiva, Shiva in Kailash, Shiva as
Tripurantaka, Shiva as Nataraja, a portrait of the patron
Rajaraja and his mentor Kuruvar, dancing figures, etc.
Vijayanagara Murals
The paintings of Brihadeswara temple exemplify the
stylistic maturity the artists evolved over the years.  Sinuous
pre-determined flow of lines, supple modelling of figures,
Dakshinamurty, Vijayanagar, Lepakshi
LATER MURAL TRADITIONS
elongation of the physiognomic features of human figures—
all these represent the perfection the Chola artist had
achieved during the period on the one hand and the phase
of transition on the other. With the decline of power of the
Chola dynasty in the thirteenth century, the Vijayanagara
Dynasty captured and brought under its control the region
from Hampi to Trichy with Hampi serving as its capital.
Many paintings survive in a number of temples. The
paintings at Tiruparakunram, near Trichy, done in the
fourteenth century represent the early phase of the
Vijayanagara style. In Hampi, the Virupaksha temple has
paintings on the ceiling of its mandapa narrating events
from dynastic history and episodes from the Ramayana
and the Mahabharata. Among the important panels are the
ones which show Vidyaranya, the spiritual teacher of
Bukkaraya Harsha, being carried in a palanquin in a
procession and the incarnations of Vishnu. The faces of
the figures are shown in profile, with large frontal eyes.
The figures have narrow waists.
In Lepakshi, near Hindupur, in present Andhra Pradesh,
there are glorious examples of Vijayanagara paintings on
the walls of the Shiva temple.
In keeping with the tradition, the Vijayanagara painters
evolved a pictorial language wherein the faces are shown
in profile and figures and objects two-dimensionally. Lines
become still but fluid, compositions appear in rectilinear
compartments. These stylistic conventions of the preceding
centuries were adopted by artists in various centres in
South India as can be seen in the paintings of the Nayaka
Period.
Nayaka paintings of the seventeenth and eigtheenth
centuries are seen in Thiruparakunram, Sreerangam and
Ladies attending Parvati, Virbhadra Temple, Lepakshi
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
Tiruvarur. In Thiruparakunram, paintings are found of two
different periods—of the fourteenth and the seventeenth
century. Early paintings depict scenes from the life of
Vardhaman Mahavira.
The Nayaka paintings depict episodes from the
Mahabharata and the Ramayana and also scenes from
Krishna-leela. In Tiruvarur, there is a panel narrating the
story of Muchukunda. In Chidambaram there are panels of
paintings narrating stories related to Shiva and Vishnu—
Shiva as bhikshatana murti, Vishnu as Mohini, etc.
In the Sri Krishna temple at Chengam in Arcot District
there are sixty panels narrating the story of the Ramayana
which represent the late phase of Nayaka paintings.
The examples cited above suggest that Nayaka paintings
were more or less an extension of the Vijayanagara style
with minor regional modifications and incorporations. The
figures, mostly in profile, are set against a flat background.
Male figures are shown slim-waisted but with less heavy
abdoman as compared to those in Vijayanagara. The artist,
as in the previous centuries and following traditions, has
tried to infuse movement and make the space dynamic.
The painting of Nataraja at Tiruvalanjuli is a good example.
Kerala Murals
Kerala painters (during the period from the sixteenth to
the eighteenth century) evolved a pictorial language and
technique of their own while discriminately adopting
certain stylistic elements from Nayaka and Vijayanagara
schools. The painters evolved a language taking cues from
contemporary traditions like Kathakali and kalam ezhuthu
using vibrant and luminous colours, representing human
Venugopal, Shri Rama Temple, Triprayar
LATER MURAL TRADITIONS
EXERCISE
1. What are the main features of Badami cave paintings?
2. Write an essay on Vijayanagara paintings.
3. Describe the mural traditions of Kerala and Tamil Nadu.
Krishna playing flute,
accompanied by  Gopikas,
Krishna temple,
Pundareekapuram
figures in three-dimensionality. Most of the
paintings are seen on the walls of shrines
and cloister walls of temples and some inside
palaces. Thematically too, paintings from
Kerala stand apart. Most of the narrations
are based on those episodes from Hindu
mythology which were popular in Kerala. The
artist seems to have derived sources from
oral traditions and local versions of the
Ramayana and the Mahabharata for painted
narration.
More than sixty sites have been found
with mural paintings which include three
palaces—Dutch
palace
Kochi,
Krishnapuram palace in Kayamkulam and
Padmanabhapuram palace. Among the sites
where one can see the mature phase of
Kerala’s mural painting tradition are
Pundareekapuram
Krishna
temple,
Panayanarkavu, Thirukodithanam, Triprayar
temple
Trissur
Vadakkunathan temple.
Even today we observe that mural
painting on interior and exterior walls of
houses in villages or havelis is prevalent in
different parts of the country. These paintings are usually
made by women either at the time of ceremonies or festivals
or as a routine to clean and decorate the walls. Some of
the traditional forms of murals are pithoro in parts of
Rajasthan and Gujarat, Mithila painting in northern
Bihar’s Mithila region, warli paintings in Maharashtra, or
simply paintings on the walls, be it in a village of Odisha
or Bengal, Madhya Pradesh or Chhattisgarh.
Temple architecture in India
(Outline map not to scale)
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE
AND SCULPTURE6
Today when we say 'temple'
in English we generally
mean a devalaya, devkula
mandir, kovil, deol,
devasthanam or prasada
depending on which part of
India we are in.
Kandariya Mahadeo temple,
Khajuraho
OST of the art and architectural remains that survive
from Ancient and Medieval India are religious in
nature. That does not mean that people did not have art in
their homes at those times, but domestic dwellings and
the things in them were mostly made from materials like
wood and clay which have perished, or were made of metal
(like iron, bronze, silver and even gold) which was melted
down and reused from time to time. This chapter introduces
us to many types of temples from India. Although we have
focussed mostly on Hindu temples, at the end of the chapter
you will find some information on major Buddhist and Jain
temples too. However, at all times, we must keep in mind
that religious shrines were also made for many local cults
in villages and forest areas, but again, not being of stone
the ancient or medieval shrines in those areas have also
vanished.
THE BASIC FORM OF THE HINDU TEMPLE
The basic form of the Hindu temple comprises the following:
(i) a cave-like sanctum (garbhagriha literally ‘womb-house’),
which, in the early temples, was a small cubicle with a
single entrance and grew into a larger chamber in time.
The garbhagriha is made to house the main icon which is
itself the focus of much ritual attention; (ii) the entrance
to the temple which may be a portico or colonnaded hall
that incorporates space for a large number of worshippers
and is known as a mandapa; (iii) from the fifth century CE
onwards, freestanding temples tend to have a mountain-
like spire, which can take the shape of a curving shikhar
in North India and a pyramidal tower, called a vimana, in
South India; (iv) the vahan, i.e., the mount or vehicle of
the temple’s main deity along with a standard pillar or
dhvaj is placed axially before the sanctum. Two broad orders
of temples in the country are known— Nagara in the north
and Dravida in the south. At times, the Vesar style of
temples as an independent style created through the selective
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
Kalasha
Amalaka
Garbhagriha
Pitha
Shikhara
Nagara temple
mixing of the Nagara and Dravida orders is mentioned by
some scholars. Elaborate studies are available on the
various sub-styles within these orders. We will look into
the differences in the forms further on in this chapter. As
temples grew more complex, more surfaces were created
for sculpture through additive geometry, i.e., by adding
more and more rhythmically projecting, symmetrical walls
and niches, without breaking away from the fundamental
plan of the shrine.
SCULPTURE, ICONOGRAPHY AND ORNAMENTATION
The study of images of deities falls within a branch of art
history called ‘iconography’, which consists of identification
of images based on certain symbols and mythologies
associated with them. And very often, while the
fundamental myth and meaning of the deity may remain
the same for centuries, its specific usage at a spot can be
a response to its local or immediate social, political or
geographical context.
Every region and period produced its own distinct style
of images with its regional variations in iconography. The
temple is covered with elaborate sculpture and ornament
that form a fundamental part of its conception. The
placement of an image in a temple is carefully planned:
for instance, river goddesses (Ganga and Yamuna) are
usually found at the entrance of a garbhagriha in a Nagara
temple, dvarapalas (doorkeepers) are usually found on the
gateways or gopurams of Dravida temples, similarly,
mithunas (erotic images), navagrahas (the nine auspicious
planets) and yakshas are also placed at entrances to guard
them. Various forms or aspects of the main divinity are to
be found on the outer walls of the sanctum. The deities of
directions, i.e., the ashtadikpalas face the eight key
directions on the outer walls of the sanctum and/or on
the outer walls of a temple. Subsidiary shrines around the
main temple are dedicated to the family or incarnations of
the main deity. Finally, various elements of ornamentation
such as gavaksha, vyala/yali, kalpa-lata, amalaka, kalasha,
etc. are used in distinct ways and places in a temple.
THE NAGARA OR NORTH INDIAN TEMPLE STYLE
The style of temple architecture that became popular in
northern India is known as nagara. In North India it is
common for an entire temple to be built on a stone platform
with steps leading up to it. Further, unlike in South India
it does not usually have elaborate boundary walls or
gateways. While the earliest temples had just one tower, or
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
shikhara, later temples had several. The garbhagriha is
always located directly under the tallest tower.
There are many subdivisions of nagara temples
depending on the shape of the shikhara. There are different
names for the various parts of the temple in different parts
of India; however, the most common name for the simple
shikhara which is square at the base and whose walls
curve or slope inward to a point on top is called the 'latina'
or the rekha-prasada type of shikara.
The second major type of architectural form in the nagara
order is the phamsana. Phamsana buildings tend to be
broader and shorter than latina ones. Their roofs are
composed of several slabs that gently rise to a single point
over the centre of the building, unlike the latina ones which
look like sharply rising tall towers. Phamsana roofs do not
curve inward, instead they slope upwards on a straight
incline. In many North Indian temples you will notice that
the phamsana design is used for the mandapas while the
main garbhagriha is housed in a latina building. Later on,
the latina buildings grew complex, and instead of appearing
like a single tall tower, the temple began to support many
smaller towers, which were clustered together like rising
mountain-peaks with the tallest one being in the centre,
and this was the one which was always above the
garbhagriha.
The third main sub-type of the nagara building is what
is generally called the valabhi type. These are rectangular
buildings with a roof that rises into a vaulted chamber.
Sun temple, Konark
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
The edge of this vaulted chamber is rounded, like the
bamboo or wooden wagons that would have been drawn by
bullocks in ancient times. They are usually called ‘wagon-
vaulted buildings’. As mentioned above, the form of the
temple is influenced by ancient building forms that were
already in existence before the fifth century CE. The valabhi
type of building was one of them. For instance, if you study
the ground-plan of many of the Buddhist rock-cut chaitya
caves, you will notice that they are shaped as long halls
which end in a curved back. From the inside, the roof of
this portion also looks like a wagon-vaulted roof.
Central India
Ancient temples of Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and
Rajasthan share many traits. The most visible is that they
are made of sandstone. Some of the oldest surviving
structural temples from the Gupta Period are in Madhya
Pradesh. These are relatively modest-looking shrines each
having four pillars that support a small mandapa which
looks like a simple square porch-like extension before an
equally small room that served as the garbhagriha.
Importantly, of the two such temples that survive, one is
at Udaigiri, which is on the outskirts of Vidisha and is
part of a larger Hindu complex of cave shrines, while the
other one is at Sanchi, which was a Buddhist site. This
means that similar developments were being incorporated
in the architecture of temples of both the religions.
The patrons and donors of the temple at Deogarh (in
Lalitpur District, Uttar Pradesh) are unknown; however
on the basis of both architecture and imagery, it is
Sheshashayana Vishnu, Dashavatara temple, Deogarh
Dashavtara Vishnu
temple, Deogarh,
fifth century CE
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
established that this temple was built in the early sixth
century CE. That is, about a hundred years or so after the
small temples we just learnt about in Sanchi and Udaigiri.
This makes it a classic example of a late Gupta Period
type of temple. This temple is in the panchayatana style of
architecture where the main shrine is built on a rectangular
plinth with four smaller subsidiary shrines at the four
corners (making it a total number of five shrines, hence
the name, panchayatana). The tall and curvilinear shikhara
also corroborates this date. The presence of this curving latina
or rekha-prasada type of shikhara also makes it clear that
this is an early example of a classic nagara style of temple.
Sheshashayana is the form of Vishnu where he is
shown reclining on the sheshanaga called Ananta.
Nara-Narayan shows the discussion between the
human soul and the eternal divine. Gajendramoksha
is the story of achieving moksha, symbolically
communicated by Vishnu’s suppression of an asura
who had taken the form of an elephant.
This west-facing temple has a grand doorway with
standing sculptures of female figures representing the
Ganga on the left side and the Yamuna on the right side.
The temple depicts Vishnu in various forms, due to which
it was assumed that the four subsidiary shrines must also
have housed Vishnu’s avatars and the temple was mistaken
for a dasavatara temple. In fact, it is
not actually known to whom the four
subsidiary shrines were originally
dedicated. There are three main
reliefs of Vishnu on the temple walls:
Sheshashayana on the south, Nara-
Narayan
Gajendramoksha on the west. The
temple is west-facing, which is less
common, as most temples are east- or
north-facing.
Numerous temples of smaller
dimensions have been constructed
over a period of time. By contrast, if
we study the temples of Khajuraho
made in the tenth century, i.e., about
four hundred years after the temple
at Deogarh, we can see how
dramatically the shape and style of
the nagara temple architecture had
developed.
Vishwanatha temple,
Khajuraho
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
The Lakshmana temple dedicated to Vishnu is the
grandest temple of Khajuraho, built in 954 by the Chandela
king, Dhanga. A nagara temple, it is placed on a high
platform accessed by stairs. There are four smaller temples
in the corners, and all the towers or shikharas rise high,
upward in a curved pyramidal fashion, emphasising the
temple’s vertical thrust ending in a horizontal fluted disc
called an amalak topped with a kalash or vase. The crowning
elements: amalak and kalash, are to be found on all nagara
temples of this period. The temple also has projecting
balconies and verandahs, thus very different from
Deogarh.
Khajuraho’s temples are also known for their extensive
erotic sculptures; the erotic expression is given equal
importance in human experience as spiritual pursuit, and
it is seen as part of a larger cosmic whole. Many Hindu
temples therefore feature mithun (embracing couple)
sculptures, considered auspicious. Usually, they are placed
at the entrance of the temple or on an exterior wall or
they may also be placed on the walls between the mandapa
and the main shrine. Khajuraho’s sculptures are highly
stylised with typical features: they are in almost full relief,
cut away from the surrounding stone, with sharp noses,
prominent chins, long slanting eyes and eyebrows. The
other notable example at Khajuraho is Kandariya Mahadeo
temple dedicated to Lord Shiva.
There are many temples at Khajuraho, most of them
devoted to Hindu gods. There are some Jain temples as
well as a Chausanth Yogini temple, which is of interest.
Predating the tenth  century, this is a temple of small,
square shrines of roughly-hewn granite blocks, each
dedicated to esoteric devis or goddesses associated with
the rise of Tantric worship after the seventh century. Several
such temples were dedicated to the cult of the yoginis across
Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and even as far south as Tamil
Nadu. They were built between the seventh and tenth
centuries, but few have survived.
Dance class, Laxman Temple,
Khajuraho
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
West India
The temples in the north-western parts of India including
Gujarat and Rajasthan, and stylistically extendable, at
times, to western Madhya Pradesh are too numerous to
include here in any comprehensive way. The stone used to
build the temples ranges in colour and type. While
sandstone is the commonest, a grey to black basalt can be
seen in some of the tenth to twelveth century temple
sculptures. The most exuberant and famed is the
manipulatable soft white marble which is also seen in some
of the tenth to twelveth century Jain temples in Mount
Abu and the fifteenth century temple at Ranakpur.
Among the most important art-historical sites
in the region is Samlaji in Gujarat which shows
how earlier artistic traditions of the region mixed
with a post-Gupta style and gave rise to a distinct
style of sculpture. A large number of sculptures
made of grey schist have been found in this region
which can be dated between the sixth and eighth
centuries CE. While the patronage of these is
debated, the date is established on the basis of
the style.
The Sun temple at Modhera dates back to early
eleventh century and was built by Raja Bhimdev I
of the Solanki Dynasty in 1026. The Solankis were
a branch of the later Chalukyas. There is a
massive rectangular stepped tank called the surya
kund in front of it. Proximity of sacred architecture
to a water body such as a tank, a river or a pond
has been noticed right from the earliest times.
By the early eleventh century they had become a
Sun temple, Modhera, Gujarat
Sun temple, Modhera, Gujarat
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
part of many temples. This hundred-square-metre
rectangular pond is perhaps the grandest temple tank in
India. A hundred and eight miniature shrines are carved
in between the steps inside the tank. A huge ornamental
arch-torana leads one to the sabha mandapa (the assembly
hall) which is open on all sides, as was the fashion of the
times in western and central Indian temples.
The influence of the woodcarving tradition of Gujarat is
evident in the lavish carving and sculpture work. However,
the walls of the central small shrine are devoid of carving
and are left plain as the temple faces the east and, every
year, at the time of the equinoxes, the sun shines directly
into this central shrine.
East India
Eastern Indian temples include those found in the North-
East, Bengal and Odisha. Each of these three areas
produced distinct types of temples. The history of
architecture in the North-East and Bengal is hard to study
because a number of ancient buildings in those regions
were renovated, and what survives now are later brick or
concrete temples at those sites. It appears that terracotta
was the main medium of construction, and also for
moulding plaques which depicted Buddhist and Hindu
deities in Bengal until the seventh century. A large number
of sculptures have been found in Assam and Bengal which
shows the development of important regional schools in
those regions.
Assam: An old sixth-century sculpted door frame from
DaParvatia near Tezpur and another few stray sculptures
Temple, Sibsagar, Assam
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
Terracotta temple, Vishnupur
from Rangagora Tea Estate near Tinsukia in Assam bear
witness to the import of the Gupta idiom in that region.
This post-Gupta style continued in the region well into
the tenth century. However, by the twelfth to fourteenth
centuries, a distinct regional style developed in Assam.
The style that came with the migration of the Tais from
Upper Burma mixed with the dominant Pala style of Bengal
and led to the creation of what was later known as the
Ahom style in and around Guwahati. Kamakhya temple, a
Shakti Peeth, is dedicated to Goddess Kamakhya and was
built in the seventeenth century.
Bengal: The style of the sculptures during the period
between the ninth and eleventh centuries in Bengal
(including Bangladesh) and Bihar is known as the Pala
style, named after the ruling dynasty at the time, while
the style of those of the mid-eleventh to mid-thirteenth
centuries is named after the Sena kings. While the Palas
are celebrated as patrons of many Buddhist monastic sites,
the temples from that region are known to express the
local Vanga style. The ninth century Siddheshvara
Mahadeva temple in Barakar in Burdwan District, for
example, shows a tall curving shikhara crowned by a large
amalaka and is an example of the early Pala style. It is
similar to contemporaneous temples of Odisha. This basic
form grows loftier with the passing of centuries. Many of
the temples from the ninth to the twelfth century were
located at Telkupi in Purulia District. They were submerged
when dams were built in the region. These were amongst
the important examples of architectural styles prevalent
in the region which showed an awareness of all the known
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
Sun temple, Konark
nagara sub-types that were prevalent in the rest of North
India. However, several temples still survive in Purulia
District which can be dated to this period. The black to
grey basalt and chlorite stone pillars and arched niches
of these temples heavily influenced the earliest Bengal
sultanate buildings at Gaur and Pandua. Many local
vernacular building traditions of Bengal also influenced
the style of temples in that region. Most prominent of these
was the shape of the curving or sloping side of the bamboo
roof of a Bengali hut. This feature was eventually even
adopted in Mughal buildings, and is known across North
India as the Bangla roof. In the Mughal period and later,
scores of terracotta brick temples were built across Bengal
and Bangladesh in a unique style that had elements of
local building techniques seen in bamboo huts which were
combined with older forms reminiscent of the Pala period
and with the forms of arches and domes that were taken
from Islamic architecture. These can be widely found in and
around Vishnupur, Bankura, Burdwan and Birbhum and
are dated mostly to the seventeenth century.
Odisha: The main architectural features of Odisha temples
are classified in three orders, i.e., rekhapida, pidhadeul
and khakra. Most of the main temple sites are located in
ancient Kalinga—modern Puri District, including
Bhubaneswar or ancient Tribhuvanesvara, Puri and
Konark. The temples of Odisha constitute a distinct sub-
style within the nagara order. In general, here the shikhara,
called deul in Odisha, is vertical almost until the top when
it suddenly curves sharply inwards. Deuls are preceded,
as usual, by mandapas called jagamohana in Odisha. The
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
ground plan of the main temple is almost always square,
which, in the upper reaches of its superstructure becomes
circular in the crowning mastaka. This makes the spire
nearly cylindrical in appearance in its length.
Compartments and niches are generally square, the
exterior of the temples are lavishly carved, their interiors
generally quite bare. Odisha temples usually have
boundary walls.
At Konark, on the shores of the Bay of Bengal, lie the
majestic ruins of the Surya or Sun temple built in stone
around 1240. Its shikhara was a colossal creation said to
have reached 70m, which, proving too heavy for its site,
fell in the nineteenth century. The vast complex is within
a quadrilateral precinct of which the jagamohana or the
dance-pavillion (mandapa) has survived, which though no
longer accessible is said to be the largest enclosed space
in Hindu architecture.
The Sun temple is set on a high base, its walls covered
in extensive, detailed ornamental carving. These include
twelve pairs of enormous wheels sculpted with spokes and
hubs, representing the chariot wheels of the Sun god who,
in mythology, rides a chariot driven by eight horses,
sculpted here at the entrance staircase. The whole temple
thus comes to resemble a colossal processional chariot.
Jagannath temple, Puri
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
On the southern wall is a massive sculpture of surya carved
out of green stone. It is said that there were three such
images, each carved out of a different stone placed on the
three temple walls, each facing different directions. The
fourth wall had the doorway into the temple from where
the actual rays of the sun would enter the garbhagriha.
The Hills
A unique form of architecture developed in the hills of
Kumaon, Garhwal, Himachal and Kashmir. Kashmir’s
proximity to prominent Gandhara sites (such as Taxila,
Peshawar and the northwest frontier) lent the region a
strong Gandhara influence by the fifth century CE. This
began to mix with the Gupta and post-Gupta traditions
that were brought to it from Sarnath, Mathura and even
centres in Gujarat and Bengal. Brahmin pundits and
Buddhist monks frequently travelled between Kashmir,
Garhwal, Kumaon and religious centres in the plains like
Banaras, Nalanda and even as far south as Kanchipuram.
As a result both Buddhist and Hindu traditions began to
intermingle and spread in the hills. The hills also had
their own tradition of wooden buildings with pitched roofs.
At several places in the hills, therefore, you will find that
while the main garbhagriha and shikhara are made in a
rekha-prasada or latina style, the mandapa is of an older
form of wooden architecture. Sometimes, the temple itself
takes on a pagoda shape.
The Karkota period of Kashmir is the most significant
in terms of architecture. One of the most important temples
is Pandrethan, built during the eighth and ninth centuries.
In keeping with the tradition of a water tank attached to
the shrine, this temple is built on a plinth built in the
Temple, Himachal Pradesh
Temple complexes in Hills
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
middle of a tank. Although there are evidences of both
Hindu and Buddhist followings in Kashmir, this temple is
a Hindu one, possibly dedicated to Shiva. The architecture
of this temple is in keeping with the age-old Kashmiri
tradition of wooden buildings. Due to the snowy conditions
in Kashmir, the roof is peaked and slants slowly outward.
The temple is moderately ornamented, moving away from
the post-Gupta aesthetics of heavy carving. A row of
elephants at the base and a decorated doorway are the
only embellishments on the shrine.
Like the findings at Samlaji, the sculptures at Chamba
also show an amalgamation of local traditions with a post-
Gupta style. The images of Mahishasuramardini and
Narasimha at the Laksna-Devi Mandir are evidences of the
influence of the post-Gupta tradition. Both the images show
the influence of the metal sculpture tradition of Kashmir.
The yellow colour of the images is possibly due to an alloy
of zinc and copper which were popularly used to make
images in Kashmir. This temple bears an inscription that
states that it was built during the reign of Meruvarman
who lived in the seventh century.
Of the temples in Kumaon, the ones at Jageshwar near
Almora, and Champavat near Pithoragarh, are classic
examples of nagara architecture in the region.
THE DRAVIDA OR SOUTH INDIAN TEMPLE STYLE
Unlike the nagara temple, the dravida temple is enclosed
within a compound wall. The front wall has an entrance
gateway in its centre, which is known as a gopuram. The
shape of the main temple tower known as vimana in Tamil
Nadu is like a stepped pyramid that rises up geometrically
rather than the curving shikhara of North India. In the
South Indian temple, the word ‘shikhara’ is used only for
the crowning element at the top of the temple which is
usually shaped like a small stupika or an octagonal cupola—
this is equivalent to the amlak and kalasha of North Indian
temples. Whereas at the entrance to the North Indian
temple’s garbhagriha, it would be usual to find images such
as mithunas and the river goddesses, Ganga and Yamuna,
in the south you will generally find sculptures of fierce
dvarapalas or the door-keepers guarding the temple. It is
common to find a large water reservoir, or a temple tank,
Dravida temple
Shikhara
Vimana
Mandapa
Gopuram
Garbhagriha
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
enclosed within the complex. Subsidiary shrines are either
incorporated within the main temple tower, or located as
distinct, separate small shrines beside the main temple.
The North Indian idea of multiple shikharas rising together
as a cluster was not popular in South India. At some of
the most sacred temples in South India, the main temple
in which the garbhagriha is situated has, in fact, one of
the smallest towers. This is because it is usually the oldest
part of the temple. With the passage of time, the population
and size of the town associated with that temple would
have increased, and it would have become necessary to
make a new boundary wall around the temple. This would
have been taller that the last one, and its gopurams would
have been even loftier. So, for instance, the Srirangam
temple in Tiruchirapally has as many as seven ‘concentric’
rectangular enclosure walls, each with gopurams. The
outermost is the newest, while the tower right in the centre
housing the garbhagriha is the oldest.
Temples thus started becoming the focus of urban
architecture. Kanchipuram, Thanjavur or Tanjore, Madurai
and Kumbakonam are the most famous temple towns of
Tamil Nadu, where, during the eighth to twelfth  centuries,
the role of the temple was not limited to religious matters
alone. Temples became rich administrative centres,
controlling vast areas of land.
Just as there are many subdivisions of the main types
of nagara temples, there are subdivisions also of dravida
temples. These are basically of five different shapes: square,
usually called kuta, and also caturasra; rectangular or shala
or ayatasra; elliptical, called gaja-prishta or elephant-
backed, or also called vrittayata, deriving from wagon-
Gangaikondacholapuram temple
Meenakshi temple,
Madurai
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
vaulted shapes of apsidal chaityas with a horse-shoe shaped
entrance facade usually called a nasi; circular or vritta;
and octagonal or ashtasra. Generally speaking, the plan of
the temple and the shape of the vimana were conditioned
by the iconographic nature of the consecrated deity, so it
was appropriate to build specific types of temples for specific
types of icons. It must, however, be remembered that this
is a simplistic differentiation of the subdivisions. Several
different shapes may be combined in specific periods and
places to create their own unique style.
The Pallavas were one of the ancient South Indian
dynasties that were active in the Andhra region from the
second century CE onwards and moved south to settle in
Tamil Nadu. Their history is better documented from the
sixth to the eighth century, when they left many
inscriptions in stone and several monuments. Their
powerful kings spread their empire to various parts of the
subcontinent, at times reaching the borders of Odisha,
and their links with South–East Asia were also strong.
Although they were mostly Shaivite, several Vaishnava
shrines also survived from their reign, and there is no
doubt that they were influenced by the long Buddhist
history of the Deccan.
Their early buildings, it is generally assumed, were rock-
cut, while the later ones were structural. However, there
is reason to believe that structural buildings were well
known even when rock-cut ones were being excavated. The
early buildings are generally attributed to the reign of
Mahendravarman I, a contemporary of the Chalukyan king,
Shore temple, Mahabalipuram
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
Pulakesin II of Karnataka. Narasimhavarman I, also known
as Mamalla, who acceded the Pallava throne around 640
CE, is celebrated for the expansion of the empire, avenging
the defeat his father had suffered at the hands of Pulakesin
II, and inaugurating most of the building works at
Mahabalipuram which is known after him as
Mamallapuram.
The shore temple at Mahabalipuram was built later,
probably in the reign of Narasimhavarman II, also known
as Rajasimha who reigned from 700 to 728 CE. Now it is
oriented to the east facing the ocean, but if you study it
closely, you will find that it actually houses three shrines,
two to Shiva, one facing east and the other west, and a
middle one to Vishnu who is shown as Anantashayana.
This is unusual, because temples generally have a single
main shrine and not three areas of worship. This shows
that it was probably not originally conceived like this and
different shrines may have been added at different times,
modified perhaps with the change of patrons. In the
compound there is evidence of a water tank, an early
example of a gopuram, and several other images.
Sculptures of the bull, Nandi, Shiva’s mount, line the
temple walls, and these, along with the carvings on the
temple’s lower walls have suffered severe disfiguration due
to erosion by salt-water laden air over the centuries.
The magnificent Shiva temple of Thanjavur, called the
Rajarajeswara or Brihadiswara temple, was completed
around 1009 by Rajaraja Chola, and is the largest and
tallest of all Indian temples. Temple building was prolific
at this time, and over a hundred important temples of the
Brihadiswara temple, Thanjavur
Nandi, Brihadiswara
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
Chola period are in a good state of preservation, and many
more are still active shrines.  Bigger in scale than anything
built by their predecessors, the Pallavas, Chalukyas or
Pandyas, this Chola temple’s pyramidal multi-storeyed
vimana rises a massive seventy metres (approximately two
hundred feet), topped by a monolithic shikhara which is
an octagonal dome-shaped stupika. It is in this temple that
one notices for the first time two large gopuras (gateway
towers) with an elaborate sculptural programme which
was conceived along with the temple. Huge Nandi-figures
dot the corners of the shikhara, and the kalasha on top by
itself is about three metres and eight centimetres in height.
Hundreds of stucco figures decorate the vimana, although
it is possible that some of these may have been added on
during the Maratha Period and did not always belong to
the Chola Period. The main deity of the temple is Shiva,
who is shown as a huge lingam set in a two storeyed
sanctum. The walls surrounding the sanctum have extended
mythological narratives which are depicted through painted
murals and sculptures.
Architecture in the Deccan
Many different styles of temple architecture influenced by
both North and South Indian temples were used in regions
like Karnataka. While some scholars consider the buildings
in this region as being distinctly  either nagara or dravida,
a hybridised style that seems to have become popular after
the mid-seventh century, is known in some ancient texts
as vesara.
By the late seventh or the early eighth century, the
ambitious projects at Ellora became even grander. By about
750 CE, the early western Chalukya control of the Deccan
was taken by the Rashtrakutas. Their greatest achievement
in architecture is the Kailashnath temple at Ellora,
Five Rathas, Mahabalipuram
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
a culmination of at least a millennium-long tradition in
rock-cut architecture in India. It is a complete dravida
building with a Nandi shrine—since the temple is dedicated
to Shiva—a gopuram-like gateway, surrounding cloisters,
subsidiary shrines, staircases and an imposing tower or
vimana rising to thirty metres. Importantly, all of this is
carved out of living rock. One portion of the monolithic
hill was carved patiently to build the Kailashnath temple.
The sculpture of the Rashtrakuta phase at Ellora is
dynamic, the figures often larger than life-size, infused
with unparalleled grandeur and the most overwhelming energy.
In the southern part of the Deccan, i.e., in the region
of Karnataka is where some of the most experimental
hybrid styles of vesara architecture are to be found.
Kailashnath temple, Ellora
Temple, Badami
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
Pulakesin I established the early western Chalukya
kingdom when he secured the land around Badami in 543.
The early western Chalukyas ruled most of the Deccan till
the mid-eighth century when they were superseded by the
Rashtrakutas. Early Chalukyan activity also takes the
form of rock-cut caves while later activity is of structural
temples. The earliest is probably the Ravana Phadi cave
at Aihole which is known for its distinctive sculptural style.
One of the most important sculptures at the site is of
Nataraja, surrounded by larger-than-life-size depictions
of the saptamatrikas: three to Shiva’s left and four to his
right. The figures are characterised by graceful, slim bodies,
long, oval faces topped with extremely tall cylindrical
crowns and shown to wear short dhotis marked by fine
incised striations indicating pleating. They are distinctly
different from contemporary western Deccan or Vakataka
styles seen at places such as Paunar and Ramtek.
The hybridisation and incorporation of several styles
was the hallmark of Chalukyan buildings. The most
elaborate of all Chalukyan temples at Pattadakal made in
the reign of Vikramaditya II (733-44) by his chief queen
Loka Mahadevi, for instance, shows complete knowledge
of Pallava buildings at Kanchipuram and as a corollary,
Mahabalipuram. The temple is one of the best early
examples of the dravida tradition. By contrast other eastern
Chalukyan temples, like the Mahakuta, five kilometres
from Badami, and the Swarga Brahma temple at Alampur
show a greater assimilation of northern styles from Odisha
and Rajasthan. At the same time the Durga temple at
Aihole is unique having an even earlier style of an apsidal
shrine which is reminiscent of Buddhist chaitya halls and
Durga temple, Aihole
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
is surrounded by a veranda of a later kind, with a shikhara
that is stylistically like a nagara one. Finally, mention
must be made of the Lad Khan temple at Aihole. This seems
to be inspired by the wooden-roofed temples of the hills,
except that it is constructed out of stone.
How then shall we understand these different styles at
one place? As curiosities or as innovations? Undoubtedly,
they are dynamic expressions of a creative set of architects
who were competing with their peers in the rest of India.
Whatever one’s explanation is, these buildings remain of
great art-historical interest.
With the waning of Chola and Pandya power, the
Hoysalas of Karnataka grew to prominence in South India
and became the most important patrons centred at Mysore.
The remains of around hundred temples have been found
in southern Deccan, though it is only three of them that
are most frequently discussed: the temples at Belur,
Halebid and Somnathpuram. Perhaps the
most characteristic feature of these temples
is that they grow extremely complex with so
many projecting angles emerging from the
previously straightforward square temple,
that the plan of these temples starts looking
like a star, and is thus known as a stellate-
plan. Since they are made out of soapstone
which is a relatively soft stone, the artists
were able to carve their sculptures
intricately. This can be seen particularly in
the jewellery of the gods that adorn their
temple walls.
Somnathpuram temple
Virupaksh temple,
Pattadkal
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
The Hoysaleshvara temple (Lord of the Hoysalas) at
Halebid in Karnataka was built in dark schist stone by
the Hoysala king in 1150. Hoysala temples are sometimes
called hybrid or vesara as their unique style seems neither
completely dravida nor nagara, but somewhere in between.
They are easily distinguishable from other medieval temples
by their highly original star-like ground-plans and a
profusion of decorative carvings.
Dedicated to Shiva as Nataraja, the Halebid temple is
a double building with a large hall for the mandapa to
facilitate music and dance. A Nandi pavilion precedes each
building. The tower of the temple here and at nearby Belur
fell long ago, and an idea of the temples' appearance can
now only be gleaned from their detailed miniature versions
flanking the entrances. From the central square plan cut-
out angular projections create the star effect decorated
with the most profuse carvings of animals and deities. So
intricate is the carving that it is said, for instance, in the
bottom-most frieze featuring a continuous procession of
hundreds of elephants with their mahouts, no two
elephants are in the same pose.
Nataraja, Halebid
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
Nalanda University
Founded in 1336, Vijayanagara, literally ‘city of victory’,
attracted a number of international travellers such as the
Italian, Niccolo di Conti, the Portuguese Domingo Paes,
Fernao Nuniz and Duarte Barbosa and the Afghan Abd, al-
Razzaq, who have left vivid accounts of the city. In addition,
various Sanskrit and Telugu works document the vibrant
literary tradition of this kingdom. Architecturally,
Vijayanagara synthesises the centuries-old dravida temple
architecture with Islamic styles demonstrated by the
neighbouring sultanates. Their sculpture too, although
fundamentally derived from, and consciously seeking to
recreate Chola ideals, occasionally shows the presence of
foreigners. Their eclectic ruins from the late fifteenth and
early sixteenth centuries preserve a fascinating time in
history, an age of wealth, exploration and cultural fusion.
BUDDHIST AND JAIN ARCHITECTURAL DEVELOPMENTS
So far, although we have focused on the nature of
developments in Hindu architecture from the fifth to
fourteenth centuries, it must constantly be kept in mind
that this was also the very period when Buddhist and Jain
developments were equally vibrant, and often went hand-
in-glove with Hindu ones. Sites such as Ellora have
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
Buddhist, Hindu and Jain monuments; however,
Badami, Khajuraho and Kannauj have the remains
of any two of the religions right next to each other.
When the Gupta empire crumbled in the sixth
century CE, this eastern region of Bihar and
Bengal, historically known as Magadha, appears
to have remained unified whilst numerous small
Rajput principalities sprang up to the west. In the
eighth century, the Palas came to power in the
region. The second Pala ruler, Dharmapala, became
immensely powerful and established an empire by
defeating the powerful Rajput Pratiharas.
Dharmapala consolidated an empire whose wealth
lay in a combination of agriculture along the fertile
Ganges plain and international trade.
The pre-eminent Buddhist site is, of course,
Bodhgaya. Bodhgaya is a pilgrimage site since
Siddhartha achieved enlightenment here and
became Gautama Buddha. While the bodhi tree is
of immense importance, the Mahabodhi Temple at
Bodhgaya is an important reminder of the brickwork of
that time. The first shrine here, located at the base of the
Bodhi tree, is said to have been constructed by King
Ashoka; the vedika around it is said to be post-Mauryan,
of about 100 BCE; many of the sculptures in the niches in
the temple are dated to the eighth century Pala Period,
while the actual Mahabodhi temple itself as it stands now
is largely a Colonial Period reconstruction of the old seventh
century design. The design of the temple is unusual. It is,
strictly speaking, neither dravida or nagara. It is narrow
like a nagara temple, but it rises without curving, like a
dravida one.
The monastic university of Nalanda is a mahavihara as
it is a complex of several monastries of various sizes. Till
date, only a small portion of this ancient learning centre
has been excavated as most of it lies buried under
contemporary civilisation, making further excavations
almost impossible.
Most of the information about Nalanda is based on the
records of Xuan Zang—previously spelt as ‘Hsuan-tsang’—
which states that the foundation of a monastery was laid
by Kumargupta I in the fifth century CE; and this was
carried forward by the later monarchs who built up a
fantastic university here. There is evidence that all three
Buddhist doctrines— Theravada, Mahayana and
Vajrayana—were taught here and monks made their way
to Nalanda and its neighbouring sites of Bodh Gaya and
Kurkihar from China, Tibet and Central Asia in the north,
Mahabodhi temple,
Bodhgaya
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
and Sri Lanka, Thailand, Burma and various other
countries from the south-eastern parts of Asia. Monks and
pilgrims would take back small sculptures and illustrated
manuscripts from here to their own countries. Buddhist
monasteries like Nalanda, thus, were prolific centres of
art production that had a decisive impact on the arts of
all Buddhist countries in Asia.
The sculptural art of Nalanda, in stucco, stone and
bronze, developed out of a heavy dependence on the
Buddhist Gupta art of Sarnath. By the ninth century a
synthesis occurred between the Sarnath Gupta idiom, the
local Bihar tradition, and that of central India, leading to
the formation of the Nalanda school of sculpture
characterised by distinctive facial features, body forms and
treatment of clothing and jewellery. The characteristic
features of Nalanda art, distinguished by its consistently
high quality of workmanship, are that the precisely
executed sculptures have an ordered appearance with little
effect of crowding. Sculptures are also usually not flat in
relief but are depicted in three-dimensional forms. The
back slabs of the sculptures are detailed and the
ornamentations delicate. The Nalanda bronzes, dating
between the seventh and eighth centuries to approximately
the twelfth century outnumber the discovery of metal
images from all other sites of eastern India and constitute
a large body of Pala Period metal sculptures. Like their
stone counterparts, the bronzes initially relied heavily on
Sarnath and Mathura Gupta traditions. The Nalanda
sculptures initially depict Buddhist deities of the Mahayana
Excavated site,
Nalanda
Sculptural details,
Nalanda
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
pantheon such as standing Buddhas, bodhisattvas such
as Manjusri Kumara, Avalokiteshvara seated on a lotus
and Naga-Nagarjuna. During the late eleventh and twelveth
centuries, when Nalanda emerged as an important tantric
centre, the repertoire came to be dominated by Vajrayana
deities such as Vajrasharada (a form of Saraswati)
Khasarpana, Avalokiteshvara, etc. Depictions of crowned
Buddhas occur commonly only after the tenth century.
Interestingly, various  brahmanical images not conforming
to the Sarnath style have also been found at Nalanda,
many of which are still worshipped in small temples in
villages around the site.
Sirpur in Chhattisgarh is an early-Odisha-style site
belonging to the period between of 550–800, with both
Hindu and Buddhist shrines. In many ways the
iconographic and stylistic elements of the Buddhist
sculptures here are similar to that of Nalanda. Later other
major Buddhist monasteries developed in Odisha.
Lalitagiri, Vajragiri and Ratnagiri are the most famous of
them.
The port-town of Nagapattinam was also a major
Buddhist centre right until the Chola Period. One of the
reasons for this must have been its importance in trade
with Sri Lanka where large numbers of Buddhists still
live. Bronze and stone sculptures in Chola style have come
to light at Nagapattinam and generally date back to the
tenth century.
Jains were prolific temple builders like the Hindus,
and their sacred shrines and pilgrimage spots are to be
found across the length and breadth of India except in the
hills. The oldest Jain pilgrimage sites are to be found in
Lakshman temple, Sirpur
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
Bihar. Many of these sites are famous for early Buddhist
shrines. In the Deccan, some of the most architecturally
important Jain sites can be found in Ellora and Aihole. In
central India, Deogarh, Khajuraho, Chanderi and Gwalior
have some excellent examples of Jain temples. Karnataka
has a rich heritage of Jain shrines and at Sravana Belagola
the famous statue of Gomateshwara, the granite statue of
Lord Bahubali which stands eighteen metres or fifty-seven
feet high, is the world’s tallest monolithic free-standing
structure. It was commissioned by Camundaraya, the
General-in-Chief and Prime Minister of the Ganga Kings
of Mysore.
Gujarat and Rajasthan have been strongholds of
Jainism since early times. A famous hoard of Jain bronzes
was found at Akota, on the outskirts of Baroda, dated
between the end of the fifth and the end of the seventh
century CE. Finely cast through the lost-wax process, these
Lord Bahubali, Gomateshwara,
Karnataka
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
bronzes were often subsequently inlaid with silver and
copper to bring out the eyes, crowns and details of the
textiles on which the figures were seated. Many famous
Jain bronzes from Chausa in Bihar are now kept in the
Patna Museum. Many Jain bronzes from Hansi in Haryana
and from various sites in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka are
kept in various museums in India.
The Jain temples at Mount Abu were constructed by
Vimal Shah. Notable for a simplistic exterior in contrast
with the exuberant marble interiors, their rich sculptural
decoration with deep undercutting creates a lace-like
appearance. The temple is famous for its unique patterns
on every ceiling, and the graceful bracket figures along
the domed ceilings. The great Jain pilgrimage site in the
Shatrunjay hills near Palitana in Kathiawar, Gujarat, is
imposing with scores of temples clustered together.
In this chapter we have read about the prolific sculptural
and architectural remains in different types of stone,
terracotta and bronze from the fifth to the fourteenth
centuries. Undoubtedly there would have been sculptures
made of other media like silver and gold, but these would
have been melted down and reused. Many sculptures would
also have been made of wood and ivory, but these have
perished because of their fragility. Often sculptures would
have been painted, but again, pigments cannot always
survive hundreds of years, especially if the sculptures were
exposed to the elements. There was also a rich tradition of
painting at this time, but the only examples that survive
from this period are murals in a few religious buildings. A
Jain sculpture, Mount Abu
Dilwara temple, Mount Abu
MAHABALIPURAM
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
Mahabalipuram is an important coastal town from the period of the
Pallavas. It is dotted with several important rock-cut and free-standing
structural temples mostly made in the seventh and eighth centuries.
This large sculptural panel, one of the largest and oldest known in the
world, is nearly thirty metres long and fifteen metres high. There is a
natural cleft in the rock which has been cleverly used by its sculptors as
a channel for water to flow down. This water collects in a massive tank in
front of the sculpted wall.
Scholars have interpreted the story depicted on the panel differently.
While some believe that it is the story of the descent of the Ganga from
heaven to earth, others believe that the main story is of Kiratarjuniya or
Arjuna’s penance, a poetic work by Bharvi which is known to have been
popular in the Pallava court. Other scholars have interpreted the
symbolism behind the sculptures to show that the whole tableau was
created to be a prashasti, or something to praise the Pallava king, who,
they say, would have sat enthroned in the tank in front of this
extraordinary backdrop.
A temple has been given prominence in the relief. Ascetics and
worshippers sit before it. Above it is an emaciated bearded figure standing
in penance on one leg, his arms raised above his head. He has been
identified by some as Bhagirath and by others as Arjuna. Arjuna’s penance
was to obtain the pashupata weapon from Shiva, whereas Bhagirath
prayed to have Ganga brought to earth. Next to this figure stands Shiva
who has one hand in the boon bestowing gesture or varada mudra. The
small gana or dwarf who stands below this hand may be a personification
of the powerful pashupata weapon.
All the figures are shown with a slender and linear quality in an
animated state of movement. Apart from humans and flying celestials
there are several naturalistically carved birds and animals as well.
Particularly noteworthy are the extraordinarily well-modelled, and life-
like elephants, and the pair of deer who are under the shrine. The most
humorous, however, is a cat who has been shown standing on his hind
legs, with his hands raised, imitating Bhagirath or Arjuna. Close
examination, however, reveals that this cat is, in fact, a symbolic device.
He is surrounded by rats, which are unable to disturb him from his
penance. Perhaps this is a metaphor used by the artist to show how
strong Arjuna's or Bhagirath’s penance was, who is also standing still,
undisturbed by his surroundings.
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
RAVANA SHAKING MOUNT KAILASHA
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
The theme of Ravana shaking Mount Kailasha
has been  depicted several times in the caves of
Ellora. But the most noteworthy of all is the one
depicted on the left wall of Kailashnath temple
(Cave No.16) at Ellora. The image is dated to the
eighth century CE. It is a colossal sculpture and
is considered as one of the masterpieces of Indian
sculpture. It depicts the episode of Ravana
shaking Mount Kailasha when Lord Shiva along
with Parvati and others were on the mountain.
The composition is divided into several tiers. The
lower tier depicts Ravana, multi-faced and multi-
armed shaking the mount with ease. The depth
of carvings of the multiple hands brings out the
effect of three-dimensional space. Ravana’s body
is angular pushing one leg inside. The hands are
expanded on the sides of the inside chamber
created by the image of Ravana. The upper half
is divided into three frames. The centre occupied
by the image of Shiva and Parvati. Parvati is
shown moving close to Shiva scared by the
commotion on the hill. Her stretched legs and
slightly twisted body in the recessed space create
a very dramatic effect of light and shade. The
volume of sculpture is very pronounced; the
attendant fiures are equally  voluminous. The
gana (dwarf) figures are shown in action, involved
in their activities. The celestial beings above
Shiva and Parvati witnessing the event are
shown in frozen movement. Protrusion of volume
and recession in the space are important
landmarks in the images of the Ellora caves.
Light and darkness has been exploited by
creating the images in full round. Their torsos
are slender with heaviness in its surface
treatment, arms are slim in full round. Attendant
figures on the two sides have angular frontality.
Every image in the composition is beautifully
interwoven structurally with each other.
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
Carvings on outer wall,
Kailashnath temple, Ellora
LAKSHAMANA TEMPLE IN KHAJURAHO
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
The temples at Khajuraho are all made of sandstone. They were patronised
by the Chandella  dynasty. The Lakshamana temple represents the full-
fledged, developed style of temple architecture during the time of the
Chandellas. Its construction was completed by 954, the year as per the
inscription found at the base of the temple, by Yashovarman, the seventh
ruler of the Chandella dynasty. The temple plan is of a panchayana type.
The temple is constructed on a heavy plinth. It consists of an
ardhamandapa (porch), mandapa (porch), the maha mandapa (greater hall)
and the garbhagriha with vimana.  Each part has a separate roof rising
backward. All the halls have projected porches on their walls but are not
accessible to visitors. Their use is functional, mainly for light and
ventilation. The outer walls of the garbhagriha and the outer and inner
walls around the circumambulatory path are decorated with sculptures.
The shikhara on the garbhagriha is tall. The Khajuraho temples are also
known for their erotic sculptures. Many erotic sculptures are carved on
the plinth wall. Some erotic sculptures are carved on the actual wall of
the temple. Tier arrangements on the walls provide a very specific space
for the placement of the images. The interior halls are also decorated
profusely. The entrance to the garbhagriha is sculpted with heavy
voluminous pillars and lintels carved with small images as part of the
door decoration. An image of Chaturmukha Vishnu is in the garbhagriha.
There are four shrines in each corner of the temple. There are images of
Vishnu in three shrines and Surya in one, which can be identified by the
central image on the lintel of the shrine-doors. Drapery and ornaments
are given a lot of attention.
TEMPLE ARCHITECTURE AND SCULPTURE
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
EXERCISE
1. Mark out all the places discussed in this chapter on a map
of India.
2. What are the commonalities and differences between North
Indian and South Indian temples? Make a diagram to
supplement your answer.
3. Bring out the stylistic differences of any two sculptural
traditions (such as Pala, Chola, Pallava, Chandella, etc.)
using either drawing, painting or clay-modelling.
Supplement your project with a written assignment that
explains the salient features of the two styles you have
chosen.
4. Compare any two temple styles in India; supplement with
a line drawing.
5. Trace the development in Buddhist art.
Project Work
Find any temple or monastery in or around your town and
note down its important features such as different
artchitectural features, sculptural style, identification of
images, dynastic affiliation and patronage.
large number of bronze scupltures have been found in the
country which shall be discussed in the next chapter.
We have focussed on the dominant art styles and some
of the most famous monuments from different parts of India
in the medieval period. It is important to realise that the
enormous artistic achievements that we have studied here
would never have been possible if artists worked alone.
These large projects would have brought architects,
builders, sculptors and painters together.
Above all, by studying these artworks, we are able to
learn much about the kind of society that made these
objects. Through them we can surmise what their buildings
were like, what types of clothes they wore and above all
we can use the art material to reconstruct the history of
their religions. These religions, as we have seen were many
and diverse and constantly changing. Hinduism, Buddhism
and Jainism each have a plethora of gods and goddesses,
and this was the period when bhakti and tantra — two
major developments, affected them. Temples also became
a space for many other art forms: such as music and dance
and, from the tenth century onward, temples became large
landowners and performed an administrative role as well.
NDIAN sculptors had mastered the bronze medium and
the casting process as much as they had mastered
terracotta sculpture and carving in stone. The cire-perdu
or ‘lost-wax’ process for casting was learnt as long ago as
the Indus Valley Culture. Along with it was discovered the
process of making alloy of metals by mixing copper, zinc
and tin which is called bronze.
Bronze sculptures and statuettes of Buddhist, Hindu
and Jain icons have been discovered from many regions of
India dating from the second century until the sixteenth
century. Most of these were required for ritual worship
and are characterised by exquisite beauty and aesthetic
appeal. At the same time the metal-casting process
continued to be utilised for making articles for various
purposes of daily use, such as utensils for cooking, eating,
drinking, etc. Present-day tribal communities also utilise
the ‘lost-wax’ process for their art expressions.
Perhaps the ‘Dancing Girl’ in tribhanga posture from
Mohenjodaro is the earliest bronze sculpture datable to
2500 BCE. The limbs and torso of this female figurine are
simplified in tubular form. A similar group of bronze
statuettes have been discovered on archaeological
excavation at Daimabad (Maharashtra) datable to 1500
BCE. Significant is the ‘Chariot’, the wheels of which are
represented in simple circular shapes while the driver or
human rider has been elongated, and the bulls in the
forefront are modelled in sturdy forms.
Interesting images of Jain Tirthankaras have been
discovered from Chausa, Bihar, belonging to the Kushana
Period during second century CE. These bronzes show how
the Indian sculptors had mastered the modelling of
masculine human physique and simplified muscles.
Remarkable is the depiction of Adinath or Vrishabhnath,
who is identified with long hairlocks dropping to his
shoulders. Otherwise the tirthankaras are noted by their
short curly hair.
Many standing Buddha images with right hand in
abhaya mudra were cast in North India, particularly Uttar
INDIAN BRONZE
SCULPTURE7
Kaliyadaman, Chola bronze,
Tamil Nadu
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
Pradesh and Bihar, during the Gupta and Post-Gupta
periods, i.e., between the fifth, sixth and seventh centuries.
The sanghati or the monk’s robe is wrapped to cover the
shoulders which turns over the right arm, while the other
end of the drapery is wrapped over the left arm. Eventually
the pleats are held by the extended hand of the same arm.
The drapery falls and spreads into a wide curve at the
level of the ankles. The Buddha’s figure is modelled in a
subtle manner suggesting, at the same time, the thin
quality of the cloth. The whole figure is treated with
refinement; there is a certain delicacy in the treatment of
the torso. The figure appears youthful and proportionate
in comparison with the Kushana style. In the typical bronze
from Dhanesar Khera, Uttar Pradesh, the folds of the
drapery are treated as in the Mathura style, i.e., in a series
of drooping down curves. Sarnath-style bronzes have
foldless drapery. The outstanding example is that of the
Buddha image at Sultanganj, Bihar, which is quite a
monumental bronze figure. The typical refined style of
these bronzes is the hallmark of the classical quality.
Vakataka bronze images of the Buddha from Phophnar,
Maharashtra, are contemporary with the Gupta period
bronzes. They show the influence of the Amaravati style of
Andhra Pradesh in the third century CE and at the same
time there is a significant change in the draping style of
the monk’s robe. Buddha’s right hand in abhaya mudra is
free so that the drapery clings to the right side of the body
Ganesh, seventh  century CE,
Kashmir
Shiva Family, tenth century CE,
Bihar
INDIAN BRONZE SCULPTURE
contour. The result is a continuous flowing line on this
side of the figure. At the level of the ankles of the Buddha
figure the drapery makes a conspicuous curvilinear turn,
as it is held by the left hand.
The additional importance of the Gupta and Vakataka
bronzes is that they were portable and monks carried them
from place to place for the purpose of individual worship
or to be installed in Buddhist viharas. In this manner the
refined classical style spread to different parts of India
and to Asian countries overseas. The hoard of bronzes
discovered in Akota near Vadodara established that bronze
casting was practised in Gujarat or western India between
the sixth and ninth centuries. Most of the images represent
the Jaina tirthankaras like Mahavira, Parshvanath or
Adinath. A new format was invented in which tirthankaras
are seated on a throne; they can be single or combined in
a group of three or in a group of twenty-four tirthankaras.
Female images were also cast representing yakshinis or
The Lost-wax Process
The lost-wax process is a technique used for making objects of
metal, especially in Himachal Pradesh, Odisha, Bihar, Madhya
Pradesh and West Bengal. In each region, a slightly different
technique is used.
The lost-wax process involves several different steps. First a
wax model of the image is made by hand of pure beeswax that
has first been melted over an open fire, and then strained through
a fine cloth into a basin of cold water. Here it resolidifies
immediately. It is then pressed through a pichki or pharni —
which squeezes the wax into noodle-like shape. These wax wires
are then wound around to the shape of the entire image.
The image is now covered with a thick coating of paste, made
of equal parts of clay, sand and cow-dung. Into an opening on
one side, a clay pot is fixed. In this molten metal is poured. The
weight of the metal to be used is ten times that of wax. (The wax
is weighed before starting the entire process.) This metal is
largely scrap metal from broken pots and pans. While the
molten metal is poured in the clay pot, the clay-plastered
model is exposed to firing. As the wax inside melts, the metal
flows down the channel and takes on the shape of the wax
image. The firing process is carried out almost like a religious
ritual and all the steps take place in dead silence. The image
is later chiselled with files to smoothen it and give it a finish.
Casting a bronze image is a painstaking task and demands
a high degree of skill. Sometimes an alloy of five metals —
gold, silver, copper, brass and lead — is used to cast bronze
images.
Devi, Chola bronze,
Tamil Nadu
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
Shasanadevis of some prominent tirthankaras.
Stylistically they were influenced by the features
of both the Gupta and the Vakataka period
bronzes. Chakreshvari is the Shasanadevi of
Adinath and Ambika is of Neminath.
Himachal Pradesh and Kashmir regions also
produced bronze images of Buddhist deities as well
as Hindu gods and goddesses. Most of these were
created during the eighth, ninth and tenth
centuries and have a very distinct style in
comparison with bronzes from other parts of India.
A noteworthy development is the growth of different
types of iconography of Vishnu images. Four-headed
Vishnu, also known as  Chaturanana or Vaikuntha
Vishnu, was worshipped in these regions. While
the central face represents Vasudeva, the other two
faces are that of Narasimha and Varaha. The
Narasimha avatar and Mahishasuramardini Durga
images of Himachal Pradesh are among the very
dynamic bronzes from that region.
In Buddhist centres like Nalanda, a school of
bronze-casting emerged around the ninth century
during the rule of the Pala Dynasty in Bihar and
Bengal regions. In the gap of a few centuries the sculptors
at Kurkihar near Nalanda were able to revive the classical
style of the Gupta period. A remarkable bronze is of a four-
Ganesh, Kashmir,
seventh  century CE
Bronze sculpture,
Himachal Pradesh
INDIAN BRONZE SCULPTURE
armed Avalokitesvara, which is a good example of a male
figure in graceful tribhanga posture. Worship of female
goddesses was adopted which is part of the growth of the
Vajrayana phase in Buddhism. Images of Tara became very
popular. Seated on a throne, she is accompanied by a growing
curvilinear lotus stalk and her right hand is in the abhaya
mudra.
The bronze casting technique and making of bronze
images of traditional icons reached a high stage of
development in South India during the medieval period.
Although bronze images were modelled and cast during
the Pallava Period in the eighth and ninth centuries, some
of the most beautiful and exquisite statues were produced
during the Chola Period in Tamil Nadu from the tenth to
the twelfth century. The technique and art of fashioning
bronze images is still skillfully practised in South India,
particularly in Kumbakonam. The distinguished patron
during the tenth century was the widowed Chola queen,
Sembiyan Maha Devi. Chola bronzes are the most sought-
after collectors’ items by art lovers all over the world.
Among the Pallava Period bronzes of the eighth century
is the icon of Shiva seated in ardhaparyanka asana (one
leg kept dangling). The right hand is in the achamana
mudra gesture, suggesting that he is about to drink poison.
Shiva is associated with the end of the cosmic
world with which this dancing position is
associated.
In this Chola period bronze sculpture he
has been shown balancing himself on his right
leg and suppressing the apasmara, the demon
of ignorance or forgetfulness, with the foot of
the same leg. At the same time he raises his
left leg in bhujangatrasita stance, which
represents tirobhava, that is kicking away the
veil of maya or illusion from the devotee’s mind.
His four arms are outstretched and the main
right hand is posed in abhaya hasta or the
gesture suggesting. The upper right holds the
damaru his favourite musical instrument to
keep on the beat tala. The upper left hand
carries a flame while the main left hand is held
in dola hasta and connects with the abhaya
hasta of the right hand. His hair locks fly on
both the sides touching the circular jvala mala
or the garland of flames which surrounds the
entire dancing figuration.
Nataraja
Nataraja, Chola period, twelfth
century CE
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
EXERCISE
1. Do you think that the technique of bronze casting has
been a continuous process? How did it evolve over a period
of time?
2. In India sculpturing in stone and metal happened
simultaneously. In your opinion what were the similarities
and differences between both technically, stylistically and
functionally?
3. Why are Chola bronze sculptures considered as the most
refined?
4. Search for visuals of bronze sculptures of the Buddha
belonging to periods other than the Chola Period from
Himachal Pradesh, Kashmir, etc.
The well-known dancing figure of Shiva as Nataraja
was evolved and fully developed during the Chola Period
and since then many variations of this complex bronze
image have been modelled.
A wide range of Shiva iconography was evolved in the
Thanjavur (Tanjore) region of Tamil Nadu. The ninth century
kalyanasundara murti is highly remarkable for the manner
in which Panigrahana (ceremony of marriage) is represented
by two separate statuettes. Shiva with his extended right
hand accepts Parvati’s (the bride’s) right hand, who is
depicted with a bashful expression and taking a step
forward. The union of Shiva and Parvati is very ingeniously
represented in the ardhanarisvara murti in a single image.
Beautiful independent figurines of Parvati have also been
modelled, standing in graceful tribhanga posture.
During the sixteenth century, known as the Vijayanagar
Period in Andhra Pradesh, the sculptors experimented with
portrait sculpture in order to preserve knowledge of the
royal patron for posterity. At Tirupati, life-size standing
portrait statues were cast in bronze, depicting
Krishnadevaraya with his two queens, Tirumalamba and
Chinnadevi. The sculptor has combined the likeness of
the facial features with certain elements of idealisation.
The idealisation is further observed in the manner the
physical body is modelled to appear imposing as well as
graceful. The standing king and queens are depicted in
praying posture, that is, both hands held in the namaskara
mudra.
N the seventh and eighth centuries CE, Islam spread towards
Spain and India. Islam came to India, particularly, with Muslim
merchants, traders, holy men and conquerors over a passage of
six hundred years. Although by the eighth century CE, Muslims
had begun to construct in Sind, Gujarat, etc., it was only in the
early thirteenth century that large-scale building activity was
begun by the Turkish State, established after the Turkish
conquest of northern India.
By the twelfth century India was already familiar with
monumental constructions in grandiose settings. Certain
techniques and embellishments were prevalent and popular, such
as trabeation, brackets, and multiple pillars to support a flat
roof or a small shallow dome. While arches were shaped in wood
and stone, these were unable to bear the weight of the top
structure. Now, however, the archuate form of construction was
introduced gradually in which arches could support the weight
of the domes. Such arches needed to be constructed with voussoirs
(series of interlocking blocks) and fitted with keystones. The domes,
resting on pendentives and squinches enabled spanning of large
spaces leaving the interiors free of pillars.
A noteworthy aspect of these migrations and conquests was
that Muslims absorbed many features of local cultures and
traditions and combined them with their own architectural
practices. Thus, in the field of architecture, a mix of many
structural techniques, stylised shapes, and surface decorations
came about through constant interventions of acceptance,
rejection or modification of architectural elements. These
architectural entities or categories showcasing multiple styles
are known as Indo-Saracenic or Indo-Islamic architecture.
According to E. B. Havell, Hindus conceived manifestations of
god everywhere in multiple forms as part of their religious faith
whereas a Muslim thought of only one with Muhammad as His
Prophet. Hence, Hindus adorned all surfaces with sculptures and
paintings. Muslims forbidden to replicate living forms on any
surface, developed their religious art and architecture consisting
of the arts of arabesque, geometrical patterns and calligraphy on
plaster and stone.
SOME ASPECTS OF
INDO-ISLAMIC ARCHITECTURE
Qutub  Minar, Delhi
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
TYPOLOGIES OF STRUCTURES
Keeping in mind religious and secular necessities, architectural
building like mosques for daily prayers, the Jama Masjids, tombs,
dargahs, minars, hammams, formally laid out gardens, madrasas,
sarais or caravansarais, Kos minars, etc., were constructed over
a period of time. These were thus additions in the existing types
of buildings in the sub-continent.
Architectural edifices in the Indian sub-continent, as elsewhere
in the world, were constructed by wealthy people.  They were, in
descending order, rulers and nobles and their families, merchants,
merchant guilds, rural elite and devotees of a cult. In spite of the
obvious Saracenic, Persian and Turkish influences, Indo-Islamic
structures were heavily influenced by prevailing sensibilities of
Indian architectural and decorative forms. A lot depended on the
availability of materials, limitations of resources and skills and
the sense of aesthetics of the patrons. Although religion and
religiosity were very important to people of medieval India, as
elsewhere, they borrowed architectural elements liberally.
CATEGORIES OF STYLES
The study of Indo-Islamic architecture is conventionally
categorised into the Imperial Style (Delhi Sultanate), the Provincial
Style (Mandu, Gujarat, Bengal, and Jaunpur), the Mughal Style
(Delhi, Agra, and Lahore) and the Deccani Style (Bijapur,
Golconda). These categories help in understanding better the
specificities of architectural styles rather than putting them in
immutable slots.
Intricate jali work,
Amer Fort, Jaipur
SOME ASPECTS OF INDO-ISLAMIC ARCHITECTURE
ARCHITECTURAL INFLUENCES
Amongst provincial styles, the architecture of Bengal and Jaunpur
is regarded as distinct. Gujarat was said to have a markedly
regional character for patrons borrowed elements from regional
temple traditions such as toranas, lintels in mihrabs, carvings of
bell and chain motifs, and carved panels depicting trees, for tombs,
mosques and dargahs. The fifteenth century white marble dargah
of Shaikh Ahmad Khattu of Sarkhej is a good example of provincial
style and it heavily influenced the form and decoration of Mughal
tombs.
DECORATIVE FORMS
These forms included designing on plaster through incision or
stucco. The designs were either left plain or covered with colours.
Motifs were also painted on or carved in stone. These motifs
included varieties of flowers, both from the sub-continent and
places outside, particularly Iran. The lotus bud fringe was used
to great advantage in the inner curves of the arches. Walls were
also decorated with cypress, chinar and other trees as also with
flower vases. Many complex designs of flower motifs decorating
the ceilings were also to be found on textiles and carpets. In the
fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth centuries tiles were also used
to surface the walls and the domes. Popular colours were blue,
turquoise, green and yellow. Subsequently the techniques of
tessellation (mosaic designs) and pietra dura were made use of
for surface decoration particularly in the dado panels of the walls.
At times lapis lazuli was used in the interior walls or on canopies.
Other decorations included arabesque, calligraphy and high and
low relief carving and a profuse use of jalis. The high relief carving
has a three- dimensional look. The arches were plain and squat
and sometimes high and pointed. From the sixteenth century
onwards arches were designed with trefoil or multiple foliations.
Spandrels of the arches were decorated with medallions or bosses.
The roof was a mix of the central dome and other smaller domes,
chatris and tiny minarets. The central dome was topped with an
inverted lotus flower motif and a metal or stone pinnacle.
Pietra dura work, Agra
Dodo panel on the wall,
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
MATERIALS FOR CONSTRUCTION
The walls in all buildings were extremely thick and were largely
constructed of rubble masonary, which was easily available. These
walls were then cased over with chunam or limestone plaster or
dressed stone. An amazing range of stones were utilised for
construction such as quartzite, sandstone, buff, marble, etc.
Polychrome tiles were used to great advantage to finish the walls.
From the beginning of the seventeenth century, bricks were also
used for construction and these imparted greater flexibility to
the structures. In this phase there was more reliance on local
materials.
FORTS
Building monumental forts with embattlements was a regular
feature in medieval times, often symbolising the seat of power of
a king. When such a fort was captured by an attacking army the
vanquished ruler either lost his complete power or his sovereignty.
This was because he had to accept the suzerainty of the victorious
king. Some examples of strong, complex edifices which still
exercise the imagination of the visitor are the forts of Chittor,
Gwalior, Daulatabad, earlier known as Devgiri and Golconda.
Commanding heights were utilised to great advantage to
construct forts. These heights gave a good perspective of the
region, strategic advantage for security, unfettered and
unhindered space to make residential and official complexes while
simultaneously creating a sense of awe in the people. Other
complexities woven into such topography were concentric circles
Aerial view,
Daulatabad Fort
SOME ASPECTS OF INDO-ISLAMIC ARCHITECTURE
of outer walls as in Golconda, so that the enemy had to breach
these at all stages before getting in.
Daulatabad had several strategic devices to confound the
enemy, such as staggered entrances so that gates could not be
opened even with the help of elephants. It also had twin forts,
one within the other but at a higher elevation and accessed by a
complex defence design arrangement. One wrong turn in the
labyrinth or complex pathway could lead to the enemy soldier
going in circles or falling to his death several hundred feet below.
The Gwalior Fort was invincible because its steep height made
it impossible to scale. It had had many habitations and usages.
Babur, who did not find much merit in many things he saw in
Hindustan, was said to have been overawed at the sight of the
Gwalior Fort. Chittorgarh bears the distinction of being the largest
fort in Asia and was occupied for the longest length of time as
the seat of power. It has many types of buildings including
stambhas or towers to signify victory and bravery. It was replete
with numerous water bodies. Innumerable acts of heroism have
been associated with the principal people in the fort, forming the
substance of many a legend. An interesting aspect associated
with forts is that within the palace complexes stylistic and
decorative influences were absorbed most liberally.
MINARS
Another form of stambha or tower was the minar, a common feature
in the sub-continent. Two most striking minars of medieval times
are the Qutub Minar in Delhi and the Chand Minar at Daulatabad
Gwalior Fort
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
Fort. The everyday use of the minar was for the
azaan or call to prayer. Its phenomenal height,
however, symbolised the might and power of the
ruler. The Qutub Minar also came to be associated
with the much revered saint of Delhi, Khwaja
Qutbuddin Bakhtiyar Kaki.
The Qutub Minar, built in the thirteenth
century, is a 234-feet-high tapering tower divided
into five storeys. The minar is a mix of polygonal
and circular shapes. It is largely built of red and
buff sandstone with some use of marble in the
upper storeys. It is characterised by highly
decorated balconies and bands of inscriptions
intertwined with foliated designs.
Chand Minar, built in the fifteenth century,
is a 210- feet-high tapering tower divided into
four storeys. Painted peach now, its façade once
boasted of chevron patterning on the encaustic
tile work and bold bands of Quranic verses.
Although it looked like an Iranian monument, it
was the combined handiwork of local architects with those from
Delhi and Iran.
TOMBS
Monumental structures over graves of rulers and royalty was a
popular feature of medieval India. Some well known examples of
such tombs are those of Ghyasuddin Tughlaq, Humayun, Abdur
Rahim Khan-i-Khanan, Akbar and Itmaduddaula. According to
Anthony Welch, the idea behind the tomb was eternal paradise
as a reward for the true believer on the Day of Judgement. This
led to the paradisiacal imagery for tomb construction. Beginning
Tomb of Itmaduddaula,
Chand Minar,
Daulatabad
SOME ASPECTS OF INDO-ISLAMIC ARCHITECTURE
with the introduction of Quranic verses on the walls, the tomb
was subsequently placed within paradisiacal elements such as a
garden or near a body of water or both, as is in the case of the Taj
Mahal. Surely though, such vast expanses of structured and
stylised spaces could not have been intended only to signify peace
and happiness in the next world but to also showcase the majesty,
grandeur and might of the person buried there.
SARAIS
A hugely interesting feature of medieval India was the sarais which
ringed cities and dotted the vast space of the Indian sub-
continent. Sarais were largely built on a simple square or
rectangular plan and were meant to provide temporary
accommodation to Indian and foreign travellers, pilgrims,
merchants, traders, etc. In effect, sarais were public domains
which thronged with people of varied cultural backgrounds.  This
led to cross-cultural interaction, influences and syncretic
tendencies in the cultural mores of the times and at the level of
the people.
STRUCTURES FOR COMMON PEOPLE
One of the architectural features of medieval India was also a
coming together of styles, techniques and decorations in public
and private spaces of non-royal sections of the society. These
included buildings for domestic usage, temples, mosques,
khanqahs and dargahs, commemorative gateways, pavilions in
buildings and gardens, bazaars, etc.
MANDU
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
SOME ASPECTS OF INDO-ISLAMIC ARCHITECTURE
The city of Mandu is located sixty miles from Indore, at an elevation of over 2000
feet and overlooks the Malwa Plateau to the north and the Narmada valley to the
south. Mandu’s natural defence encouraged consistent habitations by Parmara
Rajputs, Afghans and Mughals. As the capital city of Ghauri Dynasty (1401–1561)
founded by Hoshang Shah it acquired a lot of fame. Subsequently, Mandu was
associated with the romance of Sultan Baz Bahadur and Rani Rupmati. The
Mughals resorted to it for pleasure during the monsoon season.
Mandu is a typical respresentation of the medieval provincial style of art and
architecture. It was a complex mix of official and residential-cum-pleasure palace,
pavilions, mosques, artificial reservoirs, baolis, embattlements, etc. In spite of the
size or monumentality, the structures were very close to nature, designed in the
style of arched pavilions, light and airy, so that these buildings did not retain
heat. Local stone and marble were used to great advantage. Mandu is a fine example
of architectural adaptation to the environment.
The Royal Enclave located in the city comprised the most complete and romantic
set of  buildings, a cluster of palaces and attendant
structures, official and residential, built around two
artificial lakes. The Hindola Mahal looks like a
railway viaduct bridge with its disproportionately
large buttresses supporting the walls. This was the
audience hall of the Sultan and also the place where
he showed himself to his subjects. Batter was used
very effectively to give an impression of swinging
(Hindola) walls.
Jahaaz Mahal is an elegant two-storey ‘ship-
palace’ between two reservoirs, with open pavilions,
balconies overhanging the water and a terrace.
Built by Sultan Ghiyasuddin Khilji it was possibly
used as his harem and as the ultimate pleasure
and recreational resort. It had a complex
Hindola Mahal
Hoshang Shah’s tomb
AN INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN ART
Jama Masjid, Mandu
arrangement of watercourses and a terrace
swimming pool.
Rani Rupmati’s double pavilion
perched on the southern embattlements
afforded a beautiful view of the Narmada
valley. Baz Bahadur’s palace had a wide
courtyard ringed with halls and terraces.
A madrasa called Asharfi Mahal now
lies in ruins. Hoshang Shah’s tomb is a
majestic structure with a beautiful dome,
marble jali work, porticos, courts and
towers. It is regarded as an example of
the robustness of Afghan structures, but
its lattice work, carved brackets and
toranas lend it a softer hue.
The Jama Masjid of Mandu was built on a large scale to accommodate
many worshippers for Friday prayers. It is entered through a  monumental
gateway, topped with a squat dome, beyond which lies an open courtyard
flanked with columned cloisters on three sides, also topped with smaller
domes. The building is faced with red sandstone. The mimbar in the Qibla
Liwan is supported on carved brackets and the mihrab has a lotus bud
fringe.
Pathan architecture of Mandu is regarded as too close to the structures
of Imperial Delhi to make a bold statement of local traditions. Nevertheless,
the so-called robust, austere Pathan architecture of Mandu with its surface
embellishments of jalis, carved brackets, etc., and the lightness of the
structures was an important intervention in the narrative of the Indo-Islamic
architectural experience.
Jahaaz Mahal , Mandu
SOME ASPECTS OF INDO-ISLAMIC ARCHITECTURE
From 1632 onwards it took nearly twenty years
and 20,000 specialised workers to complete this monument.
TAJ MAHAL
