EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS
SCIENCE
CLASS X
© NCERT
not to be republished
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF) 2005 initiated a new phase of
development of syllabi and textbooks for all stages of school education. In
this phase, a conscious effort has been made to discourage rote learning and
to enhance comprehension. This is well in tune with the NPE-1986 and
Learning Without Burden-1993 that recommend child centred system of
education. The textbooks for Class IX were released in February, 2006 and
for Class X in December, 2006. Overall the books have been well received by
students and teachers.
NCF-2005 notes that treating the prescribed textbooks as the sole basis of
examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning
are ignored. It further reiterates that the methods used for teaching and
evaluation will also determine how effective these textbooks prove for making
children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than source of stress or
boredom. It calls for reforms in examination system currently prevailing in
the country.
The position papers of the National Focus Groups on Teaching of Science,
Teaching of Mathematics and Examination Reforms envisage that the question
papers, set in annual examinations conducted by the various Boards do not
really assess genuine understanding of the subjects. The quality of question
papers is often not up to the mark. They usually seek mere information
based on rote memorisation, and fail to test higher-order skills like reasoning
and analysis, let alone lateral thinking, creativity and judgment. Good
unconventional questions, challenging problems and experiment-based
problems rarely find a place in question  papers. In order to address  the
issue, and also to provide additional learning material, the Department of
Education in Science and Mathematics (DESM) has made an attempt to
develop resource book of exemplar problems in different subjects at secondary
and higher-secondary stages. Each resource book contains different types of
questions of varying difficulty level. Some questions would require the students
to apply simultaneously understanding of more than one concept. These
problems are not meant to serve merely as questions bank for examinations
but are primarily meant to improve the quality of teaching/learning process
in schools. It is expected that these problems would encourage teachers to
design quality questions on their own. Students and teachers should always
keep in mind that examination and assessment should test comprehension,
information recall, analytical thinking and problem-solving ability, creativity
and speculative ability.
© NCERT
not to be republished
A team of experts and teachers with an understanding of the subject
and a proper role of examinations worked hard to accomplish this task.
The material was discussed, edited and finally included in this resource
book.
NCERT would welcome suggestions from students, teachers and
parents which would help us to further improve the quality of this
material in subsequent editions.
New Delhi
Prof. Yash Pal
© NCERT
not to be republished
The Department of Education in Science and Mathematics (DESM), National
Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT), initiated the
programme for the development of ‘Exemplar Problems’ in Science and
Mathematics for secondary and higher secondary stages based on the subject
textbooks developed on the bases of the NCF-2005. The present book is based
on the contents of the Science Textbook for Class X published by the Council
in December, 2006.
The main objective of the book on ‘Exemplar Problems in Science’ is to
provide the teachers and students a large number of quality problems in
various forms and format with varying levels of difficulty to facilitate teaching-
learning of concepts in Science that are presented through the textbook for
Class X. It is envisaged that the problems included in this book would help the
teachers to design tasks to assess effectiveness of their preparation of balanced
question papers for unit and terminal tests. The feedback based on the analysis
of students’ responses may help the teachers in further improving the quality
of classroom instructions. In addition, the problems given in this book are also
expected to help the teachers to perceive the basic characteristics of good
quality questions and motivate them to frame similar problems on their own.
Students can benefit themselves by attempting the problems given in the book
for self assessment and also in mastering the basic techniques of problem
solving. Some of the problems given in the book are expected to challenge the
students understanding of Science concepts and to apply them in new situations.
The problems included in this book were developed in workshop mode
organised by the DESM involving practicing teachers, subject experts from
universities and institutes of higher learning and the members of the Science
group of the DESM whose names appear separately. I gratefully acknowledge
their efforts and thank them for their valuable contribution in our endeavour
to provide good quality instructional material for the school system. I
especially thank Professor Krishna Kumar, Director, and Professor G. Ravindra,
Joint Director, NCERT for their administrative support and keen interest in
the development of the book. I acknowledge with thanks the dedicated efforts
and valuable contribution of Dr. Anjni Koul, coordinator of this programme.
I also thank Dr. K.T. Chitralekha, Copy Editor and Shri Mohammad
Jabir Hussain, DTP Operator for typing the manuscript and preparing a
press-ready copy.
We look forward to feedback from students, teachers and parents for further
improvement of the contents of the book.
Dr. Hukum Singh
New Delhi
Professor and Head
© NCERT
not to be republished
MEMBERS
Rupamanjari Ghosh, Professor and Dean, School of Physical Sciences,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi. Chief Advisor of Science Textbooks for
Classes IX and X
Alka Mehrotra, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Animesh K. Mahapatra, Reader, RIE, Ajmer
B.K. Sharma, Professor (Retd.), DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
B.K. Tripathi, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Brahm Parkash, Professor (Retd.), DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Dinesh Kumar, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Gagan Gupta, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Haritma Chopra, Reader, Maitreyi College, Delhi University, Delhi
H.C. Jain, Principal (Retd.), RIE, Ajmer
Mahesh Prakash, Professor, Department of Physics, Jiwaji University, Gwalior
Manju Mishra, PGT, Navyug School, Moti Bagh, New Delhi
Meenambika Menon, TGT, Cambridge School, Noida
Monika Chopra, PGT, N.C. Jindal Public School, Punjabi Bagh, New Delhi
Nalini Nigam, Reader, Department of Botany, Ramjas College, Delhi
University, Delhi
R. Joshi, Lecturer (S.G), DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
R.P. Singh, Lecturer, Rajkiya, Pratibha Vidyalaya, Kishen Ganj, Delhi
Ruchi Verma, Lecturer, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Sanjeev Kumar, Reader, School of Sciences, Indira Gandhi National Open
University (IGNOU), Maidan Garhi, New Delhi
Shahid Hasan, Scientific officer, Department of Physics, Aligarh Muslim
University, Aligarh
Sulekh Chandra, Reader, Department of Chemistry, Zakir Hussain College, Delhi
University, Delhi
V.V. Anand, Reader, RIE, Mysore
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Anjni Koul, Senior Lecturer, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi.
DEVELOPMENT TEAM
© NCERT
not to be republished
The National Council of Educational Research and Training is grateful to the
members of Development Committee, whose names are given separately, for
their contribution in the development of Exemplar Problems in Science for
Class X. The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contribution of the
following members for reviewing the manuscript of the book: Raji
Kamalasanan, PGT, DTEA Senior Secondary School, R.K. Puram, New Delhi,
Meenakshi Tawakley, Reader (Retd.), Maitreyi College, New Dehi, Ravi A.
TGT, JNU, Devarahalli, Davangere, Karnataka, J.P. Aggarwal, Retd. ADE,
Directorate of Education, GNC, Delhi, K.K. Arora, Reader, Zakir Hussain
College, New Delhi, Sanjeev Bansal, Headmaster, Ahlcon Public School, Mayur
Vihar, Delhi, Kusum Chander, PGT, Army Public School, Sector-37, Noida,
Anju Sachdeva, DPS, R.K. Puram, New Delhi.
Special thanks are due to Hukum Singh, Professor and Head, Department
of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT, New Delhi for providing
all academic and administrative support.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the support provided by the APC
Office of DESM, administrative staff of DESM; Deepak Kapoor, Incharge,
Computer Station, DESM; Mohammad Jabir Hussain, DTP Operator and K.T.
Chitralekha, Copy Editor. The efforts of the Publication Department, NCERT
are also highly appreciated.
A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S
© NCERT
not to be republished
INTRODUCTION
The task of building an enlightened, knowledgeable and prosperous nation rests on
the shoulders of its children, the future citizens, who are to be cherished, nurtured and
taken care with tenderness. Education, particularly school education has always played
this important role. It has emerged as an important segment of the total educational
system expected to contribute significantly to the individual, social as well as the national
developmental processes. In order to effectively fulfill this role, its progress and processes
including curriculum need to be continuously reviewed, restructured and updated. The
present National Curriculum Framework–2005 (NCF–2005), has identified five guiding
principles for curriculum planning, development and transaction —
Connecting knowledge to life outside the school.
Ensuring that learning shifts away from rote methods.
Enriching the curriculum so that it goes beyond textbooks.
Making examinations more flexible and integrating them with class room life.
Nurturing an overriding identity informed by caring concerns within the
democratic polity of the country.
Most pertinent of these guiding principles is perhaps the one pertaining to  evaluation
system which expects  to make examination processes more flexible and to integrate
them with everyday life. It can be implemented effectively  only if evaluation is designed
in such a manner that it can be used as a powerful means of influencing the quality of
classroom instructional transactions so as to help the learners internalise the subject
matter rather than make them a store house of information. However, the evaluation
system, as it exists today, is such that it focuses only on cognitive learning outcomes
and completely ignores the non-cognitive aspects, which are equally vital components
of human personality.
CHILD AS A CONSTRUCTOR OF KNOWLEDGE
Traditionally it is believed that students learn from teachers and it is their responsibility
to ensure that students learn. A teacher is classified as effective or otherwise  depending
on the achievements of his/her students in examinations. Actually the examination
system in India occupies a central place in the entire education system that it tends to
thwart any attempt to innovate teaching learning process. In order to improve the quality
of school education, it is imperative that  examination system ought to be debated in
detail at the highest policy levels and transformed radically throughout the country.
Examinations in their present form are not the real measure of student’s potential
because these are limited to test only one aspect i.e. content knowledge of the course
that the students strive to learn over a period of one year.
NCF–2005 suggests that teaching should be learner centered where learner is placed
at the centre of teaching processes. It envisages the primacy of children’s experiences,
their voices and their active involvement in the process of learning. Learning experiences
© NCERT
not to be republished
at school should pave the way for construction of knowledge and fostering creativity so
that it becomes a source of joy and not a stress. The syllabi and textbooks developed on
the basis of NCF–2005 signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. The syllabus
designers have tried to address the problem of curriculum burden by restructuring
and reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration for child
psychology. The textbooks, particularly in science, attempts to enhance this endeavour
by giving higher priority and space for contemplation and wonder in the texts, and
suggesting discussions in small groups and activities requiring hands on experiences,
through  exercises and practical work.
In the present Science Textbook for Class X, the science concepts are framed not
along disciplinary lines, but rather organized around themes that are potentially cross
disciplinary in nature. The themes are  Materials, The world of the Living, How Things
work, Natural Phenomena and Natural Resources. There are sixteen chapters in the
Textbook of  Science for  Class X and these cover the above mentioned themes.
Chapter-1 “ Chemical Reaction and Equations” deals with chemical reactions
and balancing of chemical equations. Different types of reactions like combination,
decomposition, displacement, double displacement, oxidation and reduction have been
discussed.
Chapter-2 “Acids, Bases and Salts” deals with classification of substances into
acids, bases and salts, their identification using indicators. The characteristic chemical
properties have also been discussed. Importance of pH, preparing of some salts and
their uses have also been highlighted.
Chapter-3 “Metals and Non-metals” discusses about properties of metals and non-
metals which are the key areas of discussion. Extraction of metals from their ores
have been explained in a stepwise manner. A common phenomena of corrosion of
metals and its prevention has also been discussed.
Chapter-4 “Carbon and its Compounds” highlights the versatile nature of carbon
and its ability to form a wide range of hydrocarbons. Nomenclature, isomerism and
chemical properties of these compounds have been discussed. Concept of heteroatom
and functional group has been introduced with special reference to properties and
uses of ethanol and ethanoic acid. The use of carbon and its compounds is highlighted
in soaps and detergents.
Chapter-5 “Periodic Classification of Elements” deals with the historical
background of Classification of Elements, introduction of Modern Periodic Table and
general trends in properties of elements with reference to Modern Periodic Table have
been discussed.
Chapter-6 “Life Processes” highlights functions of living beings. It discusses about
multi cellularity and specialisation for the division of labour, which has led to the
development of various systems. Life processes covered in this chapter are nutrition,
© NCERT
not to be republished
respiration, transportation and excretion. Along with salient points of these processes,
an interesting information about dental caries, blood pressure and artificial kidney is
also given.
Chapter-7 “Control and Coordination” discusses the electrical and chemical
coordination of various systems of animals with special emphasis on human beings.
Reflex arc, structure of neuron and brain and role of nervous systems, in causing
actions of muscles. Coordination in plants is discussed with reference to response to
stimulus and various types of growth movements and the role of plant hormones. The
chapter also deals with the endocrine system, which  chemically coordinates other
systems. Some examples are provided with thyroxin, adrenaline and growth hormone.
The condition of diabetes, where pancreatic hormone insulin is deficient, is also cited
as an example.
Chapter-8 “How do Organisms Reproduce?” deals with the importance of variation
in the survival of the species. Attention of the student is also drawn to the fact that
reproduction is related to the stability of the population of the species. Modes of asexual
reproduction are mentioned, with special reference to their positive and negative points.
Sexual reproduction where male and female reproductive systems are explained.
Menstrual cycle along with the  reproductive health, where methods to avoid unwanted
pregnancy are mentioned. True emphasis is given to sensitise the child about female
foeticide.
Chapter-9 “Heredity and Evolution” highlights on heredity and variation.
Contributions of Father Gregor Johann Mendel is given. After explaining Mendel’s
experiments, mechanism of sex determination is also discussed. It deals with  the
acquired and inherited traits, speciation, evidences of evolution and examples of
artificial selection by man. Human evolution is also explained with special mention of
the fact that evolution should not be equated with progress.
Chapter-10 “Light Reflection and Refraction” deals with the phenomena of
reflection and refraction of light using the straight line propagation of light. It also
helps the learner in the study of some of the optical phenomena in nature. This chapter
also explains the reflection of light by spherical mirrors and refraction of light and
their application in real life situations.
Chapter-11 “The Human Eye and the Colourful World” explains some optical
phenomena in nature; functioning of human eye and defects of human eye. This
chapter also discusses about dispersion of light through a prism, formation of rainbow,
splitting of white light and blue colour of the sky.
Chapter-12 “Electricity” deals with the question like  what constitutes electricity,
how does it flow in an electric circuit, what are the factors that control or regulate the
current through a circuit etc. This chapter also deals with heating effect of current
and its electrical application.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Chapter-13 “Magnetic Effect of Electric Current” explains the magnetic effect of
current. It explains magnetic field patterns around a straight current carrying wire, a
circular loop and a solenoid, rules which help in finding direction of magnetic field
lines, force on a current carrying conductor and induced current. This chapter also
highlights the working of electric motor, AC, DC generators and domestic circuit and
importance of fuse and earthing.
Chapter-14 “Sources of Energy” highlights the need for a good and alternate source
of energy, explains the working of devices, harnessing solar, hydro, wind, nuclear,
geothermal, ocean and bio energy. This chapter also explains the environmental
consequences and importance of using non-conventional sources of energy.
Chapter-15 “Our Environment” explains the concept of Ecosystem along with the
biotic and abiotic components. Food chain, food web and mechanism of transfer of
energy from one tropic level to another is also discussed. Discussion about human
activities, which have led to the degradation of environment, ozone depletion, waste
management and environmental awareness are also covered.
Chapter-16 “Management of Natural Resources” deals with the unprecedented
pollution of river Ganga. To reinforce the danger a graphical representation of coliform
count in Ganga is also provided. The three R’s of environment management – Reduce,
Recycle and Reuse – are also mentioned. Various resources  such as  Wildlife, Water,
Coal and Petroleum are discussed. Interesting incidents from real life are provided
about how common people have fought against environmental degradation.
ASSESSMENT IN SCHOOL
National Focus Group Position Paper on ‘Examination Reforms’ strongly recommends
a system of Continuous and Comprehensive Evaluation (CCE)  in order to reduce
stress on children, make evaluation comprehensive and regular, provide space for the
teachers for developing creative thinking, provide a tool for diagnosis and for equipping
learners with greater skill. The CCE scheme is simple, flexible and implementable in
any type of school from the elite one to a school located in rural or tribal areas.
SUGGESTED TYPES OF QUESTIONS
National Focus Group Position Paper on ‘Teaching of Science’ asserts that the major
deficiency in current examination system in science is that it does not really assess genuine
understanding of the subject. It is mostly confined to elicit information through theoretical
questions, which can often be handled by rote learning without proper understanding of
the concepts. The tests rarely include questions that require students to apply their
understanding of concepts to new situations or that compel them to correlate or even to
interpret phenomenon that they experience in daily life or the ones that are based on
experimental data. Usually it is seen that language of questions framed is vague,
ambiguous and misleading. Most questions seek a direct answer.
© NCERT
not to be republished
In the present book an attempt has been made to include a few Multiple Choice
Questions (MCQ’s)  in each chapter which can be used to test real understanding of the
concepts. These questions are likely to help learners to develop proper discriminating
power and thereby reduce guess work factor to a minimum. Efforts have been made that
each one of the options given in MCQ’s appear equally probable.  Further, sentence structure
and language used often gives sufficient clue for the correct answer defeating the very
purpose for which it has been framed. Therefore, utmost care needs to be taken while
framing multiple choice questions, so that, these may be used to test real understanding
of concepts, which inturn would also help reduce student anxiety.
Some Open Ended Questions are given in each chapter to test the expression and
the ability to formulate an argument using relevant facts. A method has to be developed
in marking these questions as multiple answers, all equally appropriate, are possible.
Further direct answers to such questions may not be available in text books.
The Activity Based Questions i.e., Learning by Doing not only increase the sense
of observation among children but also help in better understanding of the concepts.
Some Challenging Questions are also framed for the children with higher mental
ability. Good question setting needs drastic reforms. Good questions can be canvassed
from experts in their discipline, school teachers, educators and even from students.
These questions can be pooled together and can be used in the examination after
careful vetting by evaluation experts. Certain conditions must be met in order to
frame a good question. Unambiguous language, clarity about expected task,
provision of proper data and values of constants are some of the pre-requisites for
framing a good question.
Design of the two sample question papers of Science for Class X theory are given in
Appendix-I. Definition of the SI base units is given in Appendix–II. Elements, their
symbols, atomic number and atomic mass are given in Appendix–III.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Foreword
Preface
Development Team
Acknowledgements
Introduction
Chapter 1
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND EQUATIONS
Chapter 2
ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS
Chapter 3
METALS AND NON-METALS
Chapter 4
CARBON AND ITS COMPOUNDS
Chapter 5
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS
Chapter 6
LIFE PROCESSES
Chapter 7
CONTROL AND COORDINATION
Chapter 8
HOW DO ORGANISMS REPRODUCE?
Chapter 9
HEREDITY AND EVOLUTION
Chapter 10
LIGHT – REFLECTION AND REFRACTION
Chapter 11
HUMAN EYE AND COLOURFUL WORLD
Chapter 12
ELECTRICITY
Chapter 13
MAGNETIC EFFECTS OF ELECTRIC CURRENT
Chapter 14
SOURCES OF ENERGY
Chapter 15
OUR ENVIRONMENT
Chapter 16
MANAGEMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES
ANSWERS
Appendix–I
Appendix–II
Appendix–III
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
© NCERT
not to be republished
Multiple Choice Questions
Which of the following is not a physical change?
(a) Boiling of water to give water vapour
(b) Melting of ice to give water
(c) Dissolution of salt in water
(d) Combustion of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG)
The following reaction is an example of a
4NH3(g) + 5O2(g) → 4NO(g) + 6H2O(g)
(i) displacement reaction
(ii) combination reaction
(iii) redox reaction
(iv) neutralisation reaction
(a) (i) and (iv)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (i) and (iii)
(d) (iii) and (iv)
Which of the following statements about the given reaction are correct?
3Fe(s) + 4H2O(g) → Fe3O4(s) + 4H2(g)
(i) Iron metal is getting oxidised
(ii) Water is getting reduced
(iii) Water is acting as reducing agent
(iv) Water is acting as oxidising agent
(a) (i), (ii) and (iii)
(b) (iii) and (iv)
(c) (i), (ii) and (iv)
(d) (ii) and (iv)
Which of the following are exothermic processes?
(i) Reaction of water with quick lime
(ii) Dilution of an acid
(iii) Evaporation of water
(iv) Sublimation of camphor (crystals)
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (i) and (iv)
(d) (iii) and (iv)
Chemical Reactions
and Equations
CHAPTER
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Three beakers labelled as A, B and C each containing 25 mL
of water were taken. A small amount of NaOH, anhydrous
CuSO4 and NaCl were added to the beakers A, B and C
respectively. It was observed that there was an increase in
the temperature of the solutions contained in beakers A and
B, whereas in case of beaker C, the temperature of the
solution falls. Which one of the following statement(s) is(are)
correct?
(i) In beakers A and B, exothermic process has occurred.
(ii) In beakers A and B, endothermic process has occurred.
(iii) In beaker C exothermic process has occurred.
(iv) In beaker C endothermic process has occurred.
(a) (i) only
(b) (ii) only
(c) (i) and (iv)
(d) (ii) and (iii)
A dilute ferrous sulphate solution was gradually added to the
beaker containing acidified permanganate solution. The light
purple colour of the solution fades and finally disappears.
Which of the following is the correct explanation for the
observation?
(a) KMnO4 is an oxidising agent, it oxidises  FeSO4
(b) FeSO4  acts as an oxidising agent and oxidises KMnO4
(c) The colour disappears due to dilution; no reaction is involved
(d) KMnO4 is an unstable compound and decomposes in presence
of FeSO4 to a colourless compound.
Which among the following is(are) double displacement
reaction(s)?
(i) Pb + CuCl2 → PbCl 2 + Cu
(ii) Na2SO 4 + BaCl2 → BaSO4 + 2NaCl
(iii) C + O2 → CO2
(iv) CH4 + 2O2 → CO2 + 2H2O
(a) (i) and (iv)
(b) (ii) only
(c) (i) and (ii)
(d) (iii) and (iv)
Which among the following statement(s) is(are) true? Exposure of
silver chloride  to sunlight for a long duration turns grey due to
(i) the formation of silver by decomposition of silver chloride
(ii)  sublimation of silver chloride
(iii) decomposition of chlorine gas from silver chloride
(iv) oxidation of silver chloride
(a) (i) only
(b) (i) and (iii)
(c) (ii) and (iii)
(d) (iv) only
© NCERT
not to be republished
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND EQUATIONS
Solid calcium oxide  reacts vigorously with water to form calcium
hydroxide  accompanied by liberation of heat. This process is
called slaking of lime.  Calcium hydroxide dissolves in water to
form its solution called lime water. Which among the following is
(are) true about slaking of lime and the solution formed?
(i) It is an endothermic reaction
(ii) It is an exothermic reaction
(iii) The pH of the resulting solution will be more than seven
(iv) The pH of the resulting solution will be less than seven
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (i) and (iv)
(d) (iii) and (iv)
Barium chloride on reacting with ammonium sulphate forms
barium sulphate and ammonium chloride. Which of the following
correctly represents the type of the reaction involved?
(i) Displacement reaction
(ii) Precipitation reaction
(iii) Combination reaction
(iv) Double displacement reaction
(a) (i) only
(b) (ii) only
(c) (iv) only
(d) (ii) and (iv)
Electrolysis of water is a decomposition reaction. The mole ratio of
hydrogen and oxygen gases liberated during electrolysis of water is
(a) 1:1
(b) 2:1
(c) 4:1
(d) 1:2
Which of the following is(are) an endothermic process(es)?
(i) Dilution of sulphuric acid
(ii) Sublimation of dry ice
(iii) Condensation of water vapours
(iv) Evaporation of water
(a) (i) and (iii)
(b) (ii) only
(c) (iii) only
(d) (ii) and (iv)
In the double displacement reaction between aqueous potassium
iodide and aqueous lead nitrate, a yellow precipitate of lead iodide
is formed. While performing the activity if lead nitrate is not
available, which of the following can be used in place of lead
nitrate?
(a) Lead sulphate (insoluble)
(b) Lead acetate
(c) Ammonium nitrate
(d) Potassium sulphate
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Which of the following gases can be used for storage of fresh
sample of an oil for a long time?
(a) Carbon  dioxide or oxygen
(b) Nitrogen or oxygen
(c) Carbon dioxide or helium
(d) Helium or nitrogen
The following reaction is used for the preparation of oxygen gas
in the laboratory
2KClO3 (s)
Catalys
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→ 2KCl (s) + 3O2 (g)
Which of the following statement(s) is(are) correct about the
reaction?
(a) It is a decomposition reaction and endothermic in nature
(b) It is a combination reaction
(c) It is a decomposition reaction and accompanied by release of
(d) It is a photochemical decomposition reaction and exothermic
in nature
Which one of the following processes involve chemical reactions?
(a) Storing of oxygen gas under pressure in a gas cylinder
(b) Liquefaction of air
(c) Keeping petrol in a china dish in the open
(d) Heating copper wire in presence of air at high temperature
In which of the following chemical equations, the abbreviations
represent the correct states of the reactants and products involved
at reaction temperature?
(a) 2H2(l) + O2(l) → 2H2O(g)
(b) 2H2(g) + O2(l) → 2H2O(l)
(c) 2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O(l)
(d) 2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O(g)
Which of the following are combination reactions?
(i) 2KClO3
⎯⎯⎯⎯→ 2KCl  + 3O2
(ii) MgO + H2O  ⎯→ Mg(OH)2
(iii) 4Al + 3O2   ⎯→ 2Al2 O3
(iv) Zn + FeSO4   ⎯→ ZnSO 4 + Fe
(a) (i) and (iii)
(b) (iii) and (iv)
(c) (ii) and (iv)
(d) (ii) and (iii)
© NCERT
not to be republished
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND EQUATIONS
Short Answer Questions
Write the balanced chemical equations for the following reactions
and identify the type of reaction in each case.
(a) Nitrogen gas is treated with hydrogen gas in the presence of a
catalyst at 773K to form ammonia gas.
(b) Sodium hydroxide solution is treated with acetic acid to form
sodium acetate and water.
(c) Ethanol is warmed with ethanoic acid to form ethyl acetate in
the presence of concentrated H2SO4 .
(d) Ethene is burnt in the presence of oxygen to form carbon
dioxide, water and releases heat and light.
Write the balanced chemical equations for the following reactions
and identify the type of reaction in each case.
(a) Thermit reaction, iron (III) oxide reacts with aluminium and
gives molten iron and aluminium oxide.
(b) Magnesium ribbon is burnt in an atmosphere of nitrogen gas
to form solid magnesium nitride.
(c) Chlorine gas is passed in an aqueous potassium iodide
solution to form potassium chloride solution and solid iodine.
(d) Ethanol is burnt in air to form carbon dioxide, water and
releases heat.
Complete the missing components/variables given as x and y in
the following reactions
(a) Pb(NO3)2 (aq) + 2KI(aq) ⎯→ PbI2 (x) + 2KNO3(y)
(b) Cu(s) + 2Ag NO3(aq) ⎯→ Cu(NO3)2(aq) + x(s)
(c) Zn(s) + H2SO4(aq) ⎯→ ZnSO4(x) + H2(y)
(d) CaCO3(s)
→ CaO(s) + CO2(g)
Which among the following changes are exothermic or
endothermic in nature?
(a) Decomposition of ferrous sulphate
(b) Dilution of sulphuric acid
(c) Dissolution of sodium hydroxide in water
(d) Dissolution of ammonium chloride in water
23. Identify the reducing agent in the following reactions
(a) 4NH3 + 5O2  ⎯→ 4NO + 6H 2O
(b) H2O + F 2  ⎯→ HF  + HOF
(c) Fe2O3 + 3CO ⎯→ 2Fe + 3CO2
(d) 2H2 + O2 ⎯→ 2H2O
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Identify the oxidising agent (oxidant) in the following reactions
(a) Pb3O4 + 8HCl ⎯→ 3PbCl2 + Cl2 + 4H2O
(b) 2Mg + O2 ⎯→ 2MgO
(c) CuSO4  + Zn ⎯→ Cu + ZnSO4
(d) V2O5 + 5Ca ⎯→ 2V + 5CaO
(e) 3Fe + 4H2O ⎯→ Fe3O4 + 4H2
(f) CuO + H2  ⎯→ Cu + H2O
Write the balanced chemical equations for the following reactions
(a) Sodium carbonate on reaction with hydrochloric acid in equal
molar concentrations gives sodium chloride and sodium
hydrogencarbonate.
(b) Sodium hydrogencarbonate on reaction with hydrochloric acid
gives sodium chloride, water and liberates carbon dioxide.
(c) Copper sulphate on treatment with potassium iodide
precipitates cuprous iodide (Cu2 I2), liberates iodine gas and
also forms potassium sulphate.
A solution of potassium chloride when mixed with silver nitrate
solution,  an insoluble white substance is formed. Write the chemical
reaction involved and also mention the type of the chemical reaction?
Ferrous sulphate decomposes with the evolution of a gas having
a characteristic odour of burning sulphur. Write the chemical
reaction involved and identify the type of reaction.
Why do fire flies glow at night?
Grapes hanging on the plant do not ferment but after being
plucked from the plant can be fermented. Under what conditions
do these grapes ferment? Is it a chemical or a physical change?
Which among the following are physical or chemical changes?
(a) Evaporation of petrol
(b) Burning of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG)
(c) Heating of an iron rod to red hot.
(d) Curdling of milk
(e) Sublimation of solid ammonium chloride
During the reaction of some metals with dilute hydrochloric acid,
following observations were made.
(a) Silver metal does not show any change
(b) The temperature of the reaction mixture rises when aluminium
(Al) is added.
(c) The reaction of sodium metal is found to be highly explosive
(d) Some bubbles of a gas are seen when lead (Pb) is reacted with
the acid.
Explain these observations giving suitable reasons.
© NCERT
not to be republished
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND EQUATIONS
A substance  X, which is an oxide of a group 2 element, is used
intensively in the cement industry. This element is present in bones
also. On treatment with water it forms a solution which turns red
litmus blue. Identify X and also write the chemical reactions involved.
Write a balanced chemical equation for each of the following
reactions and also classify them.
(a) Lead acetate solution is treated with dilute hydrochloric acid
to form lead chloride and acetic acid solution.
(b) A piece of sodium metal is added to absolute ethanol to form
sodium ethoxide and hydrogen gas.
(c) Iron (III) oxide on heating  with carbon monoxide gas reacts
to form solid iron and liberates carbon dioxide gas.
(d) Hydrogen sulphide gas reacts with oxygen gas to form solid
sulphur and liquid water.
Why do we store silver chloride in dark coloured bottles?
Balance the following chemical equations and identify the type of
chemical reaction.
(a) Mg(s) + Cl2(g) ⎯→ MgCl2(s)
(b) HgO(s)
⎯⎯⎯⎯→ Hg(l) + O2(g)
(c) Na(s) + S(s)
⎯⎯⎯⎯→ Na2S(s)
(d) TiCl4(l) + Mg(s) ⎯→ Ti(s) + MgCl2(s)
(e) CaO(s) + SiO2(s) ⎯→ CaSiO3(s)
(f) H2O2(l)
→ H2O(l) + O 2(g)
A magnesium ribbon is burnt in oxygen to give a white compound
X accompanied by emission of light. If the burning ribbon is now
placed in an atmosphere of nitrogen, it continues to burn and
forms a compound Y.
(a) Write the chemical formulae of X and Y.
(b) Write a balanced chemical equation, when X is dissolved in
water.
Zinc liberates hydrogen gas when reacted with dilute hydrochloric
acid, whereas copper does not. Explain why?
A silver article generally turns black when kept in the open for a few
days. The article when rubbed with toothpaste again starts shining.
(a) Why do silver articles turn black when kept in the open for a
few days? Name the phenomenon involved.
(b) Name the black substance formed and give its chemical
formula.
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Long Answer Questions
On heating blue coloured powder of copper (II) nitrate in a boiling
tube, copper oxide (black), oxygen gas and a brown gas X is formed
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation of the reaction.
(b) Identity the brown gas X evolved.
(c) Identity the type of reaction.
(d) What could be the pH range of aqueous solution of the gas X?
Give the characteristic tests for the following gases
(a) CO2
(b) SO2
(c) O2
(d) H2
What happens when a piece of
(a) zinc metal is added to copper sulphate solution?
(b) aluminium metal is added to dilute hydrochloric acid?
(c) silver metal is added to copper sulphate solution?
Also, write the balanced chemical equation if the reaction
occurs
What happens when zinc granules are treated with dilute solution
of H2SO 4, HCl, HNO 3, NaCl and NaOH, also write the chemical
equations if reaction occurs.
On adding a drop of barium chloride solution to an aqueous
solution of sodium sulphite, white precipitate is obtained.
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation of the reaction involved
(b) What other name can be given to this precipitation reaction?
(c) On adding dilute hydrochloric acid to the reaction mixture,
white precipitate disappears. Why?
You are provided with two containers made up of copper and
aluminium. You are also provided with solutions of dilute HCl,
dilute HNO3, ZnCl2 and H2O. In which of the above containers
these solutions can be kept?
© NCERT
not to be republished
Multiple Choice Questions
What happens when a solution of an acid is mixed with a solution
of a base in a test tube?
(i) The temperature of the solution increases
(ii) The temperature of the solution decreases
(iii) The temperature of the solution remains the same
(iv) Salt formation takes place
(a) (i) only
(b) (i) and (iii)
(c) (ii) and (iii)
(d) (i) and (iv)
An aqueous solution turns red litmus solution blue. Excess
addition of which of the following solution would reverse the
change?
(a) Baking powder
(b) Lime
(c) Ammonium hydroxide solution
(d) Hydrochloric acid
During the preparation of hydrogen chloride gas on a humid day,
the gas is usually passed through the guard tube containing calcium
chloride. The role of calcium chloride taken in the guard tube is to
(a) absorb the evolved gas
(b) moisten the gas
(c) absorb moisture from the gas
(d) absorb Cl– ions from the evolved gas
Which of the following salts does not contain water of crystallisation?
(a) Blue vitriol
(b) Baking soda
(c) Washing soda
(d) Gypsum
Acids, Bases
and Salts
CHAPTER
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Sodium carbonate is a basic salt because it is a salt of
(a) strong acid and strong base
(b) weak acid and weak base
(c) strong acid and weak base
(d) weak acid and strong base
Calcium phosphate is present in tooth enamel. Its nature is
(a) basic
(b) acidic
(c) neutral
(d) amphoteric
A sample of soil is mixed with water and allowed to settle. The
clear supernatant solution turns the pH paper yellowish-orange.
Which of the following would change the colour of this pH paper
to greenish-blue?
(a) Lemon juice
(b) Vinegar
(c) Common salt
(d) An antacid
Which of the following gives the correct increasing order of acidic
strength?
(a) Water <Acetic acid <Hydrochloric acid
(b) Water <Hydrochloric acid <Acetic acid
(c) Acetic acid <Water <Hydrochloric acid
(d) Hydrochloric acid <Water <Acetic acid
If a few drops of a concentrated acid accidentally spills over the
hand of a student, what should be done?
(a) Wash the hand with saline solution
(b) Wash the hand immediately with plenty of water and apply a
paste of sodium hydrogencarbonate
(c) After washing with plenty of water apply solution of sodium
hydroxide  on the hand
(d) Neutralise the acid with a strong alkali
Sodium hydrogencarbonate when added to acetic acid evolves a gas.
Which of the following statements are true about the gas evolved?
(i) It turns lime water milky
(ii) It extinguishes a burning splinter
(iii) It dissolves in a solution of sodium hydroxide
(iv) It has a pungent odour
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (i), (ii) and (iii)
(c) (ii), (iii) and (iv)
(d) (i) and (iv)
© NCERT
not to be republished
ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS
Common salt besides being used in kitchen can also be used as
the raw material for making
(i) washing soda
(ii) bleaching powder
(iii) baking soda
(iv) slaked lime
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (i), (ii) and (iv)
(c) (i) and (iii)
(d) (i), (iii) and (iv)
One of the constituents of baking powder is sodium
hydrogencarbonate, the other constituent is
(a) hydrochloric acid
(b) tartaric acid
(c) acetic acid
(d) sulphuric acid
To protect tooth decay we are advised to brush our teeth regularly.
The nature of the tooth paste commonly used is
(a) acidic
(b) neutral
(c) basic
(d) corrosive
Which of the following statements is correct about an aqueous
solution of an acid and of a base?
(i) Higher the pH, stronger the acid
(ii) Higher the pH, weaker the acid
(iii) Lower the pH, stronger the base
(iv) Lower the pH, weaker the base
(a) (i) and (iii)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (i) and (iv)
(d) (ii) and (iv)
The pH of the gastric juices released during digestion is
(a) less than 7
(b) more than 7
(c) equal to 7
(d) equal to 0
Which of the following phenomena occur, when a small amount of
acid is added to water?
(i) Ionisation
(ii) Neutralisation
(iii) Dilution
(iv) Salt formation
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (i) and (iii)
(c) (ii) and (iii)
(d) (ii) and (iv)
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Which one of the following can be used as an acid–base indicator
by a visually impared student?
(a) Litmus
(b) Turmeric
(c) Vanilla essence
(d) Petunia leaves
Which of the following substance will not give carbon dioxide on
treatment with dilute acid?
(a) Marble
(b) Limestone
(c) Baking soda
(d) Lime
Which of the following is acidic in nature?
(a) Lime juice
(b) Human blood
(c) Lime water
(d) Antacid
Rubber
Dilute NaOH
solution
Switch
6 volt battery
Beaker
In an attempt to demonstrate electrical conductivity
through an electrolyte, the following apparatus
(Figure 2.1) was set up.
Which among the following statement(s) is(are)
correct?
(i) Bulb will not glow because electrolyte is not
acidic
(ii) Bulb will glow because NaOH is a strong base
and furnishes ions for conduction.
(iii) Bulb will not glow because circuit is incomplete
(iv) Bulb will not glow because it depends upon
the type of electrolytic solution
(a) (i) and (iii)
(b) (ii) and (iv)
(c) (ii) only
(c) (iv) only
Which of the following is used for dissolution of gold?
(a) Hydrochloric acid
(b) Sulphuric acid
(c) Nitric acid
(d) Aqua regia
Fig. 2.1
© NCERT
not to be republished
ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS
Which of the following is not a mineral acid?
(a) Hydrochloric acid
(b) Citric acid
(c) Sulphuric acid
(d) Nitric acid
Which among the following is not a base?
(a) NaOH
(b) KOH
(c) NH4OH
(d) C2H5 OH
Which of the following statements is not correct?
(a) All metal carbonates react with acid to give a salt, water and
carbon dioxide
(b) All metal oxides react with water to give salt and acid
(c) Some metals react with acids to give salt and hydrogen
(d) Some non metal oxides react with water to form an acid
Match the chemical substances given in Column (A) with their
appropriate application given in Column (B)
Column (A)
Column (B)
(A) Bleaching powder
(i)   Preparation of glass
(B) Baking soda
(ii)  Production of H2 and Cl2
(C) Washing soda
(iii) Decolourisation
(D) Sodium chloride
(iv) Antacid
(a) A—(ii),
B—(i),
C—(iv),
D—(iii)
(b) A—(iii),
B—(ii),
C—(iv),
D—(i)
(c) A—(iii),
B—(iv),
C—(i),
D—(ii)
(d) A—(ii),
B—(iv),
C—(i),
D—(iii)
Equal volumes of hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide
solutions of same concentration are mixed and the pH of the
resulting solution is checked with a pH paper. What would be the
colour obtained? (You may use colour guide given in Figure 2.2
Figure 2.2
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
(a) Red
(b) Yellow
(c) Yellowish green
(d) Blue
Which of the following is(are) true when HCl (g) is passed through
water?
(i) It does not ionise in the solution as it is a covalent compound.
(ii) It ionises in the solution
(iii) It gives both hydrogen and hydroxyl ion in the solution
(iv) It forms hydronium ion in the solution due to the combination
of hydrogen ion with water molecule
(a) (i) only
(b) (iii) only
(c) (ii) and (iv)
(d) (iii) and (iv)
Which of the following statements is true for acids?
(a) Bitter and change red litmus to blue
(b) Sour and change red litmus to blue
(c) Sour and change blue litmus to red
(d) Bitter and change blue litmus to red
Which of the following are present in a dilute aqueous solution of
hydrochloric acid?
(a) H3O+ + Cl–
(b) H3O+ + OH–
(c) Cl– + OH–
(d) unionised HCl
Identify the correct representation of reaction occurring during
chloralkali process
(a) 2NaCl(l) + 2H2O(l) →  2NaOH(l) + Cl2(g) + H2(g)
(b) 2NaCl(aq) + 2H2O(aq) →  2NaOH(aq) + Cl2(g) + H2(g)
(c) 2NaCl(aq) + 2H2O(l) →  2NaOH(aq) + Cl2(aq) + H2(aq)
(d) 2NaCl (aq) + 2H2O (l) →  2NaOH (aq) + Cl2(g) + H2(g)
© NCERT
not to be republished
ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS
Short Answer  Questions
Match the acids given in Column (A) with their correct source given
in Column (B)
Column (A)
Column (B)
(a) Lactic acid
Tomato
(b) Acetic acid
Lemon
(c) Citric acid
(iii) Vinegar
(d) Oxalic acid
(iv) Curd
Match the important chemicals given in Column (A) with the
chemical formulae given in Column (B)
Column (A)
Column (B)
(a) Plaster of Paris
Ca(OH)2
(b) Gypsum
CaSO4.1/2 H2O
(c) Bleaching Powder
(iii) CaSO4.2H2O
(d) Slaked Lime
(iv) CaOC12
What will be the action of the following substances on litmus paper?
Dry HCl gas, Moistened NH3 gas, Lemon juice, Carbonated soft
drink,  Curd, Soap solution.
Name the acid present in ant sting and give its chemical formula.
Also give the common method to get relief from the discomfort
caused by the ant sting.
What happens when nitric acid is added to egg shell?
A student prepared solutions of (i) an acid and (ii) a base in two
separate beakers. She forgot to label the solutions and litmus
paper is not available in the laboratory. Since both the solutions
are colourless, how will she distinguish between the two?
How would you distinguish between baking powder and washing
soda by heating?
Salt A commonly used in bakery products on heating gets
converted into another salt B which itself is used for removal of
hardness of water and a gas C is evolved. The gas C when passed
through lime water, turns it milky.  Identify A, B and C.
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Name of the salt
Ammonium chloride
Copper sulphate
(iii)
Sodium chloride
Magnesium nitrate
Potassium sulphate
Calcium nitrate
Formula
NH4Cl
Mg (NO 3)2
K2SO4
Ca(NO3)2
NH4OH
Ca(OH)2
H2SO4
Salt obtained from
In one of the industrial processes used for manufacture of sodium
hydroxide, a gas X is formed as by product. The gas X reacts with
lime water to give a compound Y which is used as a bleaching
agent in chemical industry. Identify X and Y giving the chemical
equation of the reactions involved.
Fill in the missing data in the following table
What are strong and weak acids? In the following list of acids,
separate strong acids from weak acids.
Hydrochloric acid, citric acid, acetic acid, nitric acid, formic acid,
sulphuric acid.
When zinc metal is treated with a dilute solution of a  strong acid,
a gas is evolved, which is utilised in the hydrogenation of oil. Name
the gas evolved. Write the chemical equation of the reaction involved
and also write a test to detect the gas formed.
Long Answer Questions
In the following schematic diagram for the preparation of hydrogen
gas as shown in Figure 2.3, what would happen if following
changes are made?
solution
Soap bubble filled
with hydrogen
Candle
Burning of hydrogen
gas with a pop sound
Zinc granules
Hydrogen
bubbles
Test tube
Stand
Dilute
sulphuric
Delivery tube
Fig. 2.3
© NCERT
not to be republished
ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS
(a) In place of zinc granules, same amount of zinc dust is taken in
the test tube
(b) Instead of dilute sulphuric  acid, dilute hydrochloric acid is
taken
(c) In place of zinc, copper turnings are taken
(d) Sodium hydroxide is taken in place of dilute sulphuric acid
and the tube is heated.
For making cake, baking powder is taken. If at home your mother
uses baking soda instead of baking powder in cake,
(a) how will it affect the taste of the cake and why?
(b) how can baking soda be converted into baking powder?
(c) what is the role of tartaric acid added to baking soda?
A metal carbonate X on reacting with an acid gives a gas which
when passed  through a solution Y gives the carbonate back. On
the other hand, a gas G that is obtained at anode during electrolysis
of brine is passed on dry Y, it gives a compound Z, used for
disinfecting drinking water. Identity X, Y, G and Z.
A dry pellet of a common base B, when kept in open absorbs
moisture and turns sticky. The compound is also a by–product of
chloralkali process. Identify B. What type of reaction occurs when
B is treated with an acidic oxide? Write a balanced chemical
equation for one such solution.
A sulphate salt of Group 2 element of the Periodic Table is a white,
soft substance, which can be moulded into different shapes by
making its dough. When this compound is left in open for some
time, it becomes a solid mass and cannot be used for moulding
purposes. Identify the sulphate salt and why does it show such a
behaviour? Give the reaction involved.
Identify the compound X on the basis of the reactions given below.
Also, write the name and  chemical formulae of A, B and C.
Fig. 2.4
© NCERT
not to be republished
Multiple Choice Questions
Which of the following property is generally not shown by metals?
(a) Electrical conduction
(b) Sonorous in nature
(c) Dullness
(d) Ductility
The ability of metals to be drawn into thin wire is known as
(a) ductility
(b) malleability
(c) sonorousity
(d) conductivity
Aluminium is used for making cooking utensils. Which of the
following properties of aluminium are responsible for the same?
(i) Good thermal conductivity
(ii) Good electrical conductivity
(iii) Ductility
(iv) High melting point
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (i) and (iii)
(c) (ii) and (iii)
(d) (i) and (iv)
Which one of the following metals do not react with cold as well as
hot water?
(a) Na
(b) Ca
(c) Mg
(d) Fe
Metals and Non-metals
CHAPTER
© NCERT
not to be republished
Which of the following oxide(s) of iron would be obtained on
prolonged reaction of iron with steam?
(a) FeO
(b) Fe2O3
(c) Fe3O4
(d) Fe2O3 and Fe3O4
What happens when calcium is treated with water?
(i) It does not react with water
(ii) It reacts violently with water
(iii) It reacts less violently with water
(iv) Bubbles of hydrogen gas formed stick to the surface of calcium
(a) (i) and (iv)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (i) and (ii)
(d) (iii) and (iv)
Generally metals react with acids to give salt and hydrogen gas.
Which of the following acids does not give hydrogen gas on reacting
with metals (except Mn and Mg)?
(a) H2SO4
(b) HCl
(c) HNO3
(d) All of these
The composition of aqua-regia is
(a) Dil.HCl
Conc. HNO3
(b) Conc.HCl
Dil. HNO3
(c) Conc.HCl
Conc.HNO3
(d) Dil.HCl
Dil.HNO3
Which of the following are not ionic compounds?
(i) KCl
(ii) HCl
(iii) CCl4
(iv) NaCl
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (iii) and (iv)
(d) (i) and (iii)
METALS AND NON-METALS
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Which one of the following properties is not generally exhibited by
ionic compounds?
(a) Solubility in water
(b) Electrical conductivity in solid state
(c) High melting  and boiling points
(d) Electrical conductivity in molten state
Which of the following metals exist in their native state in nature?
(i) Cu
(ii) Au
(iii) Zn
(iv) Ag
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (ii) and (iv)
(d) (iii) and (iv)
Metals are refined by using different methods. Which of the
following metals are refined by electrolytic refining?
(i) Au
(ii) Cu
(iii) Na
(iv) K
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (i) and (iii)
(c) (ii) and (iii)
(d) (iii) and (iv)
Silver articles become black on prolonged exposure to air. This is
due to the formation of
(a) Ag 3N
(b) Ag 2O
(c) Ag 2S
(d) Ag2S and Ag3N
Galvanisation is a method of protecting iron from rusting by coating
with a thin layer of
(a) Gallium
(b) Aluminium
(c) Zinc
(d) Silver
Stainless steel is very useful material for our life. In stainless steel,
iron is mixed with
(a) Ni and Cr
(b) Cu and Cr
(c) Ni and Cu
(d) Cu and Au
© NCERT
not to be republished
METALS AND NON-METALS
If copper is kept open in air, it slowly loses its shining brown surface
and gains a green coating. It is due to the formation of
(a) CuSO4
(b) CuCO3
(c) Cu(NO3)2
(d) CuO
Generally, metals are solid in nature. Which one of the following
metals is found in liquid state at room temperature?
(a) Na
(b) Fe
(c) Cr
(d) Hg
Which of the following metals are obtained by electrolysis of their
chlorides in molten state ?
(i) Na
(ii) Ca
(iii) Fe
(iv) Cu
(a) (i) and (iv)
(b) (iii) and (iv)
(c) (i) and (iii)
(d) (i) and (ii)
Generally, non-metals are not lustrous. Which of the following non-
metal is lustrous?
(a) Sulphur
(b) Oxygen
(c) Nitrogen
(d) Iodine
20. Which one of the following four metals would be displaced from
the solution of its salts by other three metals?
(a) Mg
(b) Ag
(c) Zn
(d) Cu
2 mL each of concentrated HCl, HNO3 and a mixture of concentrated
HCl and concentrated HNO3  in the ratio of 3 : 1 were taken in test
tubes labelled as A, B and C. A small piece of metal was put in
each test tube. No change occurred in test tubes A and B but the
metal got dissolved in test tube C respectively. The metal could be
(a) Al
(b) Au
(c) Cu
(d) Pt
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
An alloy is
(a) an element
(b) a compound
(c) a homogeneous mixture
(d) a heterogeneous mixture
An electrolytic cell consists of
(i) positively charged cathode
(ii) negatively charged anode
(iii) positively charged anode
(iv) negatively charged cathode
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (iii) and (iv)
(c) (i) and (iii)
(d) (ii) ad (iv)
During electrolytic refining of zinc, it gets
(a) deposited on cathode
(b) deposited on anode
(c) deposited on cathode as well as anode
(d) remains in the solution
An element A is soft and can be cut with a knife. This is very
reactive to air and cannot be kept open in air. It reacts vigorously
with water. Identify the element from the following
(a) Mg
(b) Na
(c) P
(d) Ca
Alloys are homogeneous mixtures of a metal with a metal  or non-
metal. Which among the following alloys contain non-metal as one
of its constituents?
(a) Brass
(b) Bronze
(c) Amalgam
(d) Steel
Which among the following statements is incorrect for magnesium
metal?
(a) It burns in oxygen with a dazzling white flame
(b) It reacts with cold water to form magnesium oxide and evolves
hydrogen gas
(c) It reacts with hot water to form magnesium hydroxide and
evolves hydrogen gas
(d) It reacts with steam to form magnesium hydroxide and evolves
hydrogen gas
© NCERT
not to be republished
METALS AND NON-METALS
Which among the following alloys contain mercury as one of its
constituents?
(a) Stainless steel
(b) Alnico
(c) Solder
(d) Zinc amalgam
Reaction between X and Y, forms compound Z. X loses electron
and Y gains electron. Which of the following properties is not
shown by Z?
(a) Has high melting point
(b) Has low melting point
(c) Conducts electricity in molten state
(d) Occurs as solid
The electronic configurations of three elements X, Y and Z are
X  — 2, 8;  Y — 2, 8, 7 and Z — 2, 8, 2. Which of the following is
correct?
(a) X is a metal
(b) Y is a metal
(c) Z is a non-metal
(d) Y is a non-metal and Z is a metal
Although metals form basic oxides, which of the following metals
form an amphoteric oxide?
(a) Na
(b) Ca
(c) Al
(d) Cu
Generally, non-metals are not conductors of electricity. Which of
the following is a good conductor of electricity?
(a) Diamond
(b) Graphite
(c) Sulphur
(d) Fullerene
Electrical wires have a coating of an insulting material. The
material, generally used is
(a) Sulphur
(b) Graphite
(c) PVC
(d) All can be used
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Which of the following non-metals is a liquid?
(a) Carbon
(b) Bromine
(c) Phosphorus
(d) Sulphur
Which of the following can undergo a chemical reaction?
(a) MgSO4 + Fe
(b) ZnSO4 + Fe
(c) MgSO4 + Pb
(d) CuSO 4 + Fe
Which one of the following figures correctly describes the process
of electrolytic refining?
Short Answer Questions
Iqbal treated a lustrous, divalent element M with sodium
hydroxide. He observed the formation of bubbles in reaction
mixture. He made the same observations when this element was
treated with hydrochloric acid. Suggest how can he identify the
produced gas. Write chemical equations for both the reactions.
During extraction of metals, electolytic refining is used to obtain
pure metals. (a) Which material will be used as anode and cathode
for refining of silver metal by this process? (b) Suggest a suitable
electrolyte also. (c) In this electrolytic cell, where do we get pure
silver after passing electric current?
Fig. 3.1
© NCERT
not to be republished
METALS AND NON-METALS
Why should the metal sulphides and carbonates be converted to
metal oxides in the process of extraction of metal from them?
Generally, when metals are treated with mineral acids, hydrogen
gas is liberated but when metals (except Mn and Mg), treated with
HNO3, hydrogen is not liberated, why?
Compound X and aluminium are used to join railway tracks. (a)
Identify the compound X (b) Name the reaction  (c) Write down its
reaction.
When a metal X is treated with cold water, it gives a basic salt Y
with molecular formula XOH (Molecular mass = 40) and liberates
a gas Z which easily catches fire. Identify X, Y and Z and also write
the reaction involved.
A non-metal X exists in two different forms Y and Z. Y is the hardest
natural substance, whereas Z is a good conductor of electricity.
Identify X, Y and Z.
The following reaction takes place when aluminium powder is
heated with MnO2
3 MnO2 (s) + 4 Al (s)  → 3 Mn (l) + 2 Al 2O3 (l) + Heat
(a) Is aluminium getting reduced? (b) Is MnO2 getting oxidised?
What are the constituents of solder alloy? Which property of solder
makes it suitable for welding electrical wires?
A metal A, which is used in thermite process, when heated with
oxygen gives an oxide B, which is amphoteric in nature. Identify A
and B. Write down the reactions of oxide B with HCl and NaOH.
A metal that exists as a liquid at room temperature is obtained by
heating its sulphide in the presence of air. Identify the metal and
its ore and give the reaction involved.
Give the formulae of the stable binary compounds that would be
formed by the combination of following pairs of elements.
(a) Mg and N2
(b) Li and O2
(c) Al and Cl2
(d) K and O2
What happens when
(a) ZnCO3 is heated in the absence of oxygen?
(b) a mixture of Cu2O and Cu2S is heated?
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
A non-metal A is an important constituent of our food and forms two
oxides B and C. Oxide B is toxic whereas C causes global warming
(a) Identify A, B and C
(b) To which Group of Periodic Table does A belong?
Give two examples each of the metals that are good conductors
and poor conductors of heat respectively.
Name one metal and one non-metal that exist in liquid state at
room temperature. Also name two metals having melting point
less than 310 K (37°C)
An element A reacts with water to form a compound B which is
used in white washing. The compound B on heating forms an
oxide C which on treatment with water gives back B. Identify A, B
and C and give the reactions involved.
An alkali metal A gives a compound B (molecular mass = 40) on
reacting with water. The compound B gives a soluble compound
C on treatment with aluminium oxide.  Identify A, B and C and
give the reaction involved.
Give the reaction involved during extraction of zinc  from its
ore by
(a) roasting of zinc ore
(b) calcination of zinc ore
A metal M does not liberate hydrogen from acids but reacts with
oxygen to give a black colour product. Identify M and black
coloured product and also explain the reaction of M with oxygen.
An element forms an oxide A2O3 which is acidic in nature. Identify
A as a metal or non-metal.
A solution of CuSO4 was kept in an iron pot. After few days the iron
pot was found to have a number of holes in it. Explain the reason in
terms of reactivity. Write the equation of the reaction involved.
Long Answer Questions
A non-metal A which is the largest constituent of air, when heated
with H2 in 1:3 ratio in the presence of catalyst (Fe) gives a gas B.
On heating  with O 2 it gives an oxide C. If this oxide is passed into
water in the presence of air it gives an acid D which acts as a
strong oxidising agent.
(a) Identify A, B, C and D
(b) To which group of periodic table does this non-metal belong?
© NCERT
not to be republished
METALS AND NON-METALS
Give the steps involved in the extraction of metals of low and
medium reactivity from their respective sulphide ores.
Explain the following
(a) Reactivity of Al decreases if it is dipped in HNO3
(b) Carbon cannot reduce the oxides of  Na or Mg
(c) NaCl is not  a conductor of electricity in solid state whereas it
does conduct electricity in aqueous solution as well as in
molten state
(d) Iron articles are galvanised.
(e) Metals like Na, K, Ca and Mg are never found in their free state
in nature.
(i) Given below are the steps for extraction of copper from its ore.
Write the reaction involved.
(a) Roasting of copper (1) sulphide
(b) Reduction of copper (1) oxide with copper (1) sulphide.
(c) Electrolytic refining
(ii) Draw a neat  and well labelled diagram for electrolytic refining
of copper
Of the three metals X, Y and Z.  X reacts with cold water, Y with hot
water and Z with steam only. Identify X, Y and Z and also arrange
them in order of increasing reactivity.
An element A burns with golden flame in air. It reacts with another
element B, atomic number 17 to give a product C. An aqueous
solution of product C on electrolysis gives a compound D  and
liberates hydrogen. Identify A, B, C and D. Also write down the
equations for the reactions involved.
Two ores A and B were taken. On heating ore A gives CO2 whereas,
ore B gives SO2. What steps will you take to convert them into
metals?
© NCERT
not to be republished
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Carbon exists in the atmosphere in the form of
(a) carbon monoxide only
(b) carbon monoxide in traces and carbon dioxide
(c) carbon dioxide only
(d) coal
2. Which of the following statements are usually correct for carbon
compounds? These
(i) are good conductors of electricity
(ii) are poor conductors of electricity
(iii) have strong forces of attraction between their molecules
(iv) do not have strong forces of attraction between their molecules
(a) (i) and (iii)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (i) and (iv)
(d) (ii) and (iv)
3. A molecule of ammonia (NH3) has
(a) only single bonds
(b) only double bonds
(c) only triple bonds
(d) two double bonds and one single bond
4. Buckminsterfullerene is an allotropic form of
(a) phosphorus
(b) sulphur
(c) carbon
(d) tin
Carbon and its
Compounds
CHAPTER
© NCERT
not to be republished
Which of the following are correct structural isomers of butane?
(iii)
(a) (i) and (iii)
(b) (ii) and (iv)
(c) (i) and (ii)
(d) (iii) and (iv)
CH3– CH2– OH
Alkaline KMnO
→ CH3 – COOH
In the above given reaction, alkaline KMnO4  acts as
(a) reducing agent
(b) oxidising agent
(c) catalyst
(d) dehydrating agent
Oils on treating with hydrogen in the presence of palladium or
nickel catalyst form fats. This is an example of
(a) Addition reaction
(b) Substitution reaction
(c) Displacement reaction
(d) Oxidation reaction
In which of the following compounds, — OH is the functional
group?
(a) Butanone
(b) Butanol
(c) Butanoic acid
(d) Butanal
The soap molecule has a
(a) hydrophilic head and a hydrophobic tail
(b) hydrophobic head and a hydrophilic tail
(c) hydrophobic head and a hydrophobic tail
(d) hydrophilic head and a hydrophilic tail
CARBON AND ITS COMPOUNDS
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Which of the following is the correct representation of electron
dot structure of nitrogen?
Structural formula of ethyne is
(a) H – C
H – C
C – H
Identify the unsaturated compounds from the following
(i) Propane
(ii) Propene
(iii) Propyne
(iv) Chloropropane
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (ii) and (iv)
(c) (iii) and (iv)
(d) (ii) and (iii)
Chlorine reacts with saturated hydrocarbons at room temperature
in the
(a) absence of sunlight
(b) presence of sunlight
(c) presence of water
(d) presence of hydrochloric acid
In the soap micelles
(a) the ionic end of soap is on the surface of the cluster while the
carbon chain is in the interior of the cluster.
(b) ionic end of soap is in the interior of the cluster and the carbon
chain is out of the cluster.
(c) both ionic end and carbon chain are in the interior of the
cluster
(d) both ionic end and carbon chain are on the exterior of the
cluster
© NCERT
not to be republished
CARBON AND ITS COMPOUNDS
Pentane has the molecular formula C5 H12. It has
(a) 5 covalent bonds
(b) 12 covalent bonds
(c) 16 covalent bonds
(d) 17 covalent bonds
Structural formula of benzene is
Ethanol reacts with sodium and forms two products. These are
(a) sodium ethanoate and hydrogen
(b) sodium ethanoate and oxygen
(c) sodium ethoxide and hydrogen
(d) sodium ethoxide and oxygen
The correct structural formula of butanoic acid is
Vinegar is a solution of
(a) 50% – 60% acetic acid in alcohol
(b) 5% – 8% acetic acid in alcohol
(c) 5% – 8% acetic acid in water
(d) 50% – 60% acetic acid in water
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Mineral acids are stronger acids than carboxylic acids because
(i) mineral acids are completely ionised
(ii) carboxylic acids are completely ionised
(iii) mineral acids are partially ionised
(iv) carboxylic acids are partially ionised
(a) (i) and (iv)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (i) and (ii)
(d) (iii) and (iv)
Carbon forms four covalent bonds by sharing its four valence
electrons with four univalent atoms, e.g. hydrogen. After the
formation of four bonds, carbon attains the electronic
configuration of
(a) helium
(b) neon
(c) argon
(d) krypton
The correct electron dot structure of a water molecule is
Which of the following is not a straight chain hydrocarbon?
Which among the following are unsaturated hydrocarbons?
(i) H3C — CH 2 — CH 2 — CH3
(iii)
(a) (i) and (iii)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (ii) and (iv)
(d) (iii) and (iv)
© NCERT
not to be republished
CARBON AND ITS COMPOUNDS
Which of the following does not belong to the same homologous
series?
(a) CH4
(b) C2 H6
(c) C3 H8
(d) C4 H8
The name of the compound CH3 — CH 2 — CHO is
(a) Propanal
(b) Propanone
(c) Ethanol
(d) Ethanal
The heteroatoms present in
CH3 — CH 2 — O — CH2— CH2 Cl  are
(i) oxygen
(ii) carbon
(iii) hydrogen
(iv) chlorine
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (iii) and (iv)
(d) (i) and (iv)
Which of the following represents saponification reaction?
(a) CH3COONa + NaOH
CH4 + Na2CO 3
(b) CH3COOH + C2H5OH
CH 3 COOC2H5 +H2O
(c) 2CH3COOH + 2Na →  2CH3 COONa + H 2
(d) CH3COOC2H5 + NaOH → CH3 COONa + C2 H5OH
The first member of alkyne homologous series is
(a) ethyne
(b) ethene
(c) propyne
(d) methane
Short Answer Questions
Draw the electron dot structure of ethyne and also draw its
structural formula
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Write the names of the following compounds
Identify and name the functional groups present in the following
compounds.
A compound X is formed by the reaction of a carboxylic acid
C2H4O2 and an alcohol in presence of a few drops of H2SO4. The
alcohol on oxidation with alkaline KMnO4 followed by acidification
gives the same carboxylic acid as used in this reaction. Give the
names and structures of (a) carboxylic acid, (b) alcohol and (c)
the compound X. Also write the reaction.
Why detergents are better cleansing agents than soaps? Explain.
Name the functional groups present in the following compounds
(a) CH3 CO CH2 CH2 CH2 CH3
(b) CH3 CH2 CH2 COOH
(c) CH3  CH2  CH2 CH2 CHO
(d) CH3  CH2  OH
How is ethene prepared from ethanol? Give the reaction
involved in it.
Intake of small quantity of methanol can be lethal. Comment.
© NCERT
not to be republished
CARBON AND ITS COMPOUNDS
A gas is evolved when ethanol reacts with sodium. Name the gas
evolved and also write the balanced chemical equation of  the reaction
involved.
Ethene is formed when ethanol at 443 K is heated with excess of
concentrated sulphuric acid. What is the role of sulphuric acid in
this reaction? Write the balanced chemical equation of this
reaction.
Carbon, Group (14) element in the Periodic Table, is known to
form compounds with many elements.
Write an example of a compound formed with
(a) chlorine
(Group 17 of Periodic Table)
(b) oxgygen
(Group 16 of Periodic Table)
In electron dot structure, the valence shell electrons are
represented by crosses or dots.
(a) The atomic number of chlorine is 17. Write its electronic
configuration
(b) Draw the electron dot structure of chlorine molecule.
Catenation is the ability of an atom to form bonds with other
atoms of the same element. It is exhibited by both carbon and
silicon. Compare the ability of catenation of the two elements.
Give reasons.
Unsaturated hydrocarbons contain multiple bonds between the
two C-atoms and show addition reactions. Give the test to
distinguish ethane from ethene.
Match the reactions given in Column (A) with the names given
in column (B).
Column (A)
Column (B)
(a) CH3OH + CH3COOH
CH3COOCH3 + H2O
Addition reaction
(b) CH2 = CH2 + H 2
CH3 — CH3
Substitution reaction
(c) CH4 + Cl2
CH3Cl + HCl
(iii)
Neutralisation reaction
(d) CH3COOH+NaOH
CH3COONa+H2O
Esterification reaction
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Write the structural formulae of all the isomers of hexane.
What is the role of metal or reagents written on arrows in the
given chemical reactions?
(b) CH3 COOH + CH3 CH2 OH
CH3 COOC2 H5 + H2O
(c) CH3 CH2 OH
CH3  COOH
Long Answer Questions
A salt X is formed and a gas is evolved when ethanoic acid reacts
with sodium hydrogencarbonate. Name the salt X and the gas
evolved. Describe an activity and draw the diagram of the
apparatus to prove that the evolved gas is the one which you
have named. Also, write chemical equation of the reaction involved.
(a)  What are hydrocarbons? Give examples.
(b) Give the structural differences between saturated and
unsaturated hydrocarbons with two examples each.
(c) What is a functional group? Give examples of four different
functional groups.
Name the reaction which is commonly used in the conversion of
vegetable oils to fats. Explain the reaction involved in detail.
(a)  Write the  formula and draw electron dot structure of carbon
tetrachloride.
(b) What is saponification? Write the reaction involved in this
process.
Esters are sweet-smelling substances and are used in making
perfumes. Suggest some activity and the reaction involved for the
preparation of an ester with well labeled diagram.
A compound C (molecular formula, C2H4O2) reacts with Na - metal
to form a compound  R and evolves a gas which burns with a pop
sound. Compound C on treatment with an alcohol A in presence
of an acid forms a sweet smelling compound S (molecular formula,
C3H6O2). On addition of NaOH to C, it also gives R and water. S on
treatment with NaOH solution gives back R and A.
Identify C, R, A, S and write down the reactions involved.
© NCERT
not to be republished
CARBON AND ITS COMPOUNDS
Look at Figure 4.1 and answer the following questions
(a) What change would you
observe in the calcium
hydroxide solution taken in
tube B?
(b) Write the reaction involved
in test tubes A and B
respectively.
(c) If ethanol is given instead of
ethanoic acid, would you
expect the same change?
(d) How can a solution of lime
water be prepared in the
laboratory?
How would you bring about the
following conversions? Name
the process and write the reaction involved.
(a) ethanol to ethene.
(b) propanol to propanoic acid.
Write the reactions.
Draw the possible isomers of the compound with molecular
formula C3H6O and also give their electron dot structures.
Explain the given reactions with the examples
(a) Hydrogenation reaction
(b) Oxidation reaction
(c) Substitution reaction
(d) Saponification reaction
(e) Combustion reaction
An organic compound A on heating with concentrated H2SO4 forms
a compound B which on addition of one mole of hydrogen in
presence of Ni forms a compound C. One mole of compound C on
combustion forms two moles of CO2 and 3 moles of H2O. Identify
the compounds A, B and C and write the chemical equations of
the reactions involved.
Fig. 4.1
© NCERT
not to be republished
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Upto which element, the Law of Octaves was found to be applicable
(a) Oxygen
(b) Calcium
(c) Cobalt
(d) Potassium
2. According to Mendeleev's
Periodic Law, the elements were
arranged in the periodic table in the order of
(a)  increasing atomic number
(b) decreasing atomic number
(c)  increasing atomic masses
(d) decreasing atomic masses
3. In Mendeleev
’s Periodic Table, gaps were left for the elements to
be discovered later. Which of the following elements found a place
in the perioidc table later
(a) Germanium
(b) Chlorine
(c) Oxygen
(d) Silicon
4. Which of the following statement (s) about the Modern Periodic
Table are incorrect
(i) The elements in the Modern Periodic Table are arranged on
the basis of their decreasing atomic number
(ii) The elements in the Modern Periodic Table are arranged on
the basis of their increasing atomic masses
(iii) Isotopes are placed in adjoining group (s) in the Periodic Table
(iv) The elements in the Modern Periodic Table are arranged on
the basis of their increasing atomic number
(a) (i) only
(b) (i), (ii) and (iii)
(c) (i), (ii) and (iv)
(d) (iv) only
Periodic Classification
of Elements
CHAPTER
© NCERT
not to be republished
Which of the following statements about the Modern Periodic Table
is correct:
(a) It has 18 horizontal rows known as Periods
(b) It has 7 vertical columns known as Periods
(c) It has 18 vertical columns known as Groups
(d) It has 7 horizontal rows known as Groups
Which of the given elements A, B, C, D and E with atomic number
2, 3, 7, 10 and 30 respectively belong to the same period?
(a) A, B, C
(b) B, C, D
(c) A, D, E
(d) B, D, E
The elements A, B, C, D and E have atomic number 9, 11, 17, 12
and 13 respectively. Which pair of elements belong to the same
group?
(a) A and B
(b) B and D
(c) A and C
(d) D and E
Where would you locate the element with electronic configuration
2,8 in the Modern Periodic Table?
(a) Group 8
(b) Group 2
(c) Group 18
(d) Group 10
An element which is an essential constituent of all organic
compounds belongs to
(a) group 1
(b) group 14
(c) group 15
(d) group 16
Which of the following is the outermost shell for elements of period 2?
(a) K shell
(b) L shell
(c) M shell
(d) N shell
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Which one of the following elements  exhibit maximum number of
valence electrons?
(a) Na
(b) Al
(c) Si
(d) P
Which of the following gives the correct increasing order of the
atomic radii of O, F and N ?
(a) O,  F, N
(b) N, F, O
(c) O, N, F
(d) F, O, N
Which  among the following elements has the largest atomic radii?
(a) Na
(b) Mg
(c) K
(d) Ca
Which of the following elements  would lose an electron easily?
(a) Mg
(b) Na
(c) K
(d) Ca
Which of the following elements does not lose an electron easily?
(a) Na
(b) F
(c) Mg
(d) Al
Which of the following are the characteristics of isotopes of an
element?
(i) Isotopes of an element have same atomic masses
(ii) Isotopes of an element have same atomic number
(iii) Isotopes of an element show same physical properties
(iv) Isotopes of an element show same chemical properties
(a) (i), (iii) and (iv)
(b) (ii), (iii) and (iv)
(c) (ii) and (iii)
(d) (ii) and (iv)
© NCERT
not to be republished
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS
Arrange the following elements in the order of their decreasing
metallic character
Na,  Si,  Cl,  Mg,  Al
(a) Cl > Si >Al > Mg >Na
(b) Na >Mg >Al >Si > Cl
(c) Na > Al > Mg > Cl > Si
(d) Al > Na> Si > Ca> Mg
Arrange the following elements in the order of their increasing non-
metallic character
Li,  O,  C,  Be,  F
(a) F < O < C < Be < Li
(b) Li < Be < C < O< F
(c) F < O < C < Be < Li
(d) F < O < Be < C < Li
What type of oxide would Eka– aluminium form?
(a) EO3
(b) E3 O2
(c) E2 O3
(d) EO
Three elements B,  Si and Ge  are
(a) metals
(b) non-metals
(c) metalloids
(d) metal, non-metal and metalloid respectively
Which of the following elements will form an acidic oxide?
(a) An element with atomic number 7
(b) An element with atomic number 3
(c) An element with atomic number 12
(d) An element with atomic number 19
The element with atomic number 14 is hard and forms acidic oxide
and  a covalent halide. To which of the following categories does
the element belong?
(a) Metal
(b) Metalloid
(c) Non-metal
(d) Left-hand side element
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Which one of the following depict the correct representation of
atomic radius(r) of an atom?
(iii)
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (iii) and (iv)
(d) (i) and (iv)
Which one of the following does not increase while moving down
the group of the periodic table?
(a) Atomic radius
(b) Metallic character
(c) Valence
(d) Number of shells in an element
On moving from left to right in a period in the periodic table, the size of
the atom.
(a) increases
(b) decreases
(c) does not change appreciably
(d) first decreases and then increases
© NCERT
not to be republished
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS
Which of the following set of elements is written in order of their
increasing metallic character?
(a) Be
(b) Na
(c) Mg
(d) C
Short Answer Questions
The three elements A, B and C with similar properties have atomic
masses X, Y and Z respectively. The mass of Y is approximately
equal to the average mass of X and Z. What is such an arrangement
of elements called as? Give one example of such a set of elements.
Elements have been arranged in the following sequence on the
basis of their increasing atomic masses.
Cl,   Ar,  K
(a) Pick two sets of elements which have similar properties.
(b) The given sequence represents which law of classification of
elements?
Can the following groups of elements be classified as Dobereiner's
triad ?
Atomic mass of Be  9; Na  23;  Mg  24;  Si    28;  Cl  35;  Ca  40
Explain by giving reason.
In Mendeleev
’s Periodic Table the elements were arranged in the
increasing order of their atomic masses. However, cobalt with
atomic mass of 58.93 amu was placed before nickel having an
atomic mass of 58.71 amu. Give reason for the same.
“Hydrogen occupies a unique position in Modern Periodic Table”.
Justify the statement.
Write the formulae of chlorides of Eka-silicon and Eka-aluminium,
the elements predicted by
Mendeleev.
Three elements A, B and C have 3, 4  and 2 electrons respectively
in their outermost shell. Give the group number to which they
belong in the Modern Periodic Table. Also, give their valencies.
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
If an element X is placed in group 14, what will be the formula
and the nature of bonding of its chloride?
Compare the radii of two species X and Y. Give reasons for your
answer.
(a) X has 12 protons and 12 electrons
(b) Y has 12 protons and 10 electrons
Arrange the following elements in increasing order of their atomic
radii.
(a) Li,
Be, F,
(b) Cl, At,
Identify and name the metals out of the following elements whose
electronic configurations are given below.
(a) 2,  8,  2
(b) 2,  8,  1
(c) 2,  8,  7
(d) 2,  1
Write the formula of the product formed when the element A (atomic
number 19)  combines with the  element B (atomic number 17).
Draw its electronic dot structure. What is the nature of the bond
formed?
Arrange the following elements in the increasing order of their
metallic character
Mg,    Ca,    K,    Ge,    Ga
Identify the elements with the following property and arrange them
in increasing order of their reactivity
(a) An element which is a soft and reactive metal
(b) The metal which is an important constituent of limestone
(c) The metal which exists in liquid state at room temperature
Properties of the elements are given below. Where would you locate
the following elements in the periodic table?
(a) A soft metal stored under kerosene
(b) An element with variable (more than one) valency stored under
water.
(c) An element which is tetravalent and forms the basis of organic
chemistry
(d) An element which is an inert gas with atomic number 2
(e) An element whose thin oxide layer is used to make other
elements corrosion resistant by the process of “ anodising”
© NCERT
not to be republished
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS
Long Answer  Questions
An element is placed in 2nd Group and 3rd Period of the Periodic
Table, burns in presence of oxygen to form a basic oxide.
(a) Identify the element
(b) Write the electronic configuration
(c) Write the balanced equation when it burns in the presence of air
(d) Write a balanced equation when this oxide is dissolved in water
(e) Draw the electron dot structure for the formation of this oxide
An element X (atomic number 17) reacts with an element Y (atomic
number 20) to form a divalent halide.
(a) Where in the periodic table are elements X and Y placed?
(b) Classify X and Y as metal (s), non-metal (s) or metalloid (s)
(c) What will be the nature of oxide of element Y? Identify the
nature of bonding in the compound formed
(d) Draw the electron dot structure of the divalent halide
Atomic number of a few elements are given below
10, 20, 7, 14
(a) Identify the elements
(b) Identify the Group number of these elements in the Periodic Table
(c) Identify the Periods of these elements in the Periodic Table
(d) What would be the electronic configuration for each of these
elements?
(e) Determine the valency of these elements
Complete the following cross word puzzle (Figure 5.1)
Fig. 5.1
Across:
(1) An element with atomic
number 12.
(3) Metal used in making
cans and member of
Group 14.
(4) A lustrous non-metal
which has 7 electrons in
its outermost shell.
Down:
(2) Highly reactive and soft
metal which imparts
yellow colour when
subjected to flame and
is kept in kerosene.
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
(5) The first element of second Period
(6) An element which is used in making fluorescent bulbs and is
second member of Group 18 in the Modern Periodic Table
(7) A radioactive element which is the last member of halogen
family.
(8) Metal which is an important constituent of steel and forms rust
when exposed to moist air.
(9) The first metalloid in Modern Periodic Table whose fibres are
used in making bullet-proof vests
(a) In this ladder (Figure 5.2) symbols of elements are jumbled
up. Rearrange these symbols of  elements in the increasing order
of their atomic number in the Periodic Table.
(b) Arrange them in the order of their group also.
Fig. 5.2
47.   Mendeleev
predicted the existence of certain elements not known at
that time and named two of them as Eka-silicon and Eka-aluminium.
(a) Name the elements which have taken the place of these elements
(b) Mention the group and the period of these elements in the
Modern Periodic Table.
(c) Classify these elements as metals, non-metals or metalloids
(d) How many valence electrons are present in each one of them?
(a) Electropositive nature of the element(s) increases down the
group and decreases across the period
(b) Electronegativity of the element decreases down the group and
increases across the period
(c) Atomic size increases down the group and decreases across a
period (left to right)
(d) Metallic character increases down the group and  decreases
across a period.
© NCERT
not to be republished
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS
On the basis of the above trends of the Periodic Table, answer
the following about the elements with atomic numbers 3 to 9.
(a) Name the most electropositive element  among them
(b) Name the most electronegative element
(c) Name the element with smallest atomic size
(d) Name the element which  is a metalloid
(e) Name the element which shows maximum valency.
An element X which is a yellow solid at room temperature shows
catenation and allotropy. X forms two oxides which are also formed
during the thermal decomposition of ferrous sulphate crystals and
are the major air pollutants.
(a) Identify the element X
(b) Write the electronic configuration of X
(c) Write the balanced chemical equation for the thermal
decomposition of ferrous sulphate crystals?
(d) What would be the nature (acidic/ basic) of oxides formed?
(e) Locate the position of the element in the Modern Periodic Table.
An element X of group 15 exists as diatomic molecule and
combines with hydrogen at 773 K in presence of the catalyst
to form a compound, ammonia which has a characteristic
pungent smell.
(a) Identify the element X. How many valence electrons does it
have?
(b) Draw the electron dot structure of the diatomic molecule of  X.
What type of bond is formed in it?
(c) Draw the electron dot structure for ammonia and what type of
bond is formed in it?
Which group of elements could be placed in Mendeleev's
Periodic
Table without disturbing the original order? Give reason.
Give an account of the process adopted by
Mendeleev  for the
classification of elements. How did he arrive at “Periodic Law”?
© NCERT
not to be republished
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Which of the following statements about the autotrophs is incorrect?
(a) They synthesise carbohydrates from carbon dioxide and water
in the presence of sunlight and chlorophyll
(b) They store carbohydrates in the form of starch
(c) They convert carbon dioxide and water into carbohydrates in
the absence of sunlight
(d) They constitute the first trophic level in food chains
2. In which of the following groups of organisms, food material is
broken down outside the body and absorbed?
(a) Mushroom, green plants, Amoeba
(b) Yeast, mushroom, bread mould
(c) Paramecium, Amoeba, Cuscuta
(d) Cuscuta, lice, tapeworm
3. Select the correct statement
(a) Heterotrophs do not synthesise their own food
(b) Heterotrophs utilise solar energy for photosynthesis
(c) Heterotrophs synthesise their own food
(d) Heterotrophs are capable of converting carbon dioxide and
water into carbohydrates
4. Which is the correct sequence of parts in human alimentary canal?
(a) Mouth → stomach → small intestine → oesophagus
→ large intestine
(b) Mouth →oesophagus → stomach → large intestine
→ small intestine
(c) Mouth → stomach → oesophagus → small intestine
→ large intestine
(d) Mouth → oesophagus  → stomach → small intestine
→ large intestine
Life Processes
CHAPTER
© NCERT
not to be republished
If salivary amylase is lacking in the saliva, which of the following
events in the mouth cavity will be affected?
(a) Proteins breaking down into amino acids
(b) Starch breaking down into sugars
(c) Fats breaking down into fatty acids and glycerol
(d) Absorption of vitamins
The inner lining of stomach is protected by one of the following
from hydrochloric acid. Choose the correct one
(a) Pepsin
(b) Mucus
(c) Salivary amylase
(d) Bile
Which part of alimentary canal receives bile from the liver?
(a) Stomach
(b) Small intestine
(c) Large intestine
(d) Oesophagus
A few drops of iodine solution were added to rice water. The solution
turned blue-black in colour. This indicates that rice water contains
(a) complex proteins
(b) simple proteins
(c) fats
(d) starch
In which part of the alimentary canal food is finally digested?
(a) Stomach
(b) Mouth cavity
(c) Large intestine
(d) Small intestine
Choose the function of the pancreatic juice from the following
(a) trypsin digests proteins and lipase carbohydrates
(b) trypsin digests emulsified fats and lipase proteins
(c) trypsin and lipase digest fats
(d) trypsin digests proteins and lipase emulsified fats
When air is blown from mouth into a test-tube containing lime
water, the lime water turned milky due to the presence of
(a) oxygen
(b) carbon dioxide
(c) nitrogen
(d) water vapour
LIFE PROCESSES
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
The correct sequence of anaerobic reactions in yeast is
(a) Glucose
Pyruvate
Ethanol
+ Carbondioxide
(b) Glucose
Pyruvate
Lactic acid
(c) Glucose
Pyruvate
Lactic acid
(d) Glucose
Pyruvate
Ethanol
+ Carbondioxide
Which of the following is most appropriate for aerobic respiration?
(a) Glucose
Pyruvate
CO2+H2O+ Energy
(b) Glucose
Pyruvate
CO2+H2O+ Energy
(c) Glucose
Pyruvate + Energy
CO2+H2O
(d) Glucose
Pyruvate + Energy
CO2+H2O+ Energy
Which of the following statement(s) is (are) true about respiration?
(i) During inhalation, ribs move inward and diaphragm is raised
(ii) In the alveoli, exchange of gases takes place i.e., oxygen from
alveolar air diffuses into blood and carbon dioxide from blood
into alveolar air
(iii) Haemoglobin has greater affinity for carbon dioxide than
oxygen
(iv) Alveoli increase surface area for exchange of gases
(a) (i) and (iv)
(ii) and (iii)
(c) (i) and (iii)
(ii) and (iv)
Which is the correct sequence of air passage during inhalation?
(a) Nostrils → larynx → pharynx → trachea → lungs
(b) Nasal passage → trachea → pharynx → larynx → alveoli
(c) larynx → nostrils → pharynx → lungs
(d) Nostrils → pharynx → larynx → trachea → alveoli
During respiration exchange of gases take place in
(a) trachea and larynx
(b) alveoli of lungs
(c) alveoli and throat
(d) throat and larynx
© NCERT
not to be republished
LIFE PROCESSES
Which of the following statement (s) is (are) true about heart?
(i) Left atrium receives oxygenated blood from different parts of
body while right atrium receives deoxygenated blood from lungs
(ii) Left ventricle pumps oxygenated blood to different body parts
while right ventricle pumps deoxygenated blood to lungs
(iii) Left atrium transfers oxygenated blood to right ventricle which
sends it to different body parts
(iv) Right atrium receives deoxygenated blood from different parts
of the body while left ventricle pumps oxygenated blood to
different parts of the body
(a) (i)
(b) (ii)
(c) (ii) and (iv)
(d) (i) and (iii)
What prevents backflow of blood inside the heart during
contraction?
(a) Valves in heart
(b) Thick muscular walls of ventricles
(c) Thin walls of atria
(d) All of the above
Single circulation i.e., blood flows through the heart only once
during one cycle of passage through the body, is exhibited by
(a) Labeo, Chameleon, Salamander
(b) Hippocampus, Exocoetus, Anabas
(c) Hyla, Rana, Draco
(d) Whale, Dolphin, Turtle
In which of the following vertebrate group/groups, heart does
not pump oxygenated blood to different parts of the body?
(a) Pisces and amphibians
(b) Amphibians and reptiles
(c) Amphibians only
(d) Pisces only
Choose the correct statement that describes arteries.
(a) They have thick elastic walls, blood flows under high pressure;
collect blood from different organs and bring it back to the heart
(b) They have thin walls with valves inside, blood flows under
low pressure and carry blood away from the heart to various
organs of the body
(c) They have thick elastic walls, blood flows under low pressure;
carry blood from the heart to various organs of the body
(d) They have thick elastic walls without valves inside, blood flows
under high pressure and carry blood away from the heart to
different parts of the body.
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
The filtration units of kidneys are called
(a) ureter
(b) urethra
(c) neurons
(d) nephrons
Oxygen liberated during photosynthesis comes from
(a) water
(b) chlorophyll
(c) carbon dioxide
(d) glucose
The blood leaving the tissues becomes richer in
(a) carbon dioxide
(b) water
(c) heamoglobin
(d) oxygen
Which of the following is an incorrect statement?
(a) Organisms grow with time
(b) Organisms must repair and maintain their structure
(c) Movement of molecules does not take place among cells
(d) Energy is essential for life processes
The internal (cellular) energy reserve in autotrophs is
(a) glycogen
(b) protein
(c) starch
(d) fatty acid
Which of the following equations is the summary of
photosynthesis?
(a) 6CO2 + 12H2O  → C6H12O6 + 6O2+ 6H2O
(b) 6CO2 + H2O  + Sunlight→ C 6H12O6 + O2+ 6H2O
(c) 6CO2 + 12H2O + Chlorophyll + Sunlight→ C6H12O6 + 6O2+ 6H2O
(d) 6CO2 + 12H2O  + Chlorophyll + Sunlight→ C6H12O6 + 6CO2+ 6H2O
Choose the event that does not occur in photosynthesis
(a) Absorption of light energy by chlorophyll
(b) Reduction of carbon dioxide to carbohydrates
(c) Oxidation of carbon to carbon dioxide
(d) Conversion of light energy to chemical energy
© NCERT
not to be republished
LIFE PROCESSES
The opening and closing of the stomatal pore depends upon
(a) oxygen
(b) temperature
(c) water in guard cells
(d) concentration of CO2 in stomata
Choose the forms in which most plants absorb nitrogen
(i) Proteins
(ii) Nitrates and Nitrites
(iii) Urea
(iv) Atmospheric nitrogen
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (iii) and (iv)
(d) (i) and (iv)
Which is the first enzyme to mix with food in the digestive tract?
(a) Pepsin
(b) Cellulase
(c) Amylase
(d) Trypsin
Which of the following statement(s) is (are) correct?
(i) Pyruvate can be converted into ethanol and carbon dioxide
by yeast
(ii) Fermentation takes place in aerobic bacteria
(iii) Fermentation takes place in mitochondria
(iv) Fermentation is a form of anaerobic respiration
(a) (i)  and (iii)
(b) (ii) and (iv)
(c) (i) and (iv)
(d) (ii) and (iii)
Lack of oxygen in muscles often leads to cramps among cricketers.
This results due to
(a) conversion of pyruvate to ethanol
(b) conversion of pyruvate to glucose
(c) non conversion of glucose to pyruvate
(d) conversion of pyruvate to lactic acid
Choose the correct path of urine in our body
(a) kidney → ureter → urethra  → urinary bladder
(b) kidney → urinary bladder → urethra  → ureter
(c) kidney → ureters → urinary bladder  → urethra
(d) urinary bladder → kidney → ureter → urethra
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
During deficiency of oxygen in tissues of human beings, pyruvic
acid is converted into lactic acid in the
(a) cytoplasm
(b) chloroplast
(c) mitochondria
(d) golgi body
Short Answer Questions
Name the following
(a) The process in plants that links light energy with chemical
energy
(b) Organisms that can prepare their own food
(c) The cell organelle where photosynthesis occurs
(d) Cells that surround a stomatal pore
(e) Organisms that cannot prepare their own food
(f) An enzyme secreted from gastric glands in stomach that acts
on proteins.
“All plants give out oxygen during day and carbon dioxide during
night”. Do you agree with this statement? Give reason.
How do the guard cells regulate opening and closing of stomatal
pores?
Two green plants are kept separately in oxygen free containers,
one in the dark and the other in continuous light. Which one will
live longer? Give reasons.
If a plant is releasing carbon dioxide and taking in oxygen during
the day, does it mean that there is no photosynthesis occurring?
Justify your answer.
Why do fishes die when taken out of water?
Differentiate between an autotroph and a heterotroph.
Is ‘nutrition’ a necessity for an organism? Discuss.
What would happen if green plants disappear from earth?
Leaves of a healthy potted plant were coated with vaseline. Will
this plant remain healthy for long? Give reasons for your answer.
How does aerobic respiration differ from anaerobic respiration?
© NCERT
not to be republished
LIFE PROCESSES
Group (A)
Group (B)
Leech
(ii) Paramecium
(iii) Deer
(iv) Green plant
Match the words of Column (A) with that of Column (B)
Differentiate between an artery and a vein.
What are the adaptations of leaf for photosynthesis?
Why is small intestine  in herbivores longer than in carnivores?
What will happen if mucus is not secreted by the gastric glands?
What is the significance of emulsification of fats?
What causes movement of food inside the alimentary canal?
Why does absorption of digested food occur mainly in the small
intestine?
Match Group (A) with Group (B)
Why is the rate of breathing in aquatic organisms much faster
than in terrestrial organisms?
Why is blood circulation in human heart called double circulation?
What is the advantage of having four chambered heart?
Mention the major events during photosynthesis
In each of the following situations what happens to the rate of
photosynthesis?
(a) Cloudy days
(b) No rainfall in the area
(c) Good manuring in the area
(d) Stomata get blocked due to dust
Name the energy currency in the living organisms. When and
where is it produced?
(a) Autotrophic nutrition
(b) Heterotrophic nutrition
(c) Parasitic nutrition
(d) Digestion in food vacuoles
Column (A)
Column (B)
Phloem
(b) Nephron
Veins
(d) Platelets
Excretion
(ii) Translocation of food
(iii) Clotting of blood
(iv) Deoxygenated blood
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Column (A)
Group (B)
Pancreas
(ii) Liver
(iii) Gastric glands
(iv) Saliva
What is common for cuscuta, ticks and leeches?
Explain the role of mouth in digestion of food.
What are the functions of gastric glands present in the wall of the
stomach?
Match the terms in  Column (A) with those in Column (B)
Name the correct substrates for the following enzymes
(a) Trypsin
(b) Amylase
(c) Pepsin
(d) Lipase
Why do veins have thin walls as compared to arteries?
What will happen if platelets were absent in the blood?
Plants have low energy needs as compared to animals. Explain.
Why and how does water enter continuously into the root xylem?
Why is transpiration important for  plants?
How do leaves of plants help in excretion?
Long Answer Questions
Explain the process of nutrition in Amoeba.
Describe the alimentary canal of man.
Explain the process of breathing in man.
Explain the importance of soil for plant growth.
Draw the diagram of alimentary canal of man and label the
following parts.
Mouth,  Oesophagus, Stomach, Intestine
How do carbohydrates, proteins and fats get digested in human
beings?
Explain the mechanism of photosynthesis.
Explain the three pathways of breakdown in living organisms.
Describe the flow of blood through the heart of human beings.
Describe the process of urine formation in kidneys.
(a) Trypsin
(b) Amylase
(c) Bile
(d) Pepsin
© NCERT
not to be republished
Multiple Choice Questions
Which of the following statements is correct about receptors?
(a) Gustatory receptors detect taste while olfactory receptors detect smell
(b) Both gustatory and olfactory receptors detect smell
(c) Auditory receptors detect smell and olfactory receptors detect taste
(d) Olfactory receptors detect taste and gustatory receptors smell
Electrical impulse travels in a neuron from
(a) Dendrite → axon  → axonal end  → cell body
(b) Cell body  → dendrite  → axon  → axonal end
(c) Dendrite  → cell body  → axon  → axonal end
(d) Axonal end  → axon  → cell body  → dendrite
In a synapse, chemical signal is transmitted from
(a) dendritic end of one neuron to axonal end of another neuron
(b) axon to cell body of the same neuron
(c) cell body to axonal end of the same neuron
(d) axonal end of one neuron to dendritic end  of another neuron
In a neuron, conversion of electrical signal to a chemical signal occurs at/in
(a) cell body
(b) axonal end
(c) dendritic end
(d) axon
Which is the correct sequence of the components of a reflex arc?
(a) Receptors→ Muscles→ Sensory neuron→ Motor neuron→ Spinal cord
(b) Receptors→ Motor neuron → Spinal cord → Sensory neuron → Muscle
(c) Receptors → Spinal cord → Sensory neuron → Motor neuron →  Muscle
(d) Receptors → Sensory neuron → Spinal cord → Motor neuron → Muscle
Control and
Coordination
CHAPTER
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Which of the following statements are true?
(i) Sudden action in response to something in the environment is
called reflex action
(ii) Sensory neurons carry signals from spinal cord to muscles
(iii) Motor neurons carry signals from receptors to spinal cord
(iv) The path through which signals are transmitted from a receptor
to a muscle or a gland is called reflex arc
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (i) and (iii)
(c) (i) and (iv)
(d) (i) , (ii) and (iii)
Which of the following statements are true about the brain?
(i) The main thinking part of brain is hind brain
(ii) Centres of hearing, smell, memory, sight etc are located in fore
brain.
(iii) Involuntary actions like salivation, vomiting, blood pressure
are controlled by the medulla in the hind brain
(iv) Cerebellum does not control posture and balance of the body
(a) (i)  and (ii)
(b) (i),  (ii) and (iii)
(c) (ii) and (iii)
(d) (iii) and (iv)
Posture and balance of the body is controlled by
(a) cerebrum
(b) cerebellum
(c) medulla
(d) pons
Spinal cord originates from
(a) cerebrum
(b) medulla
(c) pons
(d) cerebellum
The movement of shoot towards light is
(a) geotropism
(b) hydrotropism
(c) chemotropism
(d) phototropism
The main function of abscisic acid in plants is to
(a) increase the length of cells
(b) promote cell division
(c) inhibit growth
(d) promote growth of stem
© NCERT
not to be republished
CONTROL AND CO-ORDINATION
Which of the following is not associated with growth of plant?
(a) Auxin
(b) Gibberellins
(c) Cytokinins
(d) Abscisic acid
Iodine is necessary for the synthesis of which hormone?
(a) Adrenaline
(b) Thyroxin
(c) Auxin
(d) Insulin
Choose the incorrect statement about insulin
(a) It is produced from pancreas
(b) It regulates growth and development of the body
(c) It regulates blood sugar level
(d) Insufficient secretion of insulin will cause diabetes
Select the mis-matched pair
(a) Adrenaline : Pituitary gland
(b) Testosterone: Testes
(c) Estrogen
: Ovary
(d) Thyroxin
: Thyroid gland
The shape of guard cells changes due to change in the
(a) protein composition of cells
(b) temperature of cells
(c) amount of water in cells
(d) position of nucleus in the cells
The growth of tendril in pea plants is due to
(a) effect of light
(b) effect of gravity
(c) rapid cell divisions in tendrillar cells that are away from the
support
(d) rapid cell divisions in tendrillar cells in contact with the support
The growth of pollen tubes towards ovules is due to
(a) hydrotropism
(b) chemotropism
(c) geotropism
(d) phototropism
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
The movement of sunflower in accordance with the path of sun is
due to
(a) phototropism
(b) geotropism
(c) chemotropism
(d) hydrotropism
The substance that triggers the fall of mature leaves and fruits
from plants is due to
(a) auxin
(b) gibberellin
(c) abscisic acid
(d) cytokinin
Which of the following statements about transmission of nerve
impulse is incorrect?
(a) Nerve impulse travels from dendritic end towards axonal end
(b) At the dendritic end electrical impulses bring about the release
of some chemicals which generate an electrical impulse at the
axonal end of another neuron
(c) The chemicals released from the axonal end of one neuron cross
the synapse and generate a similar electrical impulse in a
dendrite of another neuron
(d) A neuron transmits electrical impulses not only to another
neuron but also to muscle and gland cells
Involuntary actions in the body are controlled by
(a) medulla in fore brain
(b) medulla in mid brain
(c) medulla in  hind brain
(d) medulla in spinal cord
Which of the following is not an involuntary action?
(a) Vomiting
(b) Salivation
(c) Heart beat
(d) Chewing
When a person is suffering from severe cold, he or she cannot
(a) differentiate the taste of an apple from that of an ice cream
(b) differentiate the smell of a perfume from that of an agarbatti
(c) differentiate red light from green light
(d) differentiate a hot object from a cold object
© NCERT
not to be republished
CONTROL AND CO-ORDINATION
What is the correct direction of flow of electrical impulses?
Fig. 7.1
Which statement is not true about thyroxin?
(a) Iron is essential for the synthesis of thyroxin
(b) It regulates carbohydrates, protein and fat metabolism in the body
(c) Thyroid gland requires iodine to synthesise thyroxin
(d) Thyroxin is also called thyroid hormone
Dwarfism results due to
(a) Excess secretion of thyroxin
(b) Less secretion of growth hormone
(c) Less secretion of adrenaline
(d) Excess secretion of growth hormone
Dramatic changes of body features associated with puberty are
mainly because of secretion of
(a) oestrogen from testes and testosterone from ovary
(b) estrogen from adrenal gland and testosterone from pituitary gland
(c) testosterone from testes and estrogen from ovary
(d) testosterone from thyroid gland and estrogen from pituitary gland
A doctor advised a person to take an injection of insulin because
(a) his blood pressure was low
(b) his heart was beating slowly
(c) he was suffering from goitre
(d) his sugar level in blood was high
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
The hormone which increases the fertility in males is called
(a) oestrogen
(b) testosterone
(c) insulin
(d) growth hormone
Which of the following endocrine glands is unpaired?
(a) Adrenal
(b) Testes
(c) Pituitary
(d) Ovary
Junction between two neurons is called
(a) cell junction
(b) neuro muscular junction
(c) neural joint
(d) synapse
In humans,  the life processes are controlled and regulated by
(a) reproductive and endocrine systems
(b) respiratory and nervous systems
(c) endocrine and digestive systems
(d) nervous and endocrine systems
Short Answer Questions
Label the parts (a), (b), (c) and (d) and show the direction of flow of
electrical signals in Figure 7.2.
Fig. 7.2
© NCERT
not to be republished
CONTROL AND CO-ORDINATION
Name the plant hormones responsible for the following
(a) elongation of cells
(b) growth of stem
(c) promotion of cell division
(d) falling of senescent leaves.
Label the endocrine glands in Figure 7.3.
Fig. 7.3
37. In Figure 7.4 (a), (b) and (c), which appears more accurate and why?
Fig. 7.4
Label the parts of a neuron in Figure 7.5.
Fig. 7.5
Match the terms of Column (A) with those of Column (B)
Column (A)
Column (B)
(a) Olfactory receptors
(i)    Tongue
(b) Thermo receptors (temperature receptors)
(ii)   Eye
(c) Gustatoreceptors
(iii)  Nose
(d) Photoreceptors
(iv)  Skin
What is a tropic movement? Explain with an example.
What will happen if intake of iodine in our diet is low?
What happens at the synapse between two neurons?
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Answer the following :
(a) Which hormone is responsible for the changes noticed in
females at puberty?
(b) Dwarfism results due to deficiency of which hormone?
(c) Blood sugar level rises due to deficiency of which hormone?
(d) Iodine is necessary for the synthesis of which hormone?
Answer the following :
(a) Name the endocrine gland associated with brain?
(b) Which gland secretes digestive enzymes as well as hormones?
(c) Name the endocrine gland associated with kidneys?
(d) Which endocrine gland is present in males but not in females?
Long Answer Questions
Draw the structure of a neuron and explain its function.
What are the major parts of the brain? Mention the functions of
different parts.
What constitutes the central and peripheral nervous systems? How
are the components of central nervous system protected?
Mention one function for each of these hormones :
(a) Thyroxin
(b) Insulin
(c) Adrenaline
(d) Growth hormone
(e)  Testosterone.
Name various plant hormones. Also give their physiological effects
on  plant growth and development.
What are reflex actions? Give two examples. Explain a reflex arc.
“Nervous and hormonal systems together perform the function of
control and coordination in human beings.” Justify the statement.
How does chemical coordination take place in animals?
Why is the flow of signals in a synapse from axonal end of one
neuron to dendritic end of another neuron but not the reverse?
© NCERT
not to be republished
Multiple Choice Questions
In the list of organisms given below, those that reproduce by the
asexual method are
(i) banana
(ii) dog
(iii) yeast
(iv) Amoeba
(a) (ii) and (iv)
(b) (i), (iii) and (iv)
(c) (i) and (iv)
(d) (ii), (iii) and (iv)
In a flower, the parts that produce male and female gametes
(germ cells) are
(a) stamen and anther
(b) filament and stigma
(c) anther and ovary
(d) stamen and style
Which of the following is the correct sequence of events of sexual
reproduction in a flower?
(a) pollination, fertilisation, seedling, embryo
(b) seedling, embryo, fertilisation, pollination
(c) pollination, fertilisation, embryo, seedling
(d) embryo, seedling, pollination, fertilisation
Offspring formed by asexual method of reproduction have greater
similarity among themselves because
(i) asexual reproduction involves only one parent
(ii) asexual reproduction does not involve gametes
(iii) asexual reproduction occurs before sexual reproduction
(iv) asexual reproduction occurs after sexual reproduction
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (i) and (iii)
(c) (ii) and (iv)
(d) (iii) and (iv)
How do Organisms
Reproduce?
CHAPTER
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Characters transmitted from parents to offspring are present in
(a) cytoplasm
(b) ribosome
(c) golgi bodies
(d) genes
Characters that are transmitted from parents to offspring during
reproduction show
(a) only similarities with parents
(b) only variations with parents
(c) both similarities and variations with parents
(d) neither similarities nor variations
A feature of reproduction that is common to Amoeba, Spirogyra
and Yeast is that
(a) they reproduce asexually
(b) they are all unicellular
(c) they reproduce only sexually
(d) they are all multicellular
In Spirogyra, asexual reproduction takes place by
(a) breaking up of filaments into smaller bits
(b) division of a cell into two cells
(c) division of a cell into many cells
(d) formation of young cells from older cells.
The ability of a cell to divide into several cells during reproduction
in Plasmodium is called
(a) budding
(b) reduction division
(c) binary fission
(d) multiple fission
The correct sequence of reproductive stages seen in flowering plants is
(a) gametes, zygote, embryo, seedling
(b) zygote, gametes, embryo, seedling
(c) seedling, embryo, zygote, gametes
(d) gametes, embryo, zygote, seedling
The number of chromosomes in parents and offsprings of a
particular species remains constant due to
(a) doubling of chromosomes after zygote formation
(b) halving of chromosomes during gamete formation
(c) doubling of chromosomes after gamete formation
(d) halving of chromosomes after gamete formation
© NCERT
not to be republished
HOW DO ORGANISMS REPRODUCE?
In Rhizopus, tubular thread-like structures bearing sporangia at
their tips are called
(a) filaments
(b) hyphae
(c) rhizoids
(d) roots
Vegetative propagation refers to formation of new plants from
(a) stem, roots and flowers
(b) stem, roots and leaves
(c) stem, flowers and fruits
(d) stem, leaves and flowers
Factors responsible for the rapid spread of bread mould on slices
of bread are
(i) large number of spores
(ii) availability of moisture and nutrients in bread
(iii) presence of tubular branched hyphae
(iv) formation of round shaped sporangia
(a) (i) and (iii)
(b) (ii) and iv)
(c) (i) and (ii)
(d) (iii) and (iv)
Length of pollen tube depends on the distance between
(a) pollen grain and upper surface of stigma
(b) pollen grain on upper surface of stigma and ovule
(c) pollen grain in anther and upper surface of stigma
(d) upper surface of stigma and lower part of style
Which of the following statements are true for flowers?
(i) Flowers are always bisexual
(ii) They are the sexual reproductive organs
(iii) They are produced in all groups of plants
(iv) After fertilisation they give rise to fruits
(a) (i) and (iv)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (i) and (iii)
(d) (ii) and (iv)
Which among the following statements are true for unisexual flowers?
(i) They possess both stamen and pistil
(ii) They possess either stamen or pistil
(iii) They exhibit cross pollination
(iv) Unisexual flowers possessing only stamens cannot produce fruits
(a) (i) and (iv)
(b) (ii), (iii) and (iv)
(c) (iii) and (iv)
(d) (i), (iii) and (iv)
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Which among the following statements are true for sexual
reproduction in flowering plants?
(i) It requires two types of gametes
(ii) Fertilisation is a compulsory event
(iii) It always results in formation of zygote
(iv) Offspring formed are clones
(a) (i) and (iv)
(b) (i), (ii) and (iv)
(c) (i), (ii) and (iii)
(d) (i), (ii) and (iv)
In Figure 8.1, the parts A, B and C are sequentially
(a) cotyledon, plumule and radicle
(b) plumule, radicle and cotyledon
(c) plumule, cotyledon and radicle
(d) radicle, cotyledon and plumule
Offspring formed as a result of sexual reproduction exhibit more
variations because
(a) sexual reproduction is a lengthy process
(b) genetic material comes from two parents of the same species
(c) genetic material comes from two parents of different species
(d) genetic material comes from many parents
Reproduction is essential for living organisms in order to
(a) keep the individual organism alive
(b) fulfill their energy requirement
(c) maintain growth
(d) continue the species generation after generation
During adolescence, several changes occur in the human body.
Mark one change associated with sexual maturation in boys
(a) loss of milk teeth
(b) increase in height
(c) cracking of voice
(d) weight gain
In human females, an event that reflects onset of reproductive
phase is
(a) growth of body
(b) changes in hair pattern
(c) change in voice
(d) menstruation
Fig. 8.1
© NCERT
not to be republished
HOW DO ORGANISMS REPRODUCE?
In human males, the testes lie in the scrotum, because it helps in the
(a) process of mating
(b) formation of sperm
(c) easy transfer of gametes
(d) all the above
Which among the following is not the function of testes at puberty?
(i) formation of germ cells
(ii) secretion of testosterone
(iii) development of placenta
(iv) secretion of estrogen
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (iii) and (iv)
(d) (i) and (iv)
The correct sequence of organs in the male reproductive system
for transport of sperms is
(a) testis → vasdeferens → urethra
(b) testis → ureter → urethra
(c) testis → urethra → ureter
(d) testis → vasdeferens → ureter
Which among the following diseases is not sexually transmitted?
(a) Syphillis
(b) Hepatitis
(c) HIV - AIDS
(d) Gonorrhoea
Short Answer Questions
In a bisexual flower inspite of the young stamens being removed
artificially, the flower produces fruit. Provide a suitable explanation
for the above situation.
Can you consider cell division as a type of reproduction in
unicellular organism? Give one reason.
What is a clone? Why do offsprings formed by asexual reproduction
exhibit remarkable similarity?
Explain how, offspring and parents of organisms reproducing
sexually have the same number of chromosomes?
Colonies of yeast fail to multiply in water, but multiply in sugar
solution. Give one reason for this.
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Why does bread mould grow profusely on a moist slice of bread
rather than on a dry slice of bread?
Give two reasons for the appearance of variations among the
progeny formed by sexual reproduction.
Would a Planaria cut vertically into two halves regenerate into two
individuals? Complete Figure 8.2  D and E by indicating the
regenerated regions.
Fig. 8.2
From the internet, gather information about the chromosome
numbers of five animals and five plants. Correlate the number with
the size of organism and answer the following questions.
(a) Do larger organisms have more number of chromosomes/cells?
(b) Can organism with fewer chromosomes reproduce more easily
than organisms with more number of chromosomes?
(c) More the number of chromosomes/cells greater is the DNA
content. Justify.
In tobacco plant, the male gametes have twenty four chromosomes.
What is the number of chromosomes in the female gamete?
What is the number of chromosomes in the zygote?
Why cannot fertilisation take place in flowers if pollination does
not occur?
Is the chromosome number of zygote, embryonal cells and adult
of a particular organism always constant? How is the constancy
maintained in these three stages?
Where is the zygote located in the flower after fertilization?
Reproduction is linked to stability of population of a species.
Justify the statement.
How are general growth and sexual maturation different from each
other?
Trace the path of sperm during ejaculation and mention the gland
and their functions associated with the male reproductive system.
© NCERT
not to be republished
HOW DO ORGANISMS REPRODUCE?
What changes are observed in the uterus if fertilisation does not
occur?
What changes are observed in the uterus subsequent to
implantation of young embryo?
What are the benefits of using mechanical barriers during sexual
In the given Figure 8.3 label the parts and mention their functions
(a) Production of egg
(b) Site of fertilisation
(c) Site of implantation
(d) Entry of the sperms
Fig. 8.3
What would be the ratio of chromosome number between an egg
and its zygote? How is the sperm genetically different from the egg?
Long Answer Questions
Why are budding, fragmentation and regeneration all considered
as asexual types of reproduction? With neat diagrams explain the
process of regeneration in Planaria.
Write two points of difference between asexual and sexual types of
reproduction. Describe why variations are observed in the offspring
formed by sexual reproduction.
Distinguish between pollination and fertilisation. Mention the site
and product of fertilisation in a flower.
Draw a neat, labelled diagram of a pistil showing pollen tube
growth and its entry into the ovule.
Distinguish between a gamete and zygote. Explain their roles in
sexual reproduction.
Draw the diagram of a flower and label the four whorls. Write the
names of gamete producing organs in the flower.
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
What is placenta? Mention its role during pregnancy?
What are various ways to avoid pregnancy? Elaborate any one
method.
How does fertilisation take place? Fertilisation occurs once in a
month. Comment.
Reproduction is essentially a phenomenon that is not for survival
of an individual but for the stability of a species. Justify.
Describe sexually transmitted diseases and mention the ways to
prevent them.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Multiple Choice Questions
Exchange of genetic material takes place in
(a) vegetative reproduction
(b) asexual reproduction
(c) sexual reproduction
(d) budding
Two  pink coloured flowers on crossing resulted in 1 red, 2 pink
and 1 white flower progeny. The nature of the cross will be
(a) double fertilisation
(b) self pollination
(c) cross fertilisation
(d) no fertilisation
A cross between a tall plant (TT) and short pea plant (tt) resulted
in progeny that were all tall plants because
(a) tallness is the dominant trait
(b) shortness is the dominant trait
(c) tallness is the recessive trait
(d) height of pea plant is not governed by gene ‘T’ or ‘t’
Which of the following statement is incorrect?
(a) For every hormone there is a gene.
(b) For every protein there is a gene.
(c) For production of every enzyme there is a gene.
(d) For every molecule of fat there is  a gene
If a round, green seeded pea plant (RR yy) is crossed with wrinkled,
yellow seeded pea plant, (rr YY) the seeds produced in F1 generation are
(a) round and yellow
(b) round and green
(c) wrinkled and green
(d) wrinkled and yellow
Heredity and
Evolution
CHAPTER
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
6. In human males all the chromosomes are paired perfectly except
one. This/these unpaired chromosome is/are
(i) large chromosome
(ii) small chromosome
(iii) Y-chromosome
(iv) X-chromosome
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (iii) only
(c) (iii) and (iv)
(d) (ii) and (iv)
7. The maleness of a child is determined by
(a) the X chromosome in the zygote
(b) the Y chromosome in zygote
(c) the cytoplasm of germ cell which determines the sex
(d) sex is determined by chance
8. A zygote which has an X-chromosome inherited from the father
will develop into a
(a) boy
(b) girl
(c) X- chromosome does not determine the sex of a child
(d) either boy or girl
9. Select the incorrect statement
(a) Frequency of certain genes in a population change  over several
generations resulting in evolution
(b) Reduction in weight of the organism due to starvation is
genetically controlled
(c) Low weight parents can have heavy weight progeny
(d) Traits which are not inherited over generations do not cause
evolution
New species may be formed if
(i) DNA undergoes significant changes in germ cells
(ii) chromosome number changes in the gamete
(iii) there is no change in the genetic material
(iv) mating does not take place
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (i) and (iii)
(c) (ii), (iii) and (iv)
(d) (i), (ii) and (iii)
Two pea plants one with round green seeds (RRyy) and another
with wrinkled yellow (rrYY) seeds produce F1 progeny that have
round, yellow (RrYy) seeds. When F1 plants are selfed, the F2
progeny will have new combination of characters. Choose the new
combination from the following
© NCERT
not to be republished
HEREDITY AND EVOLUTION
(i) Round, yellow
(ii) Round, green
(iii) Wrinkled, yellow
(iv) Wrinkled, green
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (i) and (iv)
(c) (ii) and (iii)
(d) (i) and (iii)
A basket of vegetables contains carrot, potato, radish and tomato.
Which of them represent the correct homologous structures?
(a) Carrot and potato
(b) Carrot and tomato
(c) Radish and carrot
(d) Radish and potato
Select the correct statement
(a) Tendril of a pea plant and phylloclade of Opuntia are
homologous
(b) Tendril of a pea plant and phylloclade of Opuntia are analogous
(c) Wings of birds and limbs of lizards are analogous
(d) Wings of birds and wings of bat are homologous
If the fossil of an organism is found in the deeper layers of earth,
then we can predict that
(a) the extinction of organism has occurred recently
(b) the extinction of organism has occurred thousands of years
(c) the fossil position in the layers of earth is not related to its time
of extinction
(d) time of extinction cannot be determined
Which of the following statements is not true with respect to
variation?
(a) All variations in a species have equal chance of survival
(b) Change in genetic composition results in variation
(c) Selection of variants by environmental factors forms the basis
of evolutionary processes.
(d) Variation is minimum in asexual reproduction
A trait in an organism is influenced by
(a) paternal DNA only
(b) maternal DNA only
(c) both maternal and paternal DNA
(d) neither by paternal nor by maternal DNA
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Select the group which shares maximum number of common
characters
(a) two individuals of a species
(b) two species of a genus
(c) two genera of a family
(d) two genera of two families
According to the evolutionary theory, formation of a new species
is generally due to
(a) sudden creation by nature
(b) accumulation of variations over several generations
(c) clones formed during asexual reproduction
(d) movement of individuals from one habitat to another
From the list given below, select the character which can be
acquired but not inherited
(a) colour of eye
(b) colour of skin
(c) size of body
(d) nature of hair
The two versions of a trait (character) which are brought in by the
male and female gametes are situated on
(a) copies of the same chromosome
(b) two different chromosomes
(c) sex chromosomes
(d) any chromosome
Select the statements that describe characteristics of genes
(i) genes are specific sequence of bases in a DNA molecule
(ii) a gene does not code for proteins
(iii) in individuals of a given species, a specific gene is located on a
particular chromosome
(iv) each chromosome has only one gene
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (i) and (iii)
(c) (i) and (iv)
(d) (ii) and (iv)
In peas, a pure tall plant (TT) is crossed with a short plant (tt). The
ratio of pure tall plants to short plants in F2 is
(a) 1 : 3
(b) 3 : 1
(c) 1 : 1
(d) 2 : 1
© NCERT
not to be republished
HEREDITY AND EVOLUTION
The number of pair (s) of sex chromosomes in the zygote of humans is
(a) one
(b) two
(c) three
(d) four
The theory of evolution of species by natural selection was given by
(a) Mendel
(b) Darwin
(c) Morgan
(d) Lamarck
Some dinosaurs had feathers although they could not fly but birds
have feathers that help them to fly. In the context of evolution this
means that
(a) reptiles have evolved from birds
(b) there is no evolutionary connection between reptiles and birds
(c) feathers are homologous structures in both the organisms
(d) birds have evolved from reptiles
Short Answer  Questions
How is the sex of a newborn determined in humans?
Do genetic combination of mothers play a significant role in
determining the sex of a new born?
Mention three important features of fossils which help in the study
of evolution.
Why do all the gametes formed in human females have an X
chromosome?
In human beings, the statistical probability of getting either a male
or female child is 50 : 50. Give a suitable explanation.
A very small population of a species faces a greater threat of extinction
than a larger population. Provide a suitable genetic explanation.
What are homologous structures? Give an example. Is it necessary
that homologous structures always have a common ancestor?
Does the occurrence of diversity of animals on earth suggest their
diverse ancestry also? Discuss this point in the light of evolution.
Give the pair of contrasting traits of the following characters in
pea plant and mention which is dominant and recessive
(i) yellow seed
(ii) round seed
Why did Mendel choose pea plant for his experiments?
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
A woman has only daughters.  Analyse the situation genetically
and provide a suitable explanation.
Long Answer Questions
Does geographical isolation of individuals of a species lead to
formation of a new species? Provide a suitable explanation.
Bacteria have a simpler body plan when compared with human
beings. Does it mean that human beings are more evolved than
bacteria? Provide a suitable explanation.
All the human races like Africans, Asians, Europeans, Americans
and others might have evolved from a common ancestor. Provide a
few evidences in support of this view.
Differentiate between inherited and acquired characters. Give one
example for each type.
Give reasons why acquired characters are not inherited.
Evolution has exhibited a greater stability of molecular structure
when compared with morphological structures. Comment on the
statement and justify your opinion.
In the following crosses write the characteristics of the progeny
Cross
Progeny
(a) RR  YY   x    RR  YY
...........................
Round, yellow Round, yellow
...........................
(b) Rr    Yy   x     Rr  Yy
...........................
Round, yellow Round, yellow
...........................
(c) rr    yy   x     rr   yy
...........................
wrinkled, green wrinkled, green
...........................
(d) RR   YY   x     rr   yy
...........................
Round, yellow wrinkled green
...........................
Study the following cross and showing self pollination in F1, fill in
the blank and answer the question that follows
Parents        RRYY
Round, yellow
wrinkled, green
F1 —      Rr Yy
Round, yellow
In question 44, what are the combinations of character in the F2
progeny? What are their ratios?
Give the basic features of the mechanism of inheritance.
Give reasons for the appearance of new combinations of characters
in the F2 progeny.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Multiple Choice Questions
Which of the following can make a parallel beam of light when
light  from a  point source is incident on it?
(a) Concave mirror as well as convex lens
(b) Convex mirror as well as concave lens
(c) Two plane mirrors placed at 90° to each other
(d) Concave mirror as well as concave lens
A 10 mm long awl pin is placed vertically in front of a concave
mirror. A 5 mm long image of the awl pin is formed at 30 cm in
front of the mirror. The focal length of this mirror is
(a) – 30 cm
(b) – 20 cm
(c) – 40 cm
(d) – 60 cm
Under which of the following conditions a concave mirror can form
an image  larger than the actual object?
(a) When the object is kept at a distance equal to its radius of
curvature
(b) When object is kept at a distance less than its focal length
(c) When object is placed between the focus and centre of curvature
(d) When object is kept at a distance greater than its radius of
curvature
Figure 10.1 shows a ray of light as it travels from
medium A to medium B. Refractive index of the
medium B relative to medium A is
(c) 1/ 2
Light – Reflection and
Refraction
CHAPTER
Fig. 10.1
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Fig. 10.2
A light ray enters from medium A to medium
B as shown in Figure 10.2. The refractive
index of medium B relative to A will be
(a) greater than unity
(b) less than unity
(c) equal to unity
(d) zero
Beams of light are incident through the holes
A and B and emerge out of box through the
holes C and D respectively as shown in the
Figure10.3. Which of the following could be
inside the box?
A rectangular glass slab
A convex lens
A concave lens
A prism
7. A beam of light is incident
through the holes on side A and
emerges out of the holes on the
other face of the box as shown in
the Figure 10.4. Which of the
following could be inside the box?
(a) Concave lens
(b) Rectangular glass slab
(c) Prism
(d) Convex lens
Which of the following statements is true?
(a) A convex lens has  4 dioptre power having a focal length 0.25 m
(b) A convex lens has –4 dioptre power having a focal length 0.25 m
(c) A concave lens has 4 dioptre power having a focal length 0.25 m
(d) A concave lens has –4 dioptre power having a focal length 0.25 m
Fig. 10.3
Fig. 10.4
© NCERT
not to be republished
LIGHT – REFLECTION AND REFRACTION
Magnification produced by a rear view mirror fitted in vehicles
(a) is less than one
(b) is more than one
(c) is equal to one
(d) can be more than or less than one depending upon the position
of the object in front of it
Rays from Sun converge at a point 15 cm in front of a concave
mirror. Where should an object be placed so that size of its image
is equal to the size of the object?
(a) 15 cm in front of the mirror
(b) 30 cm in front of the mirror
(c) between 15 cm and 30 cm in front of the mirror
(d) more than 30 cm in front of the mirror
A full length image of a distant tall building can definitely be
seen by using
(a) a concave mirror
(b) a convex mirror
(c) a plane mirror
(d) both concave as well as plane mirror
In torches, search lights and headlights of vehicles the bulb is
placed
(a) between the pole and the focus of the reflector
(b) very near to the focus of the reflector
(c) between the focus and centre of curvature of the reflector
(d) at the centre of curvature of the reflector
The laws of reflection hold good for
(a) plane mirror only
(b) concave mirror only
(c) convex mirror only
(d) all mirrors irrespective of their shape
Fig. 10.5
The path of a ray of light coming from air
passing through a rectangular glass slab
traced by four students are shown as A,
B, C and D in Figure 10.5. Which one of
them is correct?
(a) A
(b) B
(c) C
(d) D
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Fig. A
Fig. B
Fig. C
Fig. D
Fig. B
Fig. D
You are given water, mustard oil, glycerine and kerosene. In which
of these media a ray of light incident obliquely at same angle would
bend the most?
(a) Kerosene
(b) Water
(c) Mustard oil
(d) Glycerine
Which of the following ray diagrams is correct for the ray of light
incident on a concave mirror as shown in Figure 10.6?
(a) Fig. A
(b) Fig. B
(c) Fig. C
(d) Fig. D
Which of the following ray diagrams is correct for the ray of light
incident on a lens shown in Fig. 10.7?
Fig. 10.7
Fig. A
Fig. C
(a) Fig. A.
(b) Fig. B.
(c) Fig. C.
(d) Fig. D.
Fig. 10.6
© NCERT
not to be republished
LIGHT – REFLECTION AND REFRACTION
A child is standing in front of a magic mirror. She finds the image
of her head bigger, the middle portion of her body  of the same size
and that of the legs smaller. The following is the order of
combinations for the magic mirror from the top.
(a) Plane, convex and concave
(b) Convex, concave and plane
(c) Concave, plane and convex
(d) Convex, plane and concave
In which of the following, the image of an object placed at infinity
will be highly diminished and point sized?
(a) Concave mirror only
(b) Convex mirror only
(c) Convex lens only
(d) Concave mirror, convex mirror, concave lens and convex lens
Short Answer Questions
Identify the device used as a spherical mirror or lens in following
cases, when the image formed is  virtual and erect in each case.
(a) Object is placed between device and its focus, image formed is
enlarged and behind it.
(b) Object is placed between the focus and device, image formed
is enlarged and on the same side as that of the object.
(c) Object is placed between infinity and device, image formed is
diminished and between focus and optical centre on the same
side as that of the object.
(d) Object is placed between infinity and device, image formed is
diminished and between pole and focus, behind it.
Why does a light ray incident on a rectangular glass slab immersed
in any medium emerges parallel to itself? Explain using a diagram.
A pencil when dipped in water in a glass tumbler appears to be
bent at the interface of air and water. Will the pencil appear to be
bent to the same extent, if instead of water we use liquids like,
kerosene or turpentine. Support your answer with reason.
How is the  refractive index of a medium related to the speed of
light? Obtain an expression for refractive index of a medium with
respect to another in terms of speed of light in these two media?
Refractive index of diamond with respect to glass is 1.6 and
absolute refractive index of glass is 1.5. Find out the absolute
refractive index of diamond.
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
A convex lens of focal length 20 cm can produce a magnified virtual
as well as real image. Is this  a correct statement? If yes, where
shall  the object be placed in each case for obtaining these images?
Sudha finds out that the sharp image of the window pane of her
science laboratory is formed at a distance of  15 cm from the lens.
She now tries to focus the building visible to her outside the window
instead of the window pane without disturbing the lens. In which
direction will  she move the screen to obtain a sharp image of the
building? What is the approximate focal length of this lens?
How are power and focal length of a lens related? You are provided
with two lenses of focal length 20 cm and 40 cm respectively. Which
lens will you use to obtain more convergent light?
Under what condition in an arrangement of two plane mirrors,
incident ray and reflected ray will always be parallel to each other,
whatever may be angle of incidence. Show the same with the help
of diagram.
Draw a ray diagram showing the path of rays of light when it enters
with oblique incidence (i)  from air into water; (ii) from water into air.
Long Answer Questions
Draw ray diagrams showing the image formation by a concave
mirror when an object is placed
(a) between pole and focus of the mirror
(b) between focus and centre of curvature of the mirror
(c) at centre of curvature of the mirror
(d) a little beyond centre of curvature of the mirror
(e) at infinity
Draw ray diagrams showing the image formation by a convex lens
when an object is placed
(a) between optical centre and focus of the lens
(b) between focus and twice the focal length of the lens
(c) at twice the focal length of the lens
(d) at infinity
(e) at the focus of the lens
Write laws of refraction. Explain the same with the help of ray
diagram, when a ray of light passes through a rectangular glass
slab.
© NCERT
not to be republished
LIGHT – REFLECTION AND REFRACTION
Draw ray diagrams showing the image formation by a concave
lens when an object is placed
(a) at the focus of the lens
(b) between focus and twice the focal length of the lens
(c) beyond twice the focal length of the lens
Draw ray diagrams showing the image formation by a convex
mirror when an object is placed
(a) at infinity
(b) at finite distance from the mirror
The image of a candle flame formed by a lens is obtained on a
screen placed on the other side of the lens. If the image is three
times the size of the flame and the distance between lens and
image is 80 cm, at what distance should the candle be placed
from the lens? What is the nature of the image at a distance of
80 cm and the lens?
Size of image of an object by a mirror having a focal length of 20
cm is observed to be reduced to 1/3rd of its size. At what distance
the object has been placed from the mirror? What is the nature of
the image and the mirror?
Define power of a lens. What is its unit? One student uses a lens of
focal length 50 cm and another of –50 cm. What is the nature of
the lens and its power used by each of them?
A student focussed the image of a candle flame on a white screen
using a convex lens. He noted down the position of the candle
screen and the lens as under
Position of candle
=  12.0 cm
Position of convex lens =  50.0 cm
Position of the screen
=  88.0 cm
(i) What is the focal length of the convex lens?
(ii) Where will the image be formed if he shifts the candle towards
the lens at a position of 31.0 cm?
(iii) What will be the nature of the image formed if he further shifts
the candle towards the lens?
(iv) Draw a ray diagram to show the formation of the image in case
(iii) as said above.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Multiple Choice Questions
A person cannot see distinctly objects kept beyond 2 m. This defect
can be corrected by using a lens of power
(a) + 0.5 D
(b) – 0.5 D
(c) + 0.2 D
(d) – 0.2 D
A student sitting on the last bench can read the letters written on
the blackboard but is not able to read the letters written in his text
book. Which of the following statements is correct?
(a) The near point of his eyes has receded away
(b) The near point of his eyes has come closer to him
(c) The far point of his eyes has come closer to him
(d) The far point of his eyes has receded away
A prism ABC (with BC as base) is placed in different orientations.
A narrow beam of white light is incident on the prism as shown in
Figure 11.1. In which of the following cases, after dispersion, the
third colour from the top corresponds to the colour of the sky?
The Human Eye and
the Colourful World
CHAPTER
Fig.11.1
(a) (i)
(b) (ii)
(c) (iii)
(d) (iv)
© NCERT
not to be republished
At noon the sun appears white as
(a) light is least scattered
(b) all the colours of the white light are scattered away
(c) blue colour is scattered the most
(d) red colour is scattered the most
Which of the following phenomena of light are involved in the
formation of a rainbow?
(a) Reflection, refraction and dispersion
(b) Refraction,  dispersion and  total internal reflection
(c) Refraction, dispersion and internal reflection
(d) Dispersion, scattering and total internal reflection
Twinkling of stars is due to atmospheric
(a) dispersion of light by water droplets
(b) refraction of light by different layers of varying refractive indices
(c) scattering of light by dust particles
(d) internal reflection of light by clouds
The clear sky appears blue because
(a) blue light gets absorbed in the atmosphere
(b) ultraviolet radiations are absorbed in the atmosphere
(c) violet and blue lights get scattered more than lights of all other
colours by the atmosphere
(d) light of all other colours is scattered more than the violet and
blue colour lights by the atmosphere
Which of the following statements is correct regarding the
propagation of light of different colours of white light in air?
(a) Red light moves fastest
(b) Blue light moves faster than green light
(c) All the colours of the white light move with the same speed
(d) Yellow light moves with the mean speed as that of the red and
the violet light
The danger signals installed at the top of tall buildings are red in
colour. These can be easily seen from a distance because among all
other colours, the red light
(a) is scattered the most by smoke or fog
(b) is scattered the least by smoke or fog
(c) is absorbed the most by smoke or fog
(d) moves fastest in air
HUMAN EYE AND THE COLOURFUL WORLD
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Which of the following phenomena contributes significantly to the
reddish appearance of the sun at sunrise or sunset?
(a) Dispersion of light
(b) Scattering of light
(c) Total internal reflection of light
(d) Reflection of light from the earth
The bluish colour of water in deep sea is due to
(a) the presence of algae and other plants found in water
(b) reflection of sky in water
(c) scattering of light
(d) absorption of light by the sea
When light rays enter the eye, most of the refraction occurs at the
(a) crystalline lens
(b) outer surface of the cornea
(c) iris
(d) pupil
The focal length of the eye lens increases when eye muscles
(a) are relaxed and lens becomes thinner
(b) contract and lens becomes thicker
(c) are relaxed and lens becomes thicker
(d) contract and lens becomes thinner
Which  of the following statement is correct?
(a) A person with myopia can see distant objects clearly
(b) A person with hypermetropia can see nearby objects clearly
(c) A person with myopia can see nearby objects clearly
(d) A person with hypermetropia cannot see distant objects clearly
Short Answer Questions
Draw ray diagrams each showing (i) myopic eye  and (ii)
hypermetropic eye.
A student sitting at the back of the classroom cannot read clearly
the letters written on the blackboard. What advice will a doctor
give to her? Draw ray diagram for the correction of this defect.
How are we able to see nearby and also the distant objects clearly?
© NCERT
not to be republished
HUMAN EYE AND THE COLOURFUL WORLD
A person needs a lens of power –4.5 D for correction of her vision.
(a) What kind of defect in vision is she suffering from?
(b) What is the focal length of the corrective lens?
(c) What is the nature of the corrective lens?
How will you use two identical prisms so that a narrow beam of
white light incident on one prism emerges out of the second prism
as white light? Draw the diagram.
Draw a ray diagram showing the dispersion through a prism when
a narrow beam of white light is incident on one of its refracting
surfaces. Also indicate the order of the colours of the spectrum
obtained.
Is the position of a star as seen by us its true position? Justify
your answer.
Why do we see a rainbow in the sky only after rainfall?
Why is the colour of the clear sky blue?
What is the difference in colours of the Sun observed during
sunrise/sunset and noon? Give explanation for each.
Long Answer Questions
Explain the structure and functioning of Human eye. How are we
able to see nearby as well as distant objects?
When do we consider a person to be myopic or hypermetropic?
Explain using diagrams how the  defects associated with myopic
and hypermetropic eye can be corrected?
Explain the refraction of light through a triangular glass prism
using a labelled ray diagram. Hence define the angle of deviation.
How can we explain the reddish appearance of sun  at  sunrise or
sunset? Why does it not appear red at noon?
Explain the phenomenon of dispersion of white light through a
glass prism, using suitable ray diagram.
How does refraction take place in the atmosphere? Why do  stars
twinkle but not the planets?
© NCERT
not to be republished
Multiple Choice Questions
A cell, a resistor, a key and ammeter are arranged as shown in
the circuit diagrams of Figure12.1. The current recorded in the
ammeter will be
(a) maximum in (i)
(b) maximum in (ii)
(c) maximum in (iii)
(d) the same in all the cases
2. In the following circuits (Figure 12.2), heat produced in the resistor
or combination of resistors connected to a 12 V battery will be
Fig. 12.1
Electricity
CHAPTER
Fig. 12.2
(a) same in all the cases
(b) minimum in case (i)
(c) maximum in case (ii)
(d) maximum in case (iii)
© NCERT
not to be republished
Electrical resistivity of a given metallic wire depends upon
(a) its length
(b) its thickness
(c) its shape
(d) nature of the material
A current of 1 A is drawn by a filament of an electric bulb. Number
of electrons passing through a cross section of the filament in 16
seconds would be roughly
(a) 10
(b) 10
(c) 10
(d) 10
Identify the circuit (Figure 12.3) in which the electrical components
have been properly connected.
Fig. 12.3
(a) (i)
(b) (ii)
(c) (iii)
(d) (iv)
ELECTRICITY
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
What is the maximum resistance which can be made using five
resistors each of 1/5 Ω?
(a) 1/5 Ω
(b) 10 Ω
(c) 5 Ω
(d) 1 Ω
What is the minimum resistance which can be made using five
resistors each of 1/5 Ω?
(a) 1/5 Ω
(b) 1/25 Ω
(c) 1/10 Ω
(d) 25 Ω
The proper representation of series combination of cells (Figure
12.4) obtaining maximum potential is
(a) (i)
(b) (ii)
(c) (iii)
(d) (iv)
Which of the following represents voltage?
Work done
Current × Time
(b) Work done  Charge
(c) Work done × Time
Current
(d) Work done  Charge  Time
A cylindrical conductor of length l and uniform area of cross-
section A has resistance R. Another conductor of length 2l and
resistance R of the same material has area of cross section
(a) A/2
(b) 3A/2
(c) 2A
(d) 3A
Fig. 12.4
© NCERT
not to be republished
ELECTRICITY
A student carries out an experiment and plots
the V-I graph of three samples of nichrome wire
with resistances R1, R2 and R3 respectively
(Figure.12.5). Which of the following is true?
(a) R1 = R2 = R3
(b) R1 > R2 > R3
(c) R3 > R2 > R1
(d) R2 > R3 > R1
If the current I through a resistor is increased by
100% (assume that temperature remains
unchanged), the increase in power dissipated will be
(a) 100 %
(b) 200 %
(c) 300 %
(d) 400 %
The resistivity does not change if
(a) the material is changed
(b) the temperature is changed
(c) the shape of the resistor is changed
(d) both material and temperature are changed
In an electrical circuit three incandescent bulbs A, B and C of rating
40 W, 60 W and 100 W respectively are connected in parallel to an
electric source. Which of the following is likely to happen regarding
their brightness?
(a) Brightness of all the bulbs will be the same
(b) Brightness of bulb A will be the maximum
(c) Brightness of bulb B will be more than that of A
(d) Brightness of bulb C will be less than that of B
In an electrical circuit two resistors of 2 Ω and 4 Ω respectively
are connected in series to a 6 V battery. The heat dissipated by
the 4 Ω resistor in 5 s will be
(a) 5 J
(b) 10 J
(c) 20 J
(d) 30 J
An electric kettle consumes 1 kW of electric power when operated
at 220 V. A fuse wire of what rating must be used for it?
(a) 1 A
(b) 2 A
(c) 4 A
(d) 5 A
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Two resistors of resistance 2 Ω and 4 Ω when connected to a
battery will have
(a) same current flowing through them when connected in parallel
(b) same current flowing through them when connected in series
(c) same potential difference across them when connected in
series
(d) different potential difference across them when connected in
parallel
Unit of electric power may also be expressed as
(a) volt ampere
(b) kilowatt hour
(c) watt second
(d) joule second
Short Answer Questions
Fig. 12.6
Fig. 12.7
A child has drawn the electric circuit to study Ohm’s law
as shown in Figure 12.6. His teacher told that the circuit
diagram needs correction. Study the circuit diagram and
redraw it after making all corrections.
Three 2 Ω resistors, A, B and C, are connected as shown
in Figure 12.7. Each of them dissipates energy and can
withstand a maximum power of 18W without melting.
Find the maximum current that can flow through the
three resistors?
21. Should the resistance of an ammeter be low or high? Give
reason.
Draw a circuit diagram  of an electric circuit containing a cell, a
key, an ammeter, a resistor of 2 Ω in series with a combination
of two resistors (4 Ω  each) in parallel and a voltmeter across the
parallel combination. Will the potential difference across the 2 Ω
resistor be the same as that across the parallel combination of
4Ω resistors? Give reason.
How does use of a fuse wire protect electrical appliances?
What is electrical resistivity? In a series electrical circuit
comprising a resistor made up of a metallic wire, the ammeter
reads 5 A. The reading of the ammeter decreases to half when the
length of the wire is doubled. Why?
© NCERT
not to be republished
ELECTRICITY
What is the commercial unit of electrical energy? Represent it in
terms of joules.
A current of 1 ampere flows in a series circuit containing an electric
lamp and a conductor of 5 Ω when connected to a 10 V battery.
Calculate the resistance of the electric lamp.
Now if a resistance of 10 Ω is connected in parallel with this
series combination, what change (if any) in current flowing through
5 Ω conductor and potential difference across the lamp will take
place?  Give reason.
Why is parallel arrangement used in domestic wiring?
B1, B2 and B3 are three identical bulbs connected as shown in
Figure 12.8. When all the three bulbs glow, a current of 3A is
recorded by the ammeter A.
(i) What happens to the glow of the other two bulbs when the
bulb B1 gets fused?
(ii) What happens to the reading of A1, A 2, A 3 and A when the
bulb B2 gets fused?
(iii) How much power is dissipated in the circuit when all the
three bulbs glow together?
Long Answer Questions
Three incandescent bulbs of 100 W each are connected in series
in an electric circuit. In another circuit another set of three bulbs
of the same wattage are connected in parallel to the same source.
(a) Will the bulb in the two circuits glow with the same brightness?
Justify your answer.
(b) Now let one bulb in both the circuits get fused. Will the rest of
the bulbs continue to glow in each circuit? Give reason.
State Ohm’s law? How can it be verified experimentally? Does it
hold good under all conditions? Comment.
What is electrical resistivity of a material? What is its unit?
Describe an experiment to study the factors on which the
resistance of conducting wire depends.
How will you infer with the help of an experiment that the same
current flows through every part of the circuit containing three
resistances in series connected to a battery?
How will you conclude that the same potential difference (voltage)
exists across three resistors connected in a parallel arrangement
to a battery?
Fig. 12.8
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
What is Joule’s heating effect? How can it be demonstrated
experimentally? List its four applications in daily life.
Find out the following in the electric circuit given in Figure 12.9
(a) Effective resistance of two 8 Ω resistors in the combination
(b) Current flowing through 4 Ω resistor
(c) Potential difference across 4 Ω resistance
(d) Power dissipated in 4 Ω resistor
(e) Difference in ammeter readings, if any.
Fig. 12.9
© NCERT
not to be republished
Multiple Choice Questions
Choose the incorrect statement from the following  regarding
magnetic lines of field
(a) The direction of magnetic field at a point is taken to be the
direction in which the north pole of a magnetic compass needle
points
(b) Magnetic field lines are closed curves
(c) If magnetic field lines are parallel and
equidistant, they represent zero field strength
(d) Relative strength of magnetic field is shown by
the degree of closeness of the field lines
If the key in the arrangement (Figure 13.1) is taken
out (the circuit is made open) and magnetic field
lines are drawn over the horizontal plane ABCD,
the lines are
(a) concentric circles
(b) elliptical in shape
(c) straight lines parallel to each other
(d) concentric circles near the point O but of elliptical
shapes  as we go away from it
A circular loop placed in a plane perpendicular to the
plane of paper carries a current when the key is ON.
The current as seen from points A and B (in the plane
of paper and on the axis of the coil) is anti clockwise
and clockwise respectively. The magnetic field lines
point from B to A. The N-pole of the resultant magnet
is on the face close to
(a) A
(b) B
(c) A if the current is small, and B if the current is large
(d) B if the current is small and A if the current is large
Magnetic Effects of
Electric Current
CHAPTER
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
For a current in a long straight solenoid N- and S-poles are created
at the two ends. Among the following statements, the incorrect
statement is
(a) The field lines inside the solenoid are in the form of straight
lines which indicates that the magnetic field is the same at all
points inside the solenoid
(b) The strong magnetic field produced inside the solenoid can
be used to magnetise a piece of magnetic material like soft
iron, when placed inside the coil
(c) The pattern of the magnetic field associated with the solenoid
is different from the pattern of the magnetic field around a
bar magnet
(d) The N- and S-poles exchange position when the direction of
current through the solenoid is reversed
Commercial electric motors do not use
(a) an electromagnet to rotate the armature
(b) effectively large number of turns of conducting
wire in the current carrying coil
(c) a permanent magnet to rotate the armature
(d) a soft iron core on which the coil is wound
5. A uniform magnetic field exists in the plane of
paper pointing from left to right as shown in
Figure 13.3. In the field an electron and a proton
move as shown. The electron and the proton
experience
(a) forces both pointing into the plane of paper
(b) forces both pointing out of the plane of paper
(c) forces pointing into the plane of paper and
out of the plane of paper, respectively
(d) force pointing opposite and along the
direction of the uniform magnetic field
respectively
In the arrangement shown in Figure 13.4 there are
two coils wound on a non-conducting cylindrical rod.
Initially the key is not inserted. Then the key is
inserted and later removed. Then
(a) the deflection in the galvanometer remains zero
throughout
(b) there is a momentary deflection in the
galvanometer but it dies out shortly and there is
no effect when the key is removed
© NCERT
not to be republished
MAGNETIC EFFECTS OF ELECTRIC CURRENT
(c) there are momentary galvanometer deflections that die out
shortly; the deflections are in the same direction
(d) there are momentary galvanometer deflections that die out
shortly; the deflections are in opposite directions
Choose the incorrect statement
(a) Fleming’s right-hand rule is a simple rule to know the direction
of induced current
(b) The right-hand thumb rule is used to find the direction of
magnetic fields due to current carrying conductors
(c) The difference between the direct and alternating currents is
that the direct current always flows in one direction, whereas
the alternating current reverses its direction periodically
(d) In India, the AC changes direction after every
50  second
A constant current flows in a horizontal wire in the plane of the
paper from east to west as shown in Figure 13.5. The direction
of magnetic field at a point will be North to South
(a) directly above the wire
(b) directly below the wire
(c) at a point located in the plane of the paper, on the north side
of the wire
(d) at a point located in the plane of the paper, on the south
side of the wire
The strength of magnetic field inside a long current carrying
straight solenoid is
(a) more at the ends than at the centre
(b) minimum in the middle
(c) same at all points
(d) found to increase from one end to the other
To convert an AC generator into DC generator
(a) split-ring type commutator must be used
(b) slip rings and brushes must be used
(c) a stronger magnetic field has to be used
(d) a rectangular wire loop has to be used
The most important safety method used for protecting home
appliances from short circuiting or overloading is
(a) earthing
(b) use of fuse
(c) use of stabilizers
(d) use of electric meter
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Short Answer Questions
A magnetic compass needle is placed in the plane of paper near
point A  as shown in Figure 13.6. In which plane should a straight
current carrying conductor be placed so that it passes through A
and there is no change in the deflection of the compass? Under
what condition is the deflection maximum and why?
Under what conditions permanent electromagnet is obtained if a
current carrying solenoid is used? Support your answer with the
help of a labelled circuit diagram.
15. AB is a current carrying conductor in the plane of the paper as
shown in Figure 13.7. What are the directions of magnetic fields
produced by it at points P and Q? Given r1 > r2, where will the
strength of the magnetic field be larger?
16. A magnetic compass shows a deflection when placed near a
current carrying wire. How will the deflection of the compass get
affected if the current in the wire is increased? Support your
answer with a reason.
17. It is established that an electric current through a metallic
conductor produces a magnetic field around it. Is there a similar
magnetic field produced around a thin beam of moving (i) alpha
particles, (ii) neutrons? Justify your answer.
What does the direction of thumb indicate in the right-hand thumb
rule. In what way this rule is different from Fleming’s left-hand
rule?
Meena draws magnetic field lines of field close to the axis of a
current carrying circular loop. As she moves away from the centre
of the circular loop she observes that the lines keep on diverging.
How will you explain her observation.
What does the divergence of magnetic field lines near the ends of
a current carrying straight solenoid indicate?
Name four appliances wherein an electric motor, a rotating device
that converts electrical energy to mechanical energy, is used as
an important component. In what respect motors are different
from generators?
What is the role of the two conducting stationary brushes in a
simple electric motor?
What is the difference between a direct current and an alternating
current? How many times does AC used in India change direction
in one second?
© NCERT
not to be republished
MAGNETIC EFFECTS OF ELECTRIC CURRENT
What is the role of fuse, used in series with any electrical
appliance? Why should a fuse with defined rating not be replaced
by one with a larger rating?
Long Answer Questions
Why does a magnetic compass needle pointing North and South
in the absence of a nearby magnet get deflected when a bar magnet
or a current carrying loop is brought near it. Describe some salient
features of magnetic lines of field concept.
With the help of a labelled circuit diagram illustrate the pattern
of field lines of the magnetic field around a current carrying
straight long conducting wire. How is the right hand thumb rule
useful to find direction of magnetic field associated with a current
carrying conductor?
Explain with the help of a labelled diagram the distribution of
magnetic field due to a current through a circular loop. Why is it
that if a current carrying coil has n turns the field produced at
any point is n times as large as that produced by a single turn?
Describe the activity that shows that a current-carrying conductor
experiences a force perpendicular to its length and the external
magnetic field. How does Fleming’s left-hand rule help us to find
the direction of the force acting on the current carrying conductor?
Draw a labelled circuit diagram of a simple electric motor and
explain its working. In what way these simple electric motors are
diffferent from commercial motors?
Explain the phenomenon of electromagnetic induction. Describe
an experiment to show that a current is set up in a closed loop
when an external magnetic field passing through the loop
increases or decreases.
Describe the working of an AC generator with the help of a labelled
circuit diagram. What changes must be made in the arrangement
to convert it to a DC generator?
Draw an appropriate schematic diagram showing common
domestic circuits and discuss the importance of fuse. Why is it
that a burnt out fuse should be replaced by another fuse of
identical rating?
© NCERT
not to be republished
Multiple Choice Questions
Which of the following is a non-renewable source of energy?
(a) Wood
(b) Sun
(c) Fossil fuels
(d) Wind
Acid rain happens because
(a) sun leads to heating of upper layer of atmosphere
(b) burning of fossil fuels release oxides of carbon, nitrogen and
sulphur in the atmosphere
(c) electrical charges are produced due to friction amongst clouds
(d) earth atmosphere contains acids
Fuel used in thermal power plants is
(a) water
(b) uranium
(c) biomass
(d) fossil fuels
In a hydro power plant
(a) Potential energy possessed by stored water is converted into
electricity
(b) Kinetic energy possessed by stored water is converted into
potential energy
(c) Electricity is extracted from water
(d) Water is converted into steam to produce electricity
Sources of
Energy
CHAPTER
© NCERT
not to be republished
Which is the ultimate source of energy?
(a) Water
(b) Sun
(c) Uranium
(d) Fossil fuels
Which one of the following forms of energy leads to least environmental
pollution in the process of its harnessing and utilisation?
(a) Nuclear energy
(b) Thermal energy
(c) Solar energy
(d) Geothermal energy
Ocean thermal energy is due to
(a) energy stored by waves in the ocean
(b) temperature difference at different levels in the ocean
(c) pressure difference at different levels in the ocean
(d) tides arising out in the ocean
The major problem in harnessing nuclear energy is how to
(a) split nuclei?
(b) sustain the reaction?
(c) dispose off spent fuel safely?
(d) convert nuclear energy into electrical energy?
Which part of the solar cooker is responsible for green house effect?
(a) Coating with black colour inside the box
(b) Mirror
(c) Glass sheet
(d) Outer cover of the solar cooker
The main constituent of biogas is
(a) methane
(b) carbon dioxide
(c) hydrogen
(d) hydrogen sulphide
The power generated in a windmill
(a) is more in rainy season since damp air would mean more air
mass hitting the blades
(b) depends on the height of the tower
(c) depends on wind velocity
(d) can be increased by planting tall trees close to the tower
SOURCES OF ENERGY
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Choose the correct statement
(a) Sun can be taken as an inexhaustible source of energy
(b) There is infinite storage of fossil fuel inside the earth
(c) Hydro and wind energy plants are non polluting sources
of energy
(d) Waste from a nuclear power plant can be easily disposed off
In a hydroelectric power plant more electrical power can be
generated if water falls from a greater height because
(a) its temperature increases
(b) larger amount of potential energy is converted into kinetic
energy
(c) the electricity content of water increases with height
(d) more water molecules dissociate into ions
Choose the incorrect statement regarding wind power
(a) It is expected to harness wind power to minimum in open space
(b) The potential energy content of wind blowing at high altitudes
is the source of wind power
(c) Wind hitting at the blades of a windmill causes them to rotate
The rotation thus achieved can be utilised further
(d) One possible method of utilising the energy of rotational
motion of the blades of a windmill is to run the turbine of an
electric generator
Choose the incorrect statement
(a) We are encouraged to plant more trees so as to ensure clean
environment and also provide bio-mass fuel
(b) Gobar-gas is produced when crops, vegetable wastes etc.,
decompose in the absence of oxygen
(c) The main ingredient of bio-gas is ethane and it gives a lot of
smoke and also produces a lot of residual ash
(d) Bio-mass is a renewable source of energy
Short Answer Questions
Why is there a need to harness non-conventional sources of
energy? Give two main reasons.
Write two different ways of harnessing energy from ocean.
What steps would you suggest to minimise environmental
pollution caused by burning of fossil fuels?
© NCERT
not to be republished
SOURCES OF ENERGY
What is the role of a plane mirror and a glass sheet in a
solar cooker?
Mention three advantages of a solar cell?
What is biomass? What can be done to obtain bio-energy using
biomass?
What are the limitations in obtaining energy from wind?
Long Answer Questions
Which is the process used to harness nuclear energy these days?
Explain it briefly.
How can solar energy be harnessed? Mention any two limitations
in using solar energy. How are these limitations overcome?
Make a list of conventional and non-conventional sources of
energy. Give a brief description of harnessing one non-
conventional source of energy.
Why is there a need for harnessing non-conventional sources
of energy? How can energy be harnessed from the sea in
different ways?
What are the environmental consequences of using fossil fuels?
Suggest the steps to minimise the pollution caused by various
sources of energy including non-conventional sources of energy.
Energy from various sources is considered to have been derived
from the sun. Do you agree? Justify your answer.
What is biomass? Explain the principle and working of a biogas
plant using a labelled schematic diagram.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Multiple Choice Questions
Which one of the following is an artificial ecosystem?
(a) Pond
(b) Crop field
(c) Lake
(d) Forest
In a food chain, the third trophic level is always occupied by
(a) carnivores
(b) herbivores
(c) decomposers
(d) producers
An ecosystem includes
(a) all living organisms
(b) non-living objects
(c) both living organisms and non-living objects
(d) sometimes living organisms and sometimes non-living objects
In the given food chain, suppose the amount of energy at fourth
trophic level is 5 kJ, what will be the energy available at the
producer level?
Grass → Grasshopper → Frog → Snake → Hawk
(a) 5 k J
(b) 50 k J
(c) 500 k J
(d) 5000 k J
Accumulation of non-biodegradable pesticides in the food chain
in increasing amount at each higher trophic level is known as
(a) eutrophication
(b) pollution
(c) biomagnification
(d) accumulation
Our Environment
CHAPTER
© NCERT
not to be republished
Depletion of ozone is mainly due to
(a) chlorofluorocarbon compounds
(b) carbon monoxide
(c) methane
(d) pesticides
Organisms which synthesise carbohydrates from inorganic
compounds using radiant energy are called
(a) decomposers
(b) producers
(c) herbivores
(d) carnivores
In an ecosystem, the 10% of energy available for transfer from one
trophic level to the next is in the form of
(a) heat energy
(b) light energy
(c) chemical energy
(d) mechanical energy
Organisms of a higher trophic level which feed on several types of
organisms belonging to a lower trophic level constitute the
(a) food web
(b) ecological pyramid
(c) ecosystem
(d) food chain
Flow of energy in an ecosystem is always
(a) unidirectional
(b) bidirectional
(c) multi directional
(d) no specific direction
Excessive exposure of humans to U V-rays results in
(i) damage to immune system
(ii) damage to lungs
(iii) skin cancer
(iv) peptic ulcers
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (ii) and (iv)
(c) (i)  and (iii)
(d) (iii) and (iv)
OUR ENVIRONMENT
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
In the following groups of materials, which group (s) contains only
non-biodegradable items?
(i) Wood, paper, leather
(ii) Polythene, detergent, PVC
(iii) Plastic, detergent, grass
(iv) Plastic, bakelite, DDT
(a) (iii)
(b) (iv)
(c) (i) and (iii)
(d) (ii) and (iv)
Which of the following limits the number of trophic levels in a food
chain?
(a) Decrease in energy at higher trophic levels
(b) Dufficient food supply
(c) Polluted air
(d) Water
Which of the statement is incorrect?
(a) All green plants and blue green algae are producers
(b) Green plants get their food from organic compounds
(c) Producers prepare their own food from inorganic compounds
(d) Plants convert solar energy into chemical energy
Which group of organisms are not constituents of a food chain?
(i) Grass, lion, rabbit, wolf
(ii) Plankton, man, fish, grasshopper
(iii) Wolf, grass, snake, tiger
(iv) Frog, snake, eagle, grass, grasshopper
(a) (i) and (iii)
(b) (iii) and (iv)
(c) (ii) and (iii)
(d) (i) and (iv)
The percentage of solar radiation absorbed by all the green plants
for the process of photosynthesis is about
(a) 1 %
(b) 5 %
(c) 8 %
(d) 10 %
In the given Figure 15.1 the various trophic levels are shown in a
pyramid. At which trophic level is maximum energy available?
(a) T4
(b) T2
(c) T1
(d) T3
Fig. 15.1
© NCERT
not to be republished
OUR ENVIRONMENT
What will happen if  deer is missing in the  food chain given below?
Grass →  Deer → Tiger
(a) The population of tiger increases
(b) The population of grass decreases
(c) Tiger will start eating grass
(d) The population of tiger decreases and the population of grass
increases
The decomposers in an ecosystem
(a) convert inorganic material, to simpler forms
(b) convert organic material to inorganic forms
(c) convert inorganic materials into organic compounds
(d) do not breakdown organic compounds
If a grass hopper is eaten by a frog, then the energy transfer will
be from
(a) producer to decomposer
(b) producer to primary consumer
(c) primary consumer to secondary consumer
(d) secondary consumer to primary consumer
Disposable plastic plates should not be used because
(a) they are made of materials with light weight
(b) they are made of toxic materials
(c) they are made of biodegradable materials
(d) they are made of non-biodegradable materials
Short Answer Questions
Why is improper disposal of waste a curse to environment?
Write the common food chain of a pond ecosystem.
What are the advantages of cloth bags over plastic bags during
shopping?
Why are crop fields known as artificial ecosystems?
Differentiate between biodegradable and non-biodegradable
substances. Cite examples.
© NCERT
not to be republished
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Suggest one word for each of the following statements/ definitions
(a) The physical and biological world where we live in
(b) Each level of food chain where transfer of energy takes place
(c) The physical factors like temperature, rainfall, wind and soil
of an ecosystem
(d) Organisms which depend on the producers either directly or
indirectly for food
Explain the role of  decomposers in the environment?
Select the mis-matched pair in the following and correct it.
(a) Biomagnification
—     Accumulation of chemicals at
the successive trophic levels of
a food chain
(b) Ecosystem
—     Biotic components of
environment
(c) Aquarium
—     A man-made ecosystem
(d) Parasites
—    Organisms which obtain food
from other living organisms
We do not clean ponds or lakes, but an aquarium needs to be
cleaned. Why?
Long Answer Questions
Indicate the flow of energy in an ecosystem. Why is it unidirectional?
Justify.
What are decomposers? What will be the consequence of their
absence in an ecosystem?
Suggest any four activities in daily life which are eco-friendly.
Give two differences between food chain and food web.
Name the wastes which are generated in your house daily. What
measures would you take for their disposal?
Suggest suitable mechanism (s) for waste management in fertiliser
industries.
What are the by-products of fertiliser industries? How do they affect
the environment?
Explain some harmful effects of agricultural practices on the
environment.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Multiple Choice Questions
From the list given below pick the item that is not a natural resource
(a) Soil
(b) Water
(c) Electricity
(d) Air
The most rapidly dwindling natural resource in the world is
(a) water
(b) forests
(c) wind
(d) sunlight
The most appropriate definition of a natural resource is that it is
a substance/commodity that is
(a) present only on land
(b) a gift of nature which is very useful to mankind
(c) a man-made substance placed in nature
(d) available only in the forest
The main cause for abundant coliform bacteria in the river Ganga is
(a) disposal of unburnt corpses into water
(b) discharge of effluents from electroplating industries
(c) washing of clothes
(d) immersion of ashes
The pH of water sample collected from a river was found to be
acidic in the range of 3.5 – 4.5, on the banks of the river were
several factories that were discharging effluents into the river.
The effluents of which one of the following factories is the most
likely cause for lowering the pH of river water?
(a) Soap and detergent factory
(b) Lead battery manufacturing factory
(c) Plastic cup manufacturing factory
(d) Alcohol distillery
Management of
Natural Resources
CHAPTER
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
6. The pH range most conducive for life of fresh water plants and
animals is
(a) 6.5 – 7.5
(b) 2.0 – 3.5
(c) 3.5 – 5.0
(d) 9.0 – 10.5
7. The three R’s that will help us to conserve natural resources for
long term use are
(a) recycle, regenerate, reuse
(b) reduce, regenerate, reuse
(c) reduce, reuse, redistribute
(d) reduce, recycle, reuse
8. Given below are a few statements related to biodiversity. Pick
those that correctly describe the concept of biodiversity
(i) Biodiversity refers to the different species of flora and fauna
present in an area
(ii) Biodiversity refers to only the flora of a given area
(iii) Biodiversity is greater in a forest
(iv) Biodiversity refers to the total number of individuals of a
particular species living in an area
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (ii) and (iv)
(c) (i) and (iii)
(d) (ii) and (iii)
9. Among the statements given below select the ones that correctly
describe the concept of sustainable development
(i) Planned growth with minimum damage to the environment
(ii) Growth irrespective of the extent of damage caused to the
environment
(iii) Stopping all developmental work to conserve the environment
(iv) Growth that is acceptable to all the stakeholders
(a) (i) and (iv)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (ii) and (iv)
(d) (iii) only
In our country, vast tracts of forests are cleared and a single
species of plant is cultivated. This practice promotes
(a) biodiversity in the area
(b) monoculture in the area
(c) growth of natural forest
(d) preserves the natural ecosystem in the area
© NCERT
not to be republished
MANAGEMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES
A successful forest conservation strategy should involve
(a) protection of animals at the highest trophic level
(b) protection of only consumers
(c) protection of only herbivores
(d) comprehensive programme to protect all the physical and
biological components
The important message conveyed by the ‘Chipko Movement’ is
(a) to involve the community in forest conservation efforts
(b) to ignore the community in forest conservation efforts
(c) to cut down forest trees for developmental activities
(d) government agencies have the unquestionable right to order
destruction of trees in forests
In our country, there are attempts to increase the height of several
existing dams like Tehri and Almati, dams across Narmada.
Choose the correct statements among the following that are a
consequence of raising the height of dams
(i) Terrestrial flora and fauna of the area is destroyed completely
(ii) Dislocation of people and domestic animals living in the area
(iii) Valuable agricultural land may be permanently lost
(iv) It will generate permanent employment for people
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (i), (ii) and (iii)
(c) (ii) and (iv)
(d) (i), (iii) and (iv)
Expand the abbreviation GAP
(a) Governmental Agency for Pollution Control
(b) Gross Assimilation by Photosynthesis
(c) Ganga Action Plan
(d) Governmental Agency for Animal Protection
Select the incorrect statement
(a) Economic development is linked to environmental conservation
(b) Sustainable development encourages development for current
generation and conservation of resources for future generations
(c) Sustainable development does not consider the view points
of stakeholders
(d) Sustainable development is a long planned and persistent
development
Which of the following is not a natural resource?
(a) Mango tree
(b) Snake
(c) Wind
(d) Wooden house
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Select the wrong statement
(a) Forests provide variety of products
(b) Forests have greater plant diversity
(c) Forests do not conserve soil
(d) Forests conserve water
Arabari forests of Bengal is dominated by
(a) Teak
(b) Sal
(c) Bamboo
(d) Mangroove
Ground water will not be depleted due to
(a) afforestation
(b) thermal power plants
(c) loss of forest, and decreased rainfall
(d) cropping of high water demanding crops
Opposition to the constrution of large dams is due to
(a) social reasons
(b) economic reasons
(c) enviromental reasons
(d) all the above
Khadins, Bundhis, Ahars and Kattas are ancient structures that
are examples for
(a) grain storage
(b) wood storage
(c) water harvesting
(d) soil conservation
Pick the right combination of terms which has no fossil fuel.
(a) Wind, ocean and coal
(b) Kerosene, wind and tide
(c) Wind, wood, sun
(d) Petroleum, wood, sun
Select the eco-friendly activity among the following
(a) Using car for transportation
(b) Using polybags for shopping
(c) Using dyes for colouring clothes
(d) Using windmills to generate power for irrigation
© NCERT
not to be republished
MANAGEMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES
It is important to make small check dams across the flooded
gullies because they
(i) hold water for irrigation
(ii) hold water and prevent soil erosion
(iii) recharge ground water
(iv) hold water permanently
(a) (i) and (iv)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (iii) and (iv)
(d) (ii) and (iv)
Short Answer Questions
Prepare a list of five items that you use daily in the school. Identify
from the list such items that can be recycled.
List two advantages associated with water harvesting at the
community level.
In a village in Karnataka, people started cultivating crops all around
a lake which was always filled with water. They added fertilisers to
their field in order to enhance the yield. Soon they discovered that
the waterbody was completely covered with green floating plants
and fishes started dying in large numbers.
Analyse the situation and give reasons for excessive growth of
plants and death of fish in the lake.
What measures would you take to conserve electricity in your
house?
Although coal and petroleum are produced by degradatioin of
bio- mass, yet we need to conserve them. Why?
Suggest a few measures for controlling carbon dioxide levels in
the atmosphere.
(a) Locate and name the water reservoirs in Figures16.1 (a) and (b).
(b) Which  has an advantage over the other and why?
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Fig. 16.1 (b)
Long Answer Questions
In the context of conservation of natural resources, explain the
terms reduce, recycle and reuse. From among the materials that
we use in daily life, identify two materials for each category.
Prepare a list of five activities that you perform daily in which
natural resources can be conserved or energy utilisation can be
minimised.
Is water conservation necessary? Give reasons.
Suggest a few useful ways of utilising waste water.
What is the importance of forest as a resource?
Why are the Arabari forests of Bengal known to be a good example
of conserved forest?
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
CLASS X (THEORY)
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-I
Time :  3 Hours                                             Maximum Marks : 75
Multiple Choice Questions
1. Solid calcium oxide  reacts vigorously with water to form calcium
hydroxide accompanied by liberation of heat. This process is called
slaking of lime. Which among the following is (are) true about
slaking of lime?
(i) It is an endothermic reaction
(ii) It is an exothermic reaction
(iii) The pH of the resulting solution will be more than seven
(iv) The pH of the resulting solution will be less than seven
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (i) and (iv)
(d) (iii) and (iv)
2. Sodium carbonate is a basic salt because it is a salt of
(a) strong acid and strong base
(b) weak acid and weak base
(c) weak base and strong acid
(d) strong base and weak acid
3. Which one of the following four metals would be displaced from
the solution of its salt by other three metals?
(a) Mg
(b) Ag
(c) Zn
(d) Cu
4. Which one among the following is the correct representation of
electron dot structure of nitrogen
© NCERT
not to be republished
The correct sequence of anaerobic reactions in yeast is
(a) Glucose ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→
cytoplasm
Pyruvate ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→
mitochondria
Ethanol +
Carbondioxide
(b) Glucose ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→
cytoplasm
Pyruvate   ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→
cytoplasm
Lactic acid
(c) Glucose ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→
cytoplasm
Pyruvate   ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→
mitochondria
Lactic acid
(d) Glucose ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
cytoplasm
Pyruvate   ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→
cytoplasm
Ethanol +
Carbondioxide
Offspring formed as a result of sexual reproduction exhibit more
variations because
(a) sexual reproduction is a lengthy process
(b) genetic material comes from two parents of the same species
(c) genetic material comes from two parents of different species
(d) genetic material comes from many parents
New species may be formed if
(i) DNA undergoes significant changes in germ cells
(ii) chromosome number changes in the gamete
(iii) chromosome number remains the same
(iv) mating does not take place
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (i) and (iii)
(c) (ii), (iii) and (iv)
(d) (i), (ii) and (iv)
Beams of light are incident through the holes  A and B  and emerge
out of the box through the holes C and D respectively as shown in
the Figure. Which of the following could be inside the box?
(a) a rectangular glass slab
(b) a convex lens
(c) a concave lens
(d) a glass prism      (1)
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-I
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
9. The clear sky appears blue because
(a) blue light gets absorbed in the atmosphere.
(b) ultraviolet radiations are absorbed in the atmosphere.
(c) violet and blue lights get scattered more than all other colours
by the atmosphere.
(d) light of all other colours is scattered more than the violet and
blue colour lights by the atmosphere.
Identify the given circuit in which the electrical components have
been properly connected.
(a) (i)
(b) (ii)
(c) (iii)
(d) (iv)
The resistance between A and B in the given Figure will be
(a) 20 Ω
(b) 30 Ω
(c) 90 Ω
(d) more than 10 Ω but less than 20 Ω      (1)
© NCERT
not to be republished
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-I
In the arrangement shown in given Figure,  there are two coils
wound on a non-conducting cylindrical rod. Initially
the key is not inserted. Then the key is inserted and
later removed. Then
(a) the deflection in the galvanometer remains zero
throughout
(b) there is a momentary deflection in the
galvanometer but it dies out shortly and there is
no effect when the key is removed
(c) there are momentary galvanometer deflections that die out
shortly; the deflections are in the same direction
(d) there are momentary galvanometer deflections that die out
shortly; the deflections are in opposite directions
A constant current flows in a horizontal wire in the plane of the
paper from east to west as shown in the given Figure. The direction
of magnetic field at a point will be North to South
(a) directly above the wire
(b) directly below the wire
(c) at a point located in the plane of the paper, on the north side
of the wire
(d) at a point located in the plane of the paper, on the south side
of the wire
The major problem in harnessing nuclear energy is how to
(a) split nuclei
(b) sustain the reaction
(c) dispose off spent fuel safely
(d) convert nuclear energy into electrical energy
Which of the statements is incorrect?
(a) All green plants and blue green algae are producers
(b) Green plants get their food from organic compounds
(c) Producers prepare their own food from inorganic compounds
(d) Plants convert solar energy into chemical energy
Short Answer Questions
Write the balanced chemical equations for the following reactions
and identify the type of reaction in each case
(a) Nitrogen gas is treated with hydrogen gas in the presence of a
catalyst at 773K to form ammonia gas.
(b) Limestone is heated strongly to form quicklime and
carbondioxide gas is evolved
(1+1=2)
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Salt A commonly used in bakery products on heating converts
into another salt B which is used in the manufacture of glass
and a gas C is evolved. The gas C when passed through lime
water, turns it milky.  Identify A, B and C. Write the reaction for
heating of salt A.
( +  +  +  = 2)
Properties of the elements are given below. Where would you locate
the following elements in the Periodic Table?
(a) A soft metal stored under kerosene
(b) An element with variable (more than one) valency stored under
water.
(1+1=2)
Why is ‘nutrition’ a necessity for an organism?
Why is the flow of signals in a synapse from axonal end of one
neuron to dendritic end of another neuron but not the reverse?
In human beings, the statistical probability of getting either a
male or female child is 50 : 50. Give a suitable explanation.(2)
Sudha finds out that the sharp image of the window pane of her
science laboratory is formed at a distance of  15 cm from the
lens. She now tries to focus the building visible to her outside the
window instead of the window pane without disturbing the lens.
In which direction will  she move the screen to obtain a sharp
image of the building? What is the approximate focal length of
this lens?
(1+1=2)
A student sitting at the back of the classroom cannot read clearly
the letters written on the blackboard. What advice will a doctor
give to her? Draw ray diagram for the correction of this defect.
(1 + 1 =2)
How will you use two identical prisms so that a ray of white light
incident on one prism emerges out of the second prism as white
light? Draw the diagram.
Three 60 W incandescent bulbs are connected in a parallel.
(a) Calculate the total power consumed.
(b) Now suppose that one of the bulbs is fused. What will be the
total power consumed now?
(1 + 1 =2)
A magnetic compass shows a deflection when placed near a
current carrying wire. How will the deflection of the compass get
affected if the current in the wire is increased? Support your
answer with a reason.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-I
What is the difference between the direct and alternating currents?
How many times does AC used in India change direction in one
second?
(1+1=2)
What steps would you suggest to minimise environmental
pollution caused by burning of fossil fuels?
List the common food chain of a pond ecosystem
List two advantages associated with water harvesting at the
community level.
Long Answer Questions
Explain the following
(a) The reactivity of a piece of aluminium metal decreases if it is
dipped in HNO3
(b) Carbon cannot reduce the oxides of  Na or Mg
(c) NaCl does not conduct electricity in solid state whereas it
does conduct electricity in aqueous solution as well as in
molten state
(d) Necessity of galvanisation of iron articles
(e) Metals like Na, K, Ca and Mg are never found in their free
state in nature.
(1+1+1+1+1= 5)
Given below are the steps for extraction of copper from its ore.
(a) Write the equations of the reactions involved in roasting of
copper (I) sulphide followed by its reduction.
(b) Draw a neat labelled diagram for electrolytic refining(3 + 2 = 5)
You are given the balls and sticks models of six carbon atoms and
fourteen hydrogen atoms and sufficient number of sticks. In how
many ways one can join the models of six carbon atoms and fourteen
hydrogen atoms to form different molecules of C6H14.
Draw structural formulae of all the possible isomers of the
compound with molecular formula C3H6O and also give their
electron dot structures.
(2 + 3 = 5)
Distinguish between pollination and fertilisation. Mention the site
and product of fertilisation in a flower. Draw a neat, labelled
diagram of a pistil showing pollen tube growth and its entry into
the ovule.
(1+1+2=5)
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Reproduction is essentially a phenomenon that is not for survival
of an individual but for continuation of a species. Justify (5)
(a) Draw ray diagrams showing the image formation by a convex
lens when an object is placed
(i)  at twice the focal length of the lens
(ii) at infinity
(b) The image of a candle flame formed by a lens is obtained on a
screen placed on the other side of the lens. If the image is
three times the size of the flame and the distance between
lens and image is 80 cm, at what distance has the candle
been placed from the lens? What is the nature of the image
and the lens?
(1 + 1 + 3 = 5)
Write laws of refraction of light. Explain the same with the help
of ray diagram, when a ray of light passes through a rectangular
glass slab
(2 + 3 = 5)
How will you infer with the help of an experiment that the same
current flows through every part of the circuit containing three
resistances in series connected to a battery?
Find out the following in the electric circuit given in the Figure.
(a) Effective resistance of two 8 Ω resistors in combination.
(b) Current flowing through 4 Ω resistor.
(c) Potential difference across 4 Ω resistor.
(d) Power dissipated by 4 Ω resistor.
(e) Difference in ammeter readings, if any.
(1+1+1+1+1= 5)
In the context of conservation of natural resources, explain the
terms reduce, recycle and reuse. From among the materials that
we use in daily life, identify two materials for each category.(5)
Suggest a few useful ways of utilising waste water.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-I
ANSWERS
ANSWERS
ANSWERS
ANSWERS
ANSWERS
Multiple Choice Questions
10. (b)
11. (d )
12. (d)
13. (b)
14. (c)
15. (b)
Short Answer Questions
(a) N2(g) + 3H2(g)
catalyst
773 K
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→ 2NH3(g)
Combination  reaction
(b) CaCO3 (s)
⎯⎯⎯⎯→ CaO (s) + CO2 (g)
Decomposition  reaction
The salt A which is commonly used in bakery product is baking
powder (NaHCO3). On heating it forms B sodium carbonate
(Na2CO3) and CO2 gas C is evolved. When CO2 (g) is passed through
lime water, it forms calcium carbonate (CaCO3),  which is sparingly
soluble in water making it milky.
2NaHCO3
⎯⎯⎯⎯→ Na2CO3 + H2O + CO2
(a)  Sodium (Na) Group 1 and Period 3
(b) Phosphorus (P) Group 15 and Period 3
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Food is required for the following purposes.
(a) It provides energy for the various metabolic processes in the
body.
(b)  It is essential for the growth of new cells and the repair or
replacement of worn out cells.
(c) It is needed to develop resistance against various diseases.
When an electrical signal reaches the axonal end of a neuron, it
releases a chemical substance. This chemical diffuses towards
the dendrite end of next neuron where it generates an electrical
impulse or signal. Hence, the electrical signal is converted into a
chemical signal at the axonal end. Since these chemicals are
absent at the dendrite end of the neuron, the electrical signal
cannot be converted into chemical signal.
The sex of an infant is determined by the type of sex chromosome
contributed by the male gamete. Since the ratio of male gametes
containing X chromosome and those containing Y chromosome
is 50 : 50, the statistical possibility of male or a female infant is
also 50 : 50.
Sudha should move the screen towards the lens so as to obtain a
clearer image of the building. The approximate focal length of this
lens will be 15 cm.
The student is suffering from myopia (Short sightedness). Doctor
advises her to use a concave lens of appropriate power to correct
this defect.
Hint— By using two identical prisms, one placed inverted with
respect to the other.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-I
Hint— (a) 60 W  3 = 180 W. Since wattage in parallel combination
becomes three times the wattage of a single bulb.
(b) 120 W
The deflection increases. The strength of magnetic field is directly
proportional to the magnitude of current passing through the
straight conductor.
Direct current always flows in one direction but the alternating
current reverses its direction periodically. The frequency of AC in
India is 50 Hz and in each cycle it alters direction twice. Therefore
AC changes direction 2  50 = 100 times in one second.
(a)  Use of alternative source of energy like solar and wind energy
(b) Use of catalytic converters in vehicles
(c) Use of refined fuels like CNG
(d) Proper servicing of vehicles
Phytoplanktons and aquatic plants → small aquatic animals
(insects, larvae etc.) →  fish → bird.
Hint— (a)  The ground water level increases due to recharging of wells.
(b) Ground water keeps the layers of soil above it moist and
prevents loss of water by evaporation.
(c) The water can be stored during rainy season and can be used
when required.
Long Answer  Questions
Hint— (a)  Due to the formation of a layer of oxide that is, Al2O3
(b) Na or Mg are more reactive metals as compared to carbon
(c) In solid state the movement of NaCl ions is not possible due
to its rigid structure. In molten state, the ions can move freely
as the forces of attraction between oppositely charged ions
are overcome due to heat. Also, in aqueous solution, the ions
are free to move.
(d) To protect iron from rusting
(e) They are highly reactive
(a) 2Cu2 S (s) + 3O 2 (s) ⎯⎯⎯⎯
2 Cu2 O(s) + 2SO2 (g)
2Cu2 O + Cu2 S ⎯⎯⎯⎯
6 Cu(s) + SO2 (g)
(b) Diagram for electrolytic refining
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
C6 H14
(a) CH3 — CH 2 — CH 2 — CH2 — CH2 — CH 3
(b) CH3 —CH
— CH2 — CH2 — CH 3
(c) CH3 —CH2 —C H
— CH 2 — CH3
(d) CH3 — CH
— CH3
Propanone
CH3—CH2—CHO
Propanal
The process or mechanism of transfer of pollen grains from the
anther to the stigma is termed pollination.
The fusion of male and female gametes giving rise to zygote is
termed fertilisation.
The site of fertilisation is ovule.
The product of fertilisation is zygote.
Hint—
© NCERT
not to be republished
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-I
Hint—
(a) For survival an individual needs energy which it obtains from
life processes such as nutrition and respiration.
(b) Reproduction does not provide energy.
(c) Reproduction ensures transfer of genetic material from one
generation to the next which helps in continuation of species.
(b) Hint—
–3 , using v
calculate u.
u = −80 .
3 cm Image is real and inverted. The lens is convex.
Give the laws of refraction
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
35. Hint— Explain with the help of the diagram
N' r1
Glass
Glass
Describe the experiment showing
that same current flows through
each component in a series circuit
(a)  1 A.
(b) 4  Ω.
(c) 4 V.
(d) 4 W.
(e) No difference. (Same current
flows through each element in
a series circuit)
Reduce means to use a material/commodity in lesser quantity,
e.g electricity and water.
Recycle means a material that is used once is collected and sent
back to a manufacturer so that they can make some other useful
material from it.
e.g., plastic cups and buckets, glass tumbler, paper, metal objects.
Reuse means using a thing over and over again instead of throwing
it away. It does not involve the process of recycling either in small
or large scale: e.g., used envelopes, plastic carry bags, bottles of
© NCERT
not to be republished
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-I
Hint— The waste water can be used for
(a) recharging the ground water
(b) irrigation purpose
(c) municipal water can be treated and used for washing cars,
watering the garden and other domestic uses.
(c) pollutants in sewage water can become fertilisers for various
crops.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
CLASS X (THEORY)
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-II
Time :  3 Hours                                             Maximum Marks : 75
Multiple Choice Questions
Which among the following statement(s) is(are) true? Silver
chloride on exposure to sunlight for long duration turns grey
due to
(i) the formation of silver by decomposition of silver chloride
(ii)  sublimation of silver chloride
(iii) decomposition of chlorine gas from silver chloride
(iv) oxidation of silver chloride
(a) (i) only
(b) (i) and (iii)
(c) (ii) and (iii)
(d) (iv) only
Which of the following oxide(s) of iron would be obtained on
prolonged reaction of iron with steam?
(a) FeO
(b) Fe2O3
(c) Fe3O4
(d) Fe2O3 and Fe3O4
CH3 CH2 OH
AlkalineKMnO + Heat
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→ CH3 COOH
In the above given reaction, alkaline KMnO4 acts as
(a) reducing agent
(b) oxidising agent
(c) reducing as well as oxidising agent
(d) dehydrating agent
Which of the following gives the correct increasing order of the
atomic radii of  O, F and N?
(a) O,  F, N
(b) N, O, F
(c) O, N, F
(d) F, O, N
© NCERT
not to be republished
Which of the following statement(s) is(are) true about heart?
(i) Left atrium receives oxygenated blood from different parts of the
body while right atrium receives deoxygenated blood from lungs
(ii) Left ventricle pumps oxygenated blood to different body parts
while right ventricle pumps deoxygenated blood to lungs
(iii) Left atrium transfers oxygenated blood to right ventricle which
sends it to different parts of the body
(iv) Right atrium receives deoxygenated blood from different parts
of the body while left ventricle pumps oxygenated blood to
different parts of the body
(a) (i)
(b) (ii)
(c) (ii) and (iv)
(d) (i) and (iii)
The substance that triggers the fall of mature leaves and fruits
from plants is
(a) Auxin
(b) Gibberellin
(c) Abscisic acid
(d) Cytokinin
Which among the following statements are true for unisexual flowers?
(i) They possess both stamen and pistil
(ii) They possess either stamen or pistil
(iii) They exhibit cross pollination
(iv) Unisexual flowers possessing only stamens cannot produce fruits
(a) (i) and (iv)
(ii), (iii) and (iv)
(c) (iii) and (iv)
(i), (iii) and (iv)
According to the evolutionary theory, formation of a new species
is generally due to
(a) sudden creation by nature
(b) accumulation of variations over several generations
(c) clones formed during asexual reproduction
(d) movement of individuals from one habitat to another
Under which of the following conditions the real image formed by
a concave mirror is  larger than the actual object?
(a) When source is at a distance equal to radius of curvature of
the concave mirror
(b) When source is at a distance less than the focal length of the
concave mirror
(c) When source is placed at a distance between the focus and
centre of curvature of the concave mirror
(d) When source is placed at a distance greater than the radius
of curvature  of the concave mirror
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-II
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
The path of a ray of light passing through a rectangular glass
slab tested by four students are shown in Figure as A, B, C and
D. Which one of them is correct?
(a) A
(b) B
(c) C
(d) D
In the following given circuits, heat produced in the resistor or
combination of resistors connected to a 12 V battery will be
(a) same in all the cases.
(b) minimum in case (i).
(c) maximum in case (ii).
(d) maximum in case (iii).
What is the maximum resistance which can be made using five
resistors each of 1/5 Ω?
(a) 1/5 Ω
(b) 10 Ω
(c) 5 Ω
(d) 1 Ω
In an electrical circuit three incandescent bulbs A, B and C of
rating 40 W, 60 W and 100 W are connected in parallel to an
electric source. Which of the following is likely to happen regarding
their brightness?
(a) Brightness of all the bulbs will be the same
© NCERT
not to be republished
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-II
(b) Brightness of bulb A will be the maximum
(c) Brightness of bulb B will be more than that of A
(d) Brightness of bulb C will be less than that of B
Choose the incorrect statement
(a) Fleming’s right-hand rule is a simple rule to know the direction
of induced current
(b) The right-hand thumb rule is used to find the direction of
magnetic fields due to current carrying conductors
(c) The difference between the direct and alternating currents is
that the direct current always flows in one direction, whereas
the alternating current reverses its direction periodically
(d) In India the AC changes direction after every
50  second (1)
Among the statements given below select the ones that describe
the concept of sustainable development
(i) Planned growth with minimum damage to the environment
(ii) Growth irrespective of the extent of damage caused to the
environment
(iii) Stopping all developmental work to conserve the environment
(iv) Growth that is acceptable to all the stakeholders
(a) (i) and (iv)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (ii) and (iv)
(d) (iii) only
Short Answer Questions
Identify the oxidising agent (oxidant) in the following reactions
(a) Pb3O4 + 8HCl ⎯→ 3PbCl2 + Cl2 + 4H2O
(b) Mg + 2H2O  ⎯→ Mg (OH) 2 + H2
(c) CuSO4  + Zn  ⎯→ Cu + ZnSO4
(d) V2O5 + 5Ca  ⎯→ 2V  + 5CaO
(+++=2)
A non-metal A is an important constituent of our food and forms
two oxides B and C. Oxide B is toxic whereas C causes global
warming
(a) Identify A, B and C
(b) To which Group of periodic table A belongs?
(1+=2)
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Atomic number of a few elements are given below
(i) 10
(ii) 20
(iii) 7
(iv) 14
(a) Identify the elements
(b) Identify the period to which these elements belong
(1 + 1 = 2)
What will happen if the mucus is not secreted by the gastric
glands?
Name the plant hormones responsible for the following
(a) elongation of cells
(b) growth of stem
(c) promotion of cell division
(d) falling of senescent leaves
( +  +  +  = 2)
How are general growth and sexual maturation different from
each other?
A very small population of a species faces a greater threat of
extinction. Provide a suitable genetic explanation.
It is established that an electric current through a metallic
conductor produces a magnetic field around it. Is there a similar
magnetic field produced around a thin beam of moving (i) positively
charged alpha particles, (ii) neutrons? Justify your answer by
giving suitable arguments.
(1 + 1 = 2)
A child has drawn the electric circuit to study Ohm’s
law as shown in the figure. His teacher told that the
circuit diagram needs correction.
Study the circuit diagram and redraw it after making
all corrections.
Three 2 Ω resistors, A, B, and C, are connected as shown below.
Each of them dissipates and can stand a maximum power of 18
W  without melting. Find the maximum current that can flow
through the three resistors.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-II
Draw the reflected ray corresponding to the ray incident on
a concave mirror as shown in the ray diagram?
Why does a light ray incident on a rectangular glass slab
immersed in any medium emerge parallel to itself? Explain
using a diagram.                                                         (2)
A person needs a lens of power –4.5 D for correction of her vision.
(a) What kind of defect in vision is she suffering from?
(b) What is the focal length of the corrective lens?
(c) What is the nature of the corrective lens?
In a village in Karnataka, people started cultivating crops all
around a lake which was always filled with water. They added
fertilisers to their field in order to enhance the yield. Soon they
discovered that the waterbody was completely covered with green
floating plants and fish in the lake started  dying in large numbers.
Analyse the situation and give reasons for excessive growth of
plants and death of fishes in the lake.
Although coal and petroleum are produced by degradatioin of
bio- mass, yet we need to conserve them. Why?
Long Answer Questions
In the following
s c h e m a t i c
diagram for the
preparation of
hydrogen gas as
shown in Figure,
would
happen
following changes
are made?
(a) In place of Zn
g r a n u l e s ,
same amount
of zinc dust is
taken in the test tube
(b) Instead of dilute sulphuric  acid, dilute hydrochloric acid is taken
(c) In place of Zn, Cu turnings are taken
(d) Sodium hydroxide is taken in place of sulphuric acid and tube
is heated
(1+1+1+1=5)
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
A metal carbonate X on reacting with an acid gives a gas which
when passed  through a solution Y gives the carbonate back. On
the other hand, a gas G that is obtained at anode during
electrolysis of brine is passed on dry Y, it gives a compound Z,
used for disinfecting drinking water. Identity X, Y, G and Z. Also,
write the chemical reactions involved.
When ethanoic acid reacts with sodium hydrogencarbonate, a
salt X is formed and a gas Y is evolved.
(a) Identify X and Y. Write chemical equation of reaction involved.
(b) Describe an activity and draw the diagram of the apparatus
to prove that the evolved gas is the one which you have named.
(2 + 2 +1 = 5)
Look at Figure and answer the following questions.
(a) What change would you observe in
tube B containing calcium hydroxide
solution
(b) Write the reaction involved in test tubes
A and B respectively
(c) If ethanol is given instead of acetic acid,
would you expect the same change?
(d) How can a solution of lime water be
prepared in the laboratory?
(1+2+1+1 = 5)
When do we consider a person to be myopic or hypermetropic?
Explain using diagrams how the  defects associated with myopic
and hypermetropic eye can be corrected?
Explain the refraction of light through a triangular glass prism
using a labelled ray diagram. Hence define the angle of deviation.
How can solar energy be harnessed? What are the limitations in
using solar energy? How are these limitations overcome?
(1+1+2= 5)
© NCERT
not to be republished
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-II
What is biomass? Explain the principle and working of a biogas
plant using a labelled schematic diagram
(2+3 = 5)
Explain with the help of a labelled diagram the distribution of a
magnetic field due to a current through a circular loop. Why is it
that if a current carrying loop has n turns the field produced at
any point is n times as large as that produced by a single turn?
(2+2 = 5)
Explain the phenomenon of electromagnetic induction? Describe
an appropriate experiment to show that a current is set up in a
closed loop when an external magnetic field passing through the
loop increases or decreases.
(2 + 3 = 5)
Suggest any five activities in daily life which are eco-friendly.
Explain some harmful effects of agricultural practices on the
environment.
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
ANSWERS
Multiple Choice Questions
14.  (d)
Short Answer Questions
(a)  Pb3O4
(b) H2O
(c) CuSO4
(d) V2O5
17.   (a)  A is carbon, B is carbon monoxide and C is carbon dioxide
(b) Group 14 of periodic table
18.    (a)  Ne,   Ca,   N,    Si
(b) 2,     3 ,    2,    3
© NCERT
not to be republished
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-II
Gastric glands in stomach release hydrochloric acid, enzyme
pepsin and mucus. The mucus protects the inner lining of the
stomach from the action of hydrochloric acid and enzyme pepsin.
If mucus is not released, it will lead to erosion of inner lining of
stomach, which may cause acidity and ulcer.
(a)  Auxin
(b) Gibberellin
(c) Cytokinin
(d) Abscisic acid
General growth refers to different types of developmental process
in the body like increase in height, weight gain, changes in shape
and size of the body but sexual maturation is specific to changes
reflected at puberty like cracking of voice, new hair patterns,
development of breast in female etc.
Fewer individuals in a species impose extensive inbreeding among
them. This limits the appearance of variations and puts the species
at a disadvantage if there are changes in the environment. Since
the individuals fail to cope up with the environmental changes,
they may become extinct.
Hint—(i) Yes, (ii) No. Alpha particles are positively charged particles
and therefore a thin beam of moving alpha particles constitutes a
current in the direction of motion of the alpha particles. The neutrons
on the other hand are electrically neutral and therefore there is no
current associated with the thin beam of moving neutrons.
Maximum current through resistor A =
18 A = 3 A.
Thus the maximum current through resistors B and C, each
A = 1.5 A.
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Hint— Draw the diagram and explain using laws of refraction at
both interfaces.
(a) Myopia
(b) – 0.22 m
(c) Concave Lens
Hint— Since people used excessive fertilisers in the fields, they
were carried down to the lake by the rains. As many fertilisers
contain phosphates and nitrates, the water body became enriched
with these chemicals. These chemicals promote excessive growth
of aquatic plants and the surface of water was completely covered
with plants (eutrophication). Due to insufficient availability of
dissolved oxygen and nutrients resulted in the death of fish.
Both the energy sources, coal and petroleum, take millions of
years for their formation. As these resources are being utilised at
a much faster rate than their formation, they will be exhausted
in the near future, hence they need to be conserved.
Long Answer Questions
Hint—
(a)  Hydrogen gas will evolve with a greater speed
(b) Almost same amount of gas is evolved
(c) Hydrogen gas is not evolved
(d) If sodium hydroxide is taken, hydrogen gas will be evolved
Zn + 2NaOH →    Na2 ZnO2        + H2
Sodium zincate
The gas G evolved at anode during electrolysis of brine is chlorine
When chlorine gas is passed through dry Ca(OH)2  (Y), it produces
bleaching powder Z used for disinfecting drinking water.
Ca (OH)2  + Cl2 → CaOCl2 + H 2O
Slaked
Bleaching
powder
Since Y and Z are calcium salts, therefore X is also a calcium salt
and is calcium carbonate.
CaCO3 + 2 HCl → CaCl2 + CO2 + H 2O
Ca (OH)2 + CO 2 → CaCO 3 + H 2O
© NCERT
not to be republished
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-II
(a) CH3 COOH + NaHCO3 → CH3 COO Na + H2O + CO2
X is sodium ethanoate
Gas evolved is carbon dioxide (Y)
(b) The gas evolved during the reaction is passed through a delivery
tube into the test tube containing lime water. The lime water
solution turns milky due to the formation of calcium carbonate,
a characteristic property of CO2 gas.
(a) It will turn milky
(b) 2CH3 COOH + Na2CO3 → 2CH3COONa + H2O + CO2 (Test tube
Ca(OH)2 + CO2 → CaCO3 + H2O (Test tube B)
With excess CO2, milkyness disappears.
CaCO3 + H 2O + CO2 → Ca (H CO3)2
(c) As C2H5OH and Na2CO3 do not react, a similar change is not
expected
C2H5OH + Na2CO 3 →  No change
(d) The lime water is prepared by dissolving  calcium oxide in
water and decanting the supernatent liquid. The reaction is
referred to as slaking of lime
CaO (s) + H2O (l) → Ca(OH)2 (aq) + Heat
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
© NCERT
not to be republished
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-II
Hint— When a person is not able to see distant objects clearly but
can see nearby objects clearly then he/she is considered to be
myopic. If it is othewise, he/she is hypermetropic. Give explanation
based on figures.
Hint— Give explanation based on figure. Angle of deviation is the
angle D, between the incident ray and the emergent ray when a
light ray passes through a glass prism.
Hint— Answer must include working of a solar device using
reflectors/solar cell; limitations; available during day time/sunny
days. Requires huge costly installations. To overcome limitation:
use of solar cell.
Hint— Biomass- Plant and animal wastes
Give description of biogas plant with the help of label diagram.
Hint— The magnetic field at a point is the resultant of the field
produced by each turn.
© NCERT
not to be republished
E XEMPLAR PROBLEMS – SCIENCE
Hint— The process by which changing magnetic field in a
conductor induces a current in another conductor is called
electromagnetic induction.
Explain the working of the setup with the help of the diagram.
Hint— (i)   Separation of biodegradable and non-biodegradable
substances.
(ii) Gardening
(iii) Use of gunny bags/paper bags in place of polythene/plastic
(iv) Use of compost and vermicompost in place of fertilisers
(v) Harvesting  rain water
Hint—
(a) Exessive use of fertilisers changes the chemistry of soil and
kills useful microbes.
(b) Excessive use of non-biodegradable chemical pesticides leads
to biological magnification.
(c) Extensive cropping causes loss of soil fertility.
(d) Excessive use of ground water for agriculture lowers the water
table.
(e) Damage to natural ecosystem/habitat.
© NCERT
not to be republished
