Due care has been taken to ensure that the information provided in this book
is correct. However, the publishers bear no responsibility for any damage resulting
from any inadvertent omission or inaccuracy in the book.
2014, KALINJAR TECHNOLOGIES PVT. LTD
Note:
Our Online Distributors
Price : 100/-
Edition : 2015
Our Regional Offline Distributors
s Bhumi Marketing, Lucknow
Jaiswal Book Shop, Allahabad
Alka News Agency, Patna
Vikas Book Agency, Hyderabad
UBSPD, Delhi
Saivenkatramanna, Hyderabad
Universal, Chandigarh
All right reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means
without the prior written permission of the publishers.
Any disputes arising due to any issues/issue related to the publication of this book shall be subject to the
jurisdiction of Delhi Courts only.
All trade marks are properties of their respective owners.
PUBLISHED BY
Address
Phone
KALINJAR PUBLICATIONS
E-mail
Website
Sonu Tower, A-17, Room No. 101
Dr. Mukherjee Nagar. Delhi-9
011 45151781, 011 45041881, Mobile No.- 08800734161
ISBN: 9789382732785
Contents
1. The Harappan Culture: Bronze Age Civilization ..............................................1
2. The Later Vedic Phase...................................................................................... 10
3. Territorial States and the First Magadhan Empire .......................................... 19
4. The Delhi Sultanate......................................................................................... 28
5. Architecture ..................................................................................................... 35
6. Mughal Empire ................................................................................................ 41
7. Social and Cultural Awakening in the first Half of the 19th Century............. 52
8. The Revolt of 1857 ........................................................................................... 60
9. Growth of New India-Religious and social reform after 1858 ......................... 69
10. Nationalist Movement ...................................................................................... 84
11. Multiple Choice Questions............................................................................... 95
The Harappan Culture: Bronze Age Civilization
THE INDUS or the Harappan culture is
older than the chalcolithic cultures which
have been treated  earlier, but it is far more
developed than these cultures. It arose in the
north-western
Indian
subcontinent. It is called Harappan because
this civilization was discovered first in 1921
at the modern site of Harappa situated in the
province of West Punjab in Pakistan. It
extended from Jammu in the north to the
Naramada estuary in the south, and from the
Makran coast of Balcuchistan in the west to
Meerut in the north-east. The area formed a
triangle and accounted for about 1,299,600
square kilometers.
Nearly 1500 Harappan sites are known
so far in the subcontinent. Of these, the two
most important cities were Harappa in Punjab
and Mohenjodaro (literally the mound of the
dead) in Sindh, both forming parts of
Pakistan. Situated at a distance of 483
kilometres they were linked together by the
Indus. A third city lay at Chanhu daro about
130 km south of Mohenjodaro in Sindh, and
a fourth at Lothal in Gujarat at the head of
the Gulf of Cambay. A fifth city lay at
Kalibangan, which means black bangles, in
northern Rajasthan. A sixth called Banawali
is situated in Hissar district in Haryana. It
saw two cultural phases, pre-Harappan and
Harappan, similar to that of Kalibangan. The
Harappan culture is noticeable in its mature
and flourishing stage at all these six places.
It is also found in its mature phase in the
coastal cities of Sutkagendor and Surkotada,
each one of which is marked by a citadel. The
later Harappan phase is found in Rangpur and
Rojdi in the Kathiawar peninsula in Gujarat.
In addition to these, Dholavira lying in the
Kutch area of Gujarat shows Harappan
fortification and all the three phases of the
Harappan culture. These phases also appear
in Rakhigarhi which is situated on the
Ghaggar in Haryana and is much bigger than
Dholavira.
Town Planning and Structures
Harappan
culture
distinguished by its system of town planning.
Harappa and Mohenjo-daro each had its own
citadel in each city lay a lower town
containing brick houses, which were
inhabited by the common people. The
remarkable thing about the arrangement of
the houses in the cities is that they followed
the grid system. According to it, roads cut
across one another alomost at right angles,
and the city was divided into so many blocks.
This is true of almost all Indus settlements.
The most important public place of
Mohenjo-daro seems to be the Great Bath,
comprising the tank which is situated in the
citadel mound. It is an example of beautiful
THE HARAPPAN CULTURE: BRONZE AGE CIVILIZATION
Gist of NCERT (History)
brickwork. It measures 11.88 × 7.01 metres
and 2.43 metres deep. Flights of steps at ei-
ther end lead to the surface. There are side
rooms for changing clothes. The floor of the
Batch was made of burnt bricks. It is sug-
gested that the Great Bath served ritual bath-
ing, which has been so vital to any religious
ceremony in India.
In Mohenjodaro the largest building is
a granary, which is 45.71 metres long and
15.23 metres wide. But in the citadel of
Harappa we find as many as six granaries.
We come across a series of brick platforms
which formed the basis for two rows of six
granaries. Each granary measured 15.23 × 6.03
metres and lay within a few metres of the
river bank. The combined floor space of the
twelve units would be about 838 square
metres. Approximately it had the same area
as the Great Granary at Mohenjo-daro.
Harappa also shows two-roomed barracks,
which possibly accommodated laboures.
At Kalibangan also we notice in the
southen part brick platforms, which may have
been used for granaries. Thus, it would
appear that granaries constituted an
important part of the Harappan cities.
The use of burnt bricks in the Hrappan
cities is remarkable, because in the
contemporary buildings of Egypt mainly
dried bricks were used. We find the use of
baked bricks in contemporary Mesopotamia,
but they were used to a much larger extent
in the Harappan cities. The drainage system
of Mohenjo-daro was very impressive. In
almost all cities every big or small house had
its own courtyard and bathroom. In
Kalibangan many houses had their wells.
Water flowed from the house to the streets
which had drains. Sometimes these drains
were covered with bricks and sometimes
with stone slabs. The street drains were
equipped with manholes. Perhaps no other
Bronze Age civilization gave so much
attention to health and cleanliness as the
Harappan did.
Agriculture
The Indus people produced wheat,
barley, rai, peas, etc. They produced two
types of wheat and barley. A good quantity
of barley has been discovered at Banawali.
In addition to this they produced sesamum
and mustard. As 1800 B.C., the people of
Lothal used rice whose remains have been
found. Foodgrains were stored in huge
granaries in both Mohenjo-daro and Harappa
and possibly in Kalibangan. Probably, cereals
were received as taxes from peasants and
stored in granaries for the payment of wages
as well as for use during emergencies. This
can be said on the analogy of Mesopotamian
cities where wages were paid in barley. The
indus people were the earliest people to
produce cotton. Because cotton was first
peoduced in this are Greeks called it sindon,
which is derived from Sindh.
Domestication of Animals
Although the Harappans practised
agriculture, animals were kept on a large
scale. Ox, buffaloes, goats, sheep and pigs
were domesticated. The humped bulls were
favoured by the Harappans. From the very
beginning dogs were regarded as pets. Cats
were also domesticated, and signs of the feet
of both dogs and cats have been noticed.
They also kept asses and camels, which were
obviously used as beasts of burden. Evidence
of the horse comes from a superficial level of
Mohenjo-daro and from a doubtful terracotta
figuring from Lothal. The remains of the horse
The Harappan Culture: Bronze Age Civilization
are reported from Sutkotada, situated in west
Gujarat, and belong to around B.C. but it is
doubtful. In any case the Harappan culture
was not horse-centred. Neither the bones of
horse nor its representations appear in early
and mature Harappan culture. Elephants were
well known to the Harappans, who were also
acquainted with the rhinoceros.
Technology and Carafts
The Harappan culture belongs to the
Bronze Age. The people of Harappa used
many tools and implements of stone, but they
were well acquainted with the manufacture
and use of bronze. Ordinarily bronze was
made by the smiths by mixing tin with copper
mines of Rajasthan, although it could also be
brought from Baluchistan. Tin was possibly
brought with difficulty from Afghanistan.
The bronze tools and weapons recovered
from the Harappan sites; contain a smaller
percentage of tin. However, the kit of bronze
goods left by the Harappans is cosiderable,
which suggests that the bronzesmiths
constituted an important group of artisans
in the Harappan society. They produced not
only images and utensils but also various tools
and weapons such as axes, saws, knives and
spears. Several other important crafts
flourished in the Harappan towns. A piece of
woven cotton has been recovered from
Mohenjo-daro, and textile) impressions found
on several objects. Spindle whorls were used
for spinning. Weavers wove cloth of wool and
cotton. Huge brick structures suggest that
brick-laying was an important craft. They
also attest the existence of a class of masons.
The Harappans also practised boat-making.
The goldsmiths made jewellery of silver, gold
and precious stones; the first two may have
been obtained from Afghanistan and the last
from south India. The Harappans were also
experts in bead-making. The potter’s wheel
was in full use, and the Harappans produced
their own characteristic pottery, which was
made glossly and shinning.
Trade
Trade was important in the life os the
Indus people. The Harappans carried on con-
siderable trade in stone, metal, shell, etc,
within the Indus culture zone. However, their
cities did not possess the necessary raw ma-
terial for the commodities they produced.
They did not use metal money. Most prob-
ably they carried on all exchanges through
barter. In return for finished goods and pos-
sibly foodgrains, they procured metals from
the neighbouring area sby boats and bullock-
carts. They practised navigation of the coast
of the Arabian Sea. They knew the use of
wheel, and carts with solid wheels were in
use in Harappa. The Harappa had commecial
links with one area of Rajasthan, and also
with Afghanistan and Iran. They had set up
a trading colony in northern Afghanistan
which evidently facilitated trade with Cen-
tral Asia. Their cities also carried commerce
with those in the land of the Tigris and the
Euphrates. Many Harappan seals have been
discovered in Mesopotania, and it seems that
the Harappans imitated some consmetics used
by the urban people of Mesopotamia.
The Mesopotamia records from about
2350 B.C. onwards refer to trade relations
with Meluha, which was the ancient name
given to the Indus region. The Mesopotamian
texts speaks of two intermediate trading sta-
tions called Dilmun and Makan, which lay
between Mesopotamia and Meluha. Dilmun
can probably be identified with Bahrain on
the Persian Gulf.
Gist of NCERT (History)
Political Organization
We have no clear idea about the political
organization of the Harappans. But if we take
into account the cultural homegeneity of the
Indus civilization it can be said that this
cultural homogeneity would not have been
possible to achieve without a central
authority.
If the Harappan cultural zone is
considered identical with the political zone,
the subcontinent did not witness such a large
political unit until the rise of the Maurya
empire; the remarkable stability of this unit
is demonstrated by its continuity for nearly
600 years.
Religions Practices
In Harappa numerous terracotta figures
of women have been found. Probably the
image represents the goddess of earth. The
Harappans, looked upon the earth as a
fertility goddess and worshipped her.
The Male Deity in the Indus Valley
The male deity is represented on a seal.
This god has three horned heads. He is
represented in the sitting postrure of a yogi,
placing one foot on the other. This god is
surrounded by an elephant, a tiger, a
rhinoceros, and has a buffalo below his
throne. At his feet appear two deer. The
depicted god is identified as Pushupati
Mahadeva.
The Harappan Script
The Harappan invented the art of
writing like the people of ancient
Mesopotamia. Although the earliest specimen
of Harappan script was noticed in 1853 and
the complete script discovered by 1923, it has
not been deciphered so far.
There are nearly 4,000 specimens of
Harappan writing on stone seals and other
objects.
Unlike
Egyptians and
Mesopotamians, the Harappans did not write
long inscriptions. Most inscriptions were
recorded on seals, and contain only a few
words. Altogether we have about 250 to 400
pictographs, and in the form of a picture each
letter stands for some sound, idea or object.
the Harappan script is not alphabetical but
mainly pictographic.
Weights and Measures
Numerous articles used for weights
have been found. They show that in weighing
mostly 16 or its multiples were used; for
instance, 16, 64, 160, 320 and 640.
Interestingly the tradition of 16 has continued
in India till modern times and till recently 16
annas made one rupee. The harappans also
knew the art of measurement. We have come
across sticks inscribed with measure marks;
one of these is made of bronze.
Harappan Pottery
The Harappans were great experts in the
use of the potter’s wheel. We come across
numerous pots painted in various designs.
Harappan pots were generally decorated with
the designs of trees and circles. The images
of men also appear on some pottery
fragments.
Seals: The greatest artistic creations of
the Harappan culture are the seals. About
2000 seals have been found, and of these a
great majority carry short in-scriptions with
pictures of the one-horned bull, the buffalo,
the tiger, the rhinocreros, the goat and the
elephant.
Images: The Harappan artisans made
beautiful images of metal. A woman dancer
made of bronze is the best specimen. Except
for a necklac she is naked. We get a few pieces
The Harappan Culture: Bronze Age Civilization
of Harappan stone sculptures. One steatite
statue wears an ornamented robe over the
left shoulder under the right arm, and its
short locks at the back of the head are kept
tidy by a woven fillet.
Origin, Maturity and End
The mature Harappan culture, broadly
speaking, existed between 2550 B.C. and 1900
B.C. Throughout the period of its existence
it seems to have retained the same kind of
tools, weapons and houses. The whole style
of life appears to be uniform. We notice the
same town-planning, the same seals, the same
terracotta works, and the same long chet
blades. But the view stressing changelessness
cannot be pushed too far. We do notice
changelessness cannot be pushed too far. We
do notice changes in the pottery of Mohenjo-
daro over a period of time. By the
nieneteenth century B.C., the two important
cities of the Harappan culture, Harappa and
Mohenjo-daro, disappeared but the Harappan
culture at other sites faded out gradually and
continued in its degenerate phase in the
outlying fringes in Gujarat, Rajasthan,
Haryana and western Uttar Pradesh.
While the ancient cutlures
Mesopotamia continued to exist even after
1900 B.C., the urban Harappan culture
disappeared at Bout that thime. Various
causes have been suggested. It is held that
the amount of rainfall in the Indus region
slightly increased around 3000 B.C. and then
decreased in the earlier part of the second
millennium B.C.  This may have adversely
affected agriculture and stockbreeding. Some
describe the decline to the decreasing fertility
on account of the increasing salinity of the
soil caused by the expansion of the
neighbouring desert. Others attribute it to a
sudden subsidence or uplift of the land which
caused floods. Earthquakes caused changes
in the  course of the Indus which led to the
inundation of fee hinterland of Mohenjo-
daro. And still others point out that the
Harappan culture was destroyed by the
Aryans, but there is very little evidence for
this.
The consequences of the disintegration
of the largest Bronze Age cultural entity are
still to be clarified. We do not know whether
the urban eclipse led to the migration of
merchants and craftsmen,  and the
dissemination of the elements of Harappan
technology and way of life in the countryside.
Something is known about the post-urban
situation in Sindh, Punjab and Haryana. We
find agricultural settlements inside the Indus
region, but their connection with the
preceding culture is not clear. We need clear
and adequate information.
ADVENT OF THE ARYANS AND
THE AGE OF THE RIG VEDA
Original Home and Identity
It Difficult to say that all the earliest
Aryans belonged to one race, but their culture
was more or less of the same type. They were
distinguished by their common language.
They spoke the indo-European languages,
which are current in changed forms all over
Europe, Iran and the greater part of the
Indian subcontinent Originally the Aryans
seem to have lives somewhere in the steppes
stretching from southern Russia to Central
Asia. Their earlist life seems to have been
mainly postoral, agriculture being a
secondary occupation. Although the Aryans
used several animals, the horse played the
most significant role in their life. Its swiftness
enabled them and some allied people to make
Gist of NCERT (History)
successful inroads on West. Asia from about
2000 B.C. onwards.
On their way to India to Aryans first
appeared in Central Asia and Iran, where the
Indo-Iranians lived for a long time. We know
about the Aryans in India from the Rig Veda.
The term Arya occurs 36 times  in this text,
and generally indicates a cultural community.
The Rig Veda is the earliest text of the Indo-
European languages. It is a collection of
prayers offered to Agni, Indra, Mitra, Verun
and others gods by various families of poets
or sages. It consists of ten mandalas or books,
of which Books II to VII form its earlies
portions. Books I and X seem to have been
the latest additions.
The Rig Veda has many things in
common with the Avesta, which is the holdest
text in the Iranian language. The two texts
use the same names for several gods and even
for social classes. But the earliest specimen
of the Indo-European language is found in
an inscription of about 2200 B.C. from Iraq
Later such specimens occur in Hittite
inscriptions in Anatolia (Turkey) from the
nineteenth to the seventeenth centuries B.C.
Aryan names appeal in Kassijte inscriptions
of about about 1600 B.C. from Iraq and in
Mitanni inscriptions of the fourteenth century
B.C. from the Aryans appeared in India. The
earliest Aryans lived in the geographical area
covered by eastern Afghanistan, North-West
Frontier Province, Punjab and fringes of
western Uttar Pradesh. Some rivers of
Afghanistan such as the river Kubha, and the
river Indus and its five branches, are
mentioned in the Rig Veda. The Sindhu,
identical with the Indus, is the river par
excellence of the Aryans, and it is repeatedly
mentioned. Another river, the Saraswati, is
called naditama or the best of the rivers in
the Rig Veda. The whole region in which the
Aryans first settled in Indian subcontinent is
called the Land of the Seven Rivers.
Tribal Conflicts
We hear of many defeats inflicted by
Indra on the enemies of the Aryans. In the
Rig Veda Indra is called Purandara which
means that he was the breaker of forts. The
Aryans succeeded everywhere because they
possessed chariots driven by horses, and
intorduced them for the first time into West
Asia and India. The Aryan soldiers were
probably equiped also with coats of mail
(vaiman) and better arms.
According to tradition, the Aryans were
divided into five tribed panchajana but there
might have been other tribes also. The
Bharatas and the Tritsu were the ruling Aryan
clans, and they were supported by priest
Vasisththa. The country Bharatavarsha was
eventually named after the tribe Bharata,
which apperas first in the Rig Veda. The
Bharata ruling clan was opposed by a host of
ten chiefs, five of whom were heads of Aryan
tribes and the remaining five of non-Aryan
people. The battle that was fought between
the Bharatas on the one hand, and the host
of ten chiefs on the other is known as the
Battle of Ten Kings. This battle was fought
on the river Parushni, identical with the river
Ravi and it gave victory to Sudas and estab-
lished the supremacy of the Bharatas. Of the
defeated tribes, the most Important was that
of the Purus. Subequently the Bharatas joined
hands with the Purus and formed a new rul-
ing tribe called the Kurus. The Kurus com-
bined with the Panchalas, and they together
established their rule in the upper Gangetic
basin where they played an important part
in later Vedic times.
The Harappan Culture: Bronze Age Civilization
Material Life
The Rig Vedic people possessed better
knowledge of agriculture. Ploughshare is
mentioned in the earliest part of the Rig Veda
though some consider it an interpolation.
Possibly this ploughshare was made of wood.
They were acquainted with sowing, harvest-
ing and threshing, and knew about the dif-
ferent seasons.
In spite of all this there are so many ref-
erences to the cow and the bull in the Rig
Veda that the Rig Vedic Aryans can be called
predominantly a pastoral people. Most of
their wars were fought for the sake of cows.
The terms for war in the Rig Veda is gavishthi
or search for cows. The cow seems to have
been the most important form, of wealth. The
Rig Veda, mentions such artisans as the car-
penter, the chariot-maker, the weaver, the
leather worker, the potter, etc.
This indicates that they practised all
these crafts. The term aryas used for copper
or bronze show that metal-working was
known. But we have no clear evidence of the
existence of regular trade. The Aryans or the
Vedic people were acquainted more with land
routes because the word samudra mentioned
in the Rig Veda mainly denotes a collection
of water. We may, therefore, this of a pre-
iron phase of the PGW which coincided with
the Rig Vedic phase.
Tribal Polity
The administrative machinery of the
Aryans in the Rig period worked with the
tribal chief in the centre, because of his suc-
cessful leadership in war. He was called rajan.
It seems that in the Rig Vedic period the king’s
post had become hereditary. We have traces
of election of the king by the tribal assembly
called the samiti. The king was called the
protector of his tribe.
Several tribal or the clan-based
assemblies such as the sabha, samiti, vidatha,
gana are mentioned in the Rig Veda. They
exercised deliberative, military and religious
functions. Even women attended the sabha
and vidatha in Rig Vedic times. But the two
most important assemblies were the sabha
and the samiti. These two were so important
that the chiefs or the kings showed eagerness
to win their-support.
In the day-to-day administration, the
king was assisted by a few functionaries. The
most important functionary seems to have
been the purohita. The two priests who
played a major part in the time of Rig Veda
are Vasishtha and Vishvamitra. Vishvamitra
composed the gayatri mantra to widen the
Aryan world. The next important function-
ary seems to be the senani, who used spears,
axes, swords, etc. We do not come across any
officer concerned with the collection of taxes.
Probably the chiefs received from the people
voluntary offerings called bnali. Presents and
spoils of war were perhaps distributed in
some Vedic assemblies. The Rig Veda does
not mention any officer for administering
justice. Spies were employed to keep an eye
on such unsocial activities.
The officer who enjoyed authority over
a large land or pasture ground is called
Vrajapati. He led heads of the families called
kulapas, or the heads of the fighting hordes
called gramanis, to battle. In the beginning,
the gramani was just the head of a small tribal
fighting unit. But when the unit settled, the
gramani became the head of the village, and
in course of time he became identical with
the Vrajapati. The king did not maintain any
regular or standing army, but in times of war
he mustered a militia whose military
functions were performed by different tribal
Gist of NCERT (History)
groups called vrata, gana, grama, sardlia. By
and large it was a tribal system of
government in which the military element
was strong.
Tribe and Family
Kinship was the basis of social structure,
and a man was identified by the clan to which
he belonged. People gave their primary loy-
alty to the tribe, which was called jana. The
term jana occurs at about 275 places in the
Rig Veda, and the term janapada or territory
is not used even once. The people were at-
tached to the tribe, since the territory or the
kingdom, was not yet established.
Another important term which stands
for the tribe in the Rig Veda is vis; it is
mentioned 170 times in that text. Probably
the vis was divided into grama or smaller
tribal units meant for fighting. When the
gramas clashed with one another it caused
samgrama. The most numerous varna of
varishya arose out of the vis or the mass of
the tribal people.
The term for family (kula) is mentioned
rarely in the Rig Veda. It comprised not only
mother, father, sons, slaves, etc., but many
more people also. It seems that family in early
Vedic phase was indicated by the term griha,
which frequently occurs in this text. In the
earliest Indo-European languages one word
is used for nephew, grandson, cousin, etc. It
seems that several generations of the family
lived under the same roof. Because it was a
patriarchal society, the birth of a son was
desired again and again, and especially
people prayed to the gods for brave sons to
fight the wars. In the Rig Veda no desire is
expressed for daughters, though the desire
for children and cattle is a recurrent theme
in the hymns. Women could attend
assemblies. They could offer sacrifices along
with their husbands. We have an instance of
five women who composed hymns although
the later texts mention 20 such women.
We also notice the practice of levirate
and widow remarriage in the Rig Veda. There
are no examples of child-marriage, and the
marriageable age in the Rig Veda seems to
have been 16 to 17
Social Divisions
The Rig Veda mentions arya varna and
dasa varna. The tribal chiefs and the priests
acquired a larger share of the booty, and they
naturally grew at the cost of their kinsmen,
which created social inequalities in the tribe.
Gradually the tribal society was divided into
three groups - warriors, priests and the
people - on the same pattern as in Iran. The
fourth division called the schudras appeared
towards the end of the Rig Vedic period,
because it is mentioned for the first time in
the tenth Book of the Rig Veda, which is the
latest addition.
In the age of the Rig Veda differentiation
based on occupations had started. Bat this
division was not very sharp. We hear of a
family in which a member says: “I am a poet,
my father is a physician, and my mother is a
grinder. Earning livelihood through different
means we live together...” We hear of gifts
of cattle, chariots, horses, slaves, tec. Unequal
distribution of the sopils of war created social
inequalities, and this helped the rise of princes
and priests at the cost of the common tribal
people. But since economy was mainly
pastoral and not food-producing, the scope
for collecting regular tributes from the people
was very limited. We do not find gifts of land
and even those of cereals are rare. We find
domestic slaves but not the wage-earners.
The Harappan Culture: Bronze Age Civilization
Tribal elements in society were stronger and
social divisions based on collection of taxes
or accumulation of landed property were
absent. The society was still tribal and largely
egalitarian.
Rig Vedic Gods
The most important divinity in the Rig
Veda is Indra, who is called Purandara or
breaker of forts. Indra played the role of a
varlord, leading the Aryan solidies to victory
against the demons. Two hundred and fifty
hymns are devoted to him. He is considered
to be the rain god and thought to be
responsbile for causing rainfall.
The second position is held by Agni (fire
god) to whom 200 hymns are devoted. Fire
played a significant part in the life of primitive
people because of its use in burning forests,
cooking, etc.
The cult of fire occupied a central place
not only in India but also in Iran, It Vedic
times Agni acted as a king of intermediary
between the gods on the one hand, and the
people on the other. The third important
position is occupied by Varuna who
personified water. Varuna was supposed to
uphold the natural order, and whatever
happened in the world was thought to be the
reflection of his desires. Soma was considered
to be the god of plants and intoxi-cating drink
is named after him. The maruts personify the
storm.
This we have a large number of gods.,
who represent the different forces of nature
in one form or another, but are also assigned
human activities.We also find some female
divinites such as Aditi, and Ushas who
represented the appearance of the dawn. But
they were not prominent in the time of the
Rig Veda; in the set-up of the period the male
gods were far more imp[ortant than the
female.
The dominant mode of worshipping the
dos was through the recitation of prayers and
offering of sacrifices. Prayers played an
important part in Rig Vedic times. Both
collective and individual prayers were made.
Originally every tribe or clan was the votary
of a special god. It seems that prayers were
offered to gods in chorus by the members of
a whole tribe. This also happened in the case
of sacrifices. Agni and Indra were invited to
partake of sacrifices made by the whole tribe
(jana). Offerings of vevetables, barely, etc.
were made to gods. But in Rig Vedic times
the process was not accompanied by any ritual
or sacrificial formulae. They asked mainly for
praja (children), pashu (cattle), food, wealth,
health, etc.
Gist of NCERT (History)
THE LATER VEDIC PHASE
EXPANSION IN THE
LATER VEDIC PERIOD (C. 1000-500 B.C.)
THE HISTORY of the later Vedic period
is based mainly on the Vedic texts which were
compiled after the age of the Rig Veda. The
collections of the Vedic hymns or mantras
were known as the Samhitas. For purposes
of recitation, the prayers of the Rig Veda were
set to tune, and this modified collection was
known as the Sama Veda Samhita. In addition
to the Sama Veda. in post-Rig Vedic times two
other collections were: composed. These were
- the Yajur Veda Samhita and the Atharva
Veda Samhita. The Yajur Veda contains not
only hymns but also rituasls which have to
accompany their recitation. The Atharva Veda
contains charms and spells to ward off evils
and diseases. The Vedic Samhitas were
followed by the composition of a series of
texts known as the Brahmanas. These are full
of ritualistic formulae and explain the social
and religious meaning of rituals.
All these later Vedic texts were complied
in the upper Gangetic basin in circa 1000-500
B.C. These are called Painted Grey Ware
(PGW) sites because they were inhabited by
people who used earthern bowls and dishes
made of painted grey pottery. They also used
iron weapons. With the combined evidence
from the later Vedic texts and PGW iron-
phase archaeology we can fom an idea of the
life of the people in the first half of the first
millennium B.C. in western Uttar Pradesh
and adjoining areas of Punjab, Haryana and
Rajasthan.
The texts show that the Aryans
expanded from Punjab over the whole of
western Uttar Pradesh covered by the
Ganga-Yamuna doab. The Bharatas and
Purus, the two major tribes, combined and
thus formed the Rum people. In the beginning
they lived between the Sarasvati and the
Drishadvati just on the fringe of the doab.
Soon the Kurus occupied Delhi and the upper
portion of the doab, the area called
Kurukshetra or the land of the Kurus.
Gradually they coalesced with a people called
the Panchalas, who occupied the middle
portion of the doab. The authority of the
Kuru-Panchala people spread over Delhi, and
the upper and middle portion of the doab.
The authority of the Kuru-Panchala people
spread over Delhi, and the upper and middle
parts of the doab. They set up their capital at
Hastinapur situated in the district of Meerut.
The history of the Kuru tribe is important
for the battle of Bharata, which is the main
theme of the great epic called the
Mahabharata. This war is supposed to have
been fought around 950 B.C. between, the
Kauravas and the Pandavas, although both
of them belonged to the Kuru clan. As a result
The Later Vedic Phase
practically the whole of the kuru clan was
wiped out.
Towards the end of the later Vedic
period, around 600 B.C. the Vedic people
spread from the board further east of Koshala
in eastern Uttar Pradesh and videha in north
Bihar. Although Koshala is associated with
the story of Rama, it is not mentioned in Vedic
literature.
The UGW-Iron Phase
Culture and Later Vedic Economy
Around 1000 B.C. iron appears in
Dharwar district in Karnataka. Excavations
show that iron weapons such as arrow-heads
and spear-heads came to be commonly used
in western Uttar Pradesh from about 800 B.C.
onwards. With iron weapons the Vedic people
may have defeated the few adversaries that
may have faced them in the upper portion of
the doab. Towards the end of the Vedic
period kjowledge of iron spread in eastern
Uttar Pradesh and Videha. The earliest iron
implements discovered in this area belong to
the seventh Century B.C., and the metal itself
is called shyama or krishna ayas in the later
Vedic texts.
Although very few agricultural tools
made of iron have been found, undoubtedly
agriculture was the chief means of livelibood
of the later Vedic people. The Shatapatha
Brahmana speaks at length about the
ploughing rituals. According to ancient
legends, janaka, the king of Videha and father
of Sita, lent his hand to the plought. In later
times ploughing came to be prohibited, for
the members of the upper vernas.
The Vedic people continued to produce
barly, but during this period rice and wheat
became their chief crops. In subsequent times
wheat became the staple food of the people
in Punjab and western Uttar Pradesh. For the
first time the Vedic people came to be
acquainted with rice in the doab. It is called
vrihi in the Vedic texts, and its remains
recovered from Hastinapur belong to the
eighth century B.C. The use of rice is
recommended in Vedic rituals, but that of
wheat only rarely.
Agriculture and various crafts enabled
the later Vedic people to lead a settled life.
Excavations and explorations give us some
idea about settlements in later Vedic times.
Widespread Painted Grey Ware sites are
found not only in western Uttar Pradesh and
Delhi, which was the Kuru-Panchala area but
also in the adjoining paras of Punjab and
Haryana, which was the Madras area and in
those of Rajasthan, which was the Matsya
area. Also we can court nearly 700 sites,
mostly belonging to the upper Gangetic basin.
Althoug the term nagara is used in later
Vedic texts we can trace only the faint
beginnings of towns towards the end of the
later Vedic period. Hastinapur and
Kaushambi near Allahabad) can be regarded
as primitive towns belonging to the end of
the Vedic period. They may be called
protourban sites.
Political Organization
In later Vedic times Rig Vedic popular
assemblies lost importance, and royal power
increased at their cost The vidatha completely
disappeared. The sabha and samiti continued
to hold the ground, but their character
changed. They came to be dominated by
chiefs and rich nobles. Women were no longer
permitted to sit on the sabha, and it was now
dominated by nobles and brahmanas.
The formation of bigger kingdoms made
the chief or the king more powerful. Tribal
Gist of NCERT (History)
authority tended to become territorial.
Princes or chiefs ruled over tribes, but the
dominant tribes gave their names to
territories, which might be inhabited by
tribes other than their own. In the beginning
each area was named after the tribe which
settled there first. At first Panchala was the
name of a people, and then it became the
name of a region. The term rashtra, which
indicates territory, first appears in this
period.
Traces of the election of the chief or the
king appear In later Vedic texts. Other
qualities was elected raja. He received
voluntary presents called bali from his
ordinary kinsmen or the common people
called the vis. But the chief tried to perpetuate
the right to receive presents and enjoy other
privileges pertaining to his office by making
it hereditary in his family; the post generally
went to the eledest son. However, this
succession was not always  smooth.
The kings influence was strengthened
by rituals. He performed the rajasuya
sancrifice, which was supposed to confer su-
preme power on him. He performed the
ashvamedha, which meant unquestioned con-
trol over an are in which the royal horse ran
uninterrupted. He also performed the
vajapeya or the chariot race, in which the
royal chariot was made to win the race
against his kinsmen. All these rituals im-
pressed the people with the increasing power
and prestige of the king.
During this period collection of taxes
and tributes seems to have become common.
They were probably deposited with an officer
called sangrihitri. In the discharge of his
duties the king was assisted by the priest,
the commander, the chief queen and a few-
other high functionaries. At the lower level,
the administration was possibly carried on
the village assemblies, which may have been
controlled by the chiefs of the dominant
clans.
Social Organization
The later Vedic society came to be
divided into four vernas called the
brahmans, rajanyas or kahatriyas, vaishyas
and shudras. The growing cult of sacrificed
enormously added to the power of the
brahmanas.
The vaishyas constituted the common
people, and they were assigned to do the
producing functions such as agriculture,
cattle-breeding, etc. Some of them also
worked as artisans. Towerds the end of the
Vedic period they began to engage in trade.
The vaishyas appear to be the only tribute-
ayers in later Vedic times, and the brahmanas
and kahatriyas are represented as living on
the tributes collected from the vaishyas. This
was done with, the help of the priests who
also fattened at the cost of people or the
vaishyas. All the three higher varnas shared
one common feature: they were entitled to
upanayana or investiture with the sacred
thread according to the Vedic mantras. The
fourth varna was deprived of the sacred
thread ceremony and the recitation of the
gayatri mantra and with this began the
imposition of disabilities on the shudra.
Generally the later Vedic texts draw a
line of demarcation between the three higher
orders on the one hand, and the shudras on
the other. There were, nevertheless several
public rituals connected with the coronation
of the king in which the shudras participated,
presumably as survivors of the original Aryan
people. Certain sections of artisans such as
rathakara or chariotmaker enjoyed a high
The Later Vedic Phase
status, and were entitled to the sacred thread
ceremony. Therefore, even in later Vedic times
varna distinctions had not advanced very far.
In the family we notice the increasing
power of the father, who could even
disinherit his son. In princely families the
right of primogeniture was getting stronger.
Male ancestors came to be worshipped.
Women were generally given a lower
position. Althoug some women theologians
tookpart in philosophic discussion and some
queens participated in coronation rituals,
ordinarily women were thought to be
inferior and subordinate to men.
The institution of gotra appeared in later
Vedic times. Literally it means the cow-pen
or the place where cattle belonging to the
whole clan are kept, but in course of time it
signified descent from a common ancestor.
People began to practise gotra exogamy. No
marriage could take place between persons
belonging to the same gotra or having the
same lineage.
Ashramas or four stages of life were not
well established in Vedic times. In the post-
Vedic texts we hear of four ashramas-that of
Brahmachari or student, grihastha or
householder, vanaprastha or hermit and
sannyasin or ascetic who completely
renounced the worldly life. Only the first
three are mentioned in the later Vedic texts;
the last or the fourth stage had not been well
established in later Vedic times though ascetic
life was not unknown. Even in post-Vedic
times only the stage of the housholder was
commonly practised by all the varnas.
Good, Rituals said Philosophy
The two outstanding Rig Vedic gods,
Indra and Agni, lost thieir former
Importance. On the other hand, Prajapati the
creator, came to occupy the supreme position
in the later Vedic pantheon. Some of the other
minor gods of the Rig Vedic period also came
to the forefront. Rudra, the god of animals,
became important in later Vedic times, and
Vishnu came to be conceived as the preserver
and protector of the people. In addition, some
objects began to be worshipped as symbols
of vidinity; signs of idolatry appear in later
Vedic times. Pushan, who was supposed to
look after cattle, came to be regarded as the
god of the shudras.
People worshiped gods for the same
material reasons in this period as they did in
earlier times. However, the mode of worship
changed considerably. Prayers continued to
be recited. Sacrifices became far more
important, and they assumed both public and
domestic character.
Sacrifices involved the killing of animals
on a large scale and, especially the
desctruction of cattle wealth. The guest was
known as goghna or one who was fed on
cattle. Sacrifices were accompanied by
formulae which had to be carefully
pronounced by the sacrificer. The sacrificer
was known as the yajamana, the performer,
of yajna, and much of his success depended
on the magical power of words uttered
correctly in the sacrifices.
In addition to cows, which were usually
given as sacrificial gifts, gold, cloth and horses
were also given. Sometimes the priests
claimed poetions of territory as dakshina,
The Shatapatha brahmana states that in the
ashvamedha, north, south, east and west all
should be given to the priest.
Towards the end of the Veclie period
began a strong reaction against priestly
domination, against cults and rituals,
Gist of NCERT (History)
especially in the land of the Panchalas and
Videha where, around 600 B.C., the
Upanishads
compiled.
These
philosophical texts criticized the rituals and
laid stress on the value of right belief and
knowledge. They emphasised that the
knowledge of the self or atman should be
acquired and the relation of atman with
Brahma should be properly understood.
JAINISM AND BUDDHISM
NUMEROUS religious, sects arose in the
middle Gangetic plains in the second half of
the sixth century B.C. Of these sects Jainism
and Buddhism were the most important, and
they emerged as the most potent religious
reform movements.
Causes of Origin
In post-Vedic times society was clearly
divided into four varnas: brahmanas,
kshtriyas, vaishyas and shudras. Each varna
was assigned well-defined functions,
although it was emphasised that varna was
based on birth. The brahmanas, who were
given the functions of priests and and
teachers, claimed the highest status in society.
The kshatriyas ranked second in the varna
heiracrchy. The vaishyas were engagerd in
agriculture, cattle-rearing and trade.
They appear as principal taxpayers. The
shudras were meant for servint the three
higher varnas, and along with women were
barred from taking to Vedic studies.
Naturally the varna-divided society
seems to have generated tensions. We have
no means to find out the reactions of the
vaishyas and the shudras. But the kshatriyas,
who functioned as rulers, reacted strongly
against the ritualistic domination of the
brahmanas, and seem to have led a kind of
protest movement against the importance
attached to birth in the varna system. The
kshatriya reaction against the domination of
the priestly class called brahmanas, who
claimed various privileges, was one of the
causes of the origin of new religions.
Vardhamana Mahavira, who founded
Jainism, and Gautama Budha, who founded
Buddhism belonged to the kshatriya clan, and
both disputed the authority of the
brahmanas.
But the real cause of the rise of these
new religions lay in the spread of a new
agricultural economy in north-eastern India.
In the middle Gangeic plains, large-scale
habitations began in about 600 B.C., when
iron came to be used in this area. The use of
iron tools made possible clearance,
agriculture and large settlements. The
agricultural economy based on the iron
ploughshare required the use of bullocks, and
it could not flourish without animal
husbandry. But the Vedic practice of killing
cattle indiscriminately in sacrifices stood in
the way of the progress of new agriculture.
But if the new agrarian economy had to be
stable, this killing had to be stopped.
The period saw the rise of a large
number of cities in north-eastern India. We
may refer, for example, to Kaushambi near
Allahabad, Kusinagar (in Deoria district of
Uttar Pradesh).
Banaras, Vaishali (in the newly created
district of the same name in north Bihar),
Chirand (in Saran district) and Rajgir
(situated at a distance of about 100 km south-
east of Patna). Besides others these cities had
many artisans and traders, who began to use
coins for the first time. The earliest coins
belong to the fifth century B.C., and they are
called punch-marked coins. They circulated
The Later Vedic Phase
for the first time in eastern Uttar Pradesh and
Bihar. The use of coins naturally facilitated
trade and commerce, which added to the
importance of the vaishyas. In the
brahmanical society the vaishyas ranked
third, the first two being brahmanas and
kshatriyas. Naturally they looked for some
religion which would improve their position.
Vardhmana Mahavira and Jainism
According to the Jainas, the origin of
Jainism goes back to very ancient times. They
believe in twenty-four tirthankaras or great
teachers or leaders of their religion. The first
tirthankara is believed to be Rishabhadev
who was born in Ayodhya. He is said to have
laid the foundations for orderly human
society. The last, twenty-fourth, tirthankara,
was Vardhamana Mahavira who was a
contem-porary of Gautama Buddha. The
twenty-third tirthankara was Parshvanath
who was born in Varanasi. He gave up royal
life and became an ascetic. Many teachings
of Jainism are attributed to him. According
to Jaina tradition, he lived two hundred years
before Mahavira. Mahavir is said to be the
twenty-fourth.
According
tradition,
Vardhamana Mahavira was born is 540 B.C.
in a village called Kundagrama near Vaishali,
which is identical with Basarh in the district
of Vaishali, in north Bihar. His father
Siddhartha was the head of a famous
kshatriya clan called Jnatrika and the ruler
of his own area. Mahavira’s mother was
named Trishala, sister of the Lichchhavi chief
Chetaka, whose daughter was wedded to
Bimbisara.
In the biginning, Mahavira led the life
of a householder, but in the search for truth
he abandoned the world at the age of 30 and
became an ascetic. In the thirteenth year,
when he had reached the age of 42, he
attained kaivalya.
Through kaivalyahe conquered misery
and happiness. Because of this conquest he is
known as Mahavira or the great hero or jina,
i.e. the conqueror, and his followers are
known as Jainas. He propagated his religion
for 30 years, and his mission took him to
Koshala, Magadha, Mithila, Champa, etc. He
passed away at the age of 72 in 468 B.C. at a
place called Pavapuri near modern Rajgir.
According to another tradition, he was born
in 599 B.C. and passed away in 527 B.C.
Doctrines of Jainism
Jainism taught five doctrines: (i) do not
commit violence, (ii) do not speak a lie, (ii)
do not steal, (iv) do not acquire property, and
(v) observe continence (brahmacharya. It is
said that only the fifth doctrine was added
by Mahavira: the other four were taken over
by him from previous teachers. Jainism
attached the utmost importance to ahmsa or
non-injury to living beings in later times,
Jainism was divided into two sects:
shvetambaras or those who put on white
dress, and digmbaras or those who keep
them-selves naked.
Jainism mainly aims at the attainment
of freedom from worldly bonds. No ritual is
required for acquiring such liberation. It can
be obtained through right knowledge, right
faith and right action. These three are
considered to be the Three Jewels or triratna
of Jainism.
Jainnism prohibited the practice of war
and even agriculture for its followers because
both involve the killing of living beings.
Eventually the Jainas mainly confined
themselves to trade and mercantile activities.
Gist of NCERT (History)
Spread of Jaiaism
In order to spread the teachings of
Jainism, Mahavira organized an order of his
followers which admitted both men and
women. According to a late tradition, the
spread of Jainism in Karnataka is attributed
to Chandragupta Maurya (322-298 B.C.). The
emperor became a Jaina, gave up his throne
and spent the last years of his life in Karnataka
as a Jaina ascetic. The second cause of the
spread of Jainism in south India is said to be
the great famine that took place in Magadha
200 years after the death of Mahavira. The
faminie lasted for twelve years, and in order
to protect themselves many a Jaina went to
the south under the leadership of
Bhadrabahu, but the rest of them stayed back
in Magadha under the leadership of
Sthalabahu.
The emigrant Jainas spread Jainism in
south India. At the end of the famine they
came back to Magadha, where they
developed differences with the local Jainas.
Those who came back from the south claimed
that even during the famine they had strictly
observed the religious rules; on the other
hand, they alleged, the Jaina ascetics living
in Magadha had violated those rules and had
become lax. In order to sort out these
differences and to compile the main teachings
of Jainism a council was convened in
Pataliputra, modern Patna, but the southern
Jainas boycotted the council and refused to
accept its decisions. From now onwards, the
southerns began to be called digambaras, and
the Magadhans shvetambaras. However,
epigraphic evidence for the spread of Jainism
in karnataka is not earlier than the third
century A.D. In subsequent centuries,
especially after the fifth century, numerous
Jaina monastic establishments called basadis
sprang up in Karnataka and were granted
land by the king for their support.
Jainism spread to Kalinga in Orissa  in
the fourth century B.C., and in the first cenury
B.C. it enjoyed the patronage of the Kalinga
king Kharavela who had defeated the princes
of Andhra and Magadha.
Contribution of Jainism
Jainism made the first serious attempt
to mitigate the evils of the varna order and
the ritualistic Vedic religion. The early Jainas
discarded Sanskrit language mainly
patronized by the brahmanas. They adopted
Prakrit language of the common people to
preach their doctrines. Their religious
literature was written in Ardhamagadhi, and
texts were finally compiled in the sixth
century A.D. in Gujarat at a place called
Valabhi, a great centre of  Education. The
adoption of Prakrit by the Jainas heed the
growth of this language and its literature.
Many regional languages developed out of
Pakrit languages, particularly Shauraseni, out
of which grew of Marathi language. They
contributed to the growth of Kananads, in
which they wrote extensively.
Gautam Budhda and Buddhism
Gautama Buddha or Siddhartha was a
contrmporary of Mahavira. According to
tradition he was born in 563 B.C. in a Shakya
kshatriya family in Lumbini in Nepal near
Kapilvastu, which is a identified with
Piprahwa in Basti district and close to the
foothills of Nepal. Gautama’s father seems
to have been the elected ruler of Kapilvastu,
and headed the republican clan of the
Shakyas. His mother was a princess from the
Koshala dynasty. Thus, like Mahavira,
Gautama also belonged to a noble family.At
The Later Vedic Phase
the age of 29, like Mahavira again, he left
home. He kept on wandering for about seven
years and then attained knowledge at the age
of 35 at Bodh Gaya under a pipel tree. From
this time onwards he began to be called the
Buddha or the enlightened, Gautam Buddha
delivered his first sermons at Sarnath in
Banaras, passed away at the age of 80 in 483
B.C. at a place called Kusinagar, identical with
the village called Kasia in the district of Deoria
in eastern Uttar Pradesh.
Doctrines of Buddhism
Gautama Buddha recommended an
eight-fold path (ashtangika marga) for the
elimination of human misery. This path is
attributed to him in a text of about the third
century B.C. It comprised right observation,
right determination, right speech, right
action, right livelibood, right execise, right
memory and right meditation. If a person
follows this eight fold path he would not
depend on the machinations of the priests,
and will be able to reach his destination.
Gautama taught than a person should avoide
the excess of both luxury and a austerity. He
prescribed the middle path.
The Buddha also laid down a code of
conduct for his followers on the same lines
as was done by the Jaina teachers. The main
items in these social conduct are: (i) do not
cover the propert of others, (ii) do not com-
mit violence, (iii) do not use intoxicants, (iv)
do not speak a lie, and (v) do not indulge in
corrupt practices. These techining are com-
mon to the social conduct ordinend by al-
most all religons.
Special Features of
Buddhism and the Causes of Its Spread
Buddhism does not recognize the
existence of god and soul (atman). This can
be taken as a kind of reovlution in the history
of Indian religions. It particularly won trie
support of the lower orders as it attacked
the varna system. People were taken into the
Buddhist order without any consideration of
caste. Women also were admitted to the
sangha and thus brought on par with men.
In comparison with Brahmanism, Buddhism
was liberal and democratic.
The use of Pali, the language of the
peopel, also contributed to the spread of
Buddhism. It facilitated the spread of
Buddhist doctrines among the common
people. Gautama Buddha also organized the
sangha or the religious order, whose doors
were kept open to every body, irrespective
of caste and sex. The only condition required
of the the monks was that they would
faithfully observe the rules and regulations
of the sangha. Once they were enrolled as
members of the Buddhist Church they had
to take the vow of continence, poverty and
faith. So there are three main elements in
Buddhism: Buddha, sangha and dhamma.
The monarchies of Magadha, Koshala and
Kaushambi and several republican states and
their people adopted this religion.
Two hundred years after the death of
the Buddha, the famous Maurya king Ashoka
embraced Buddhism. This was an epoch-
making event. Through his agents Ashoka
spred Buddhism into Central Asia, West  Asia
and Sri Lanka, and thus transformed it into
a world religion. Even today Sri Lanka,
Burma (Myanmar), Tibet and parts of China
and Japan, profess Buddhism Although.
Importance and Influence of Buddhism
Despite its ultimate disppearance as an
organized religion, Buddhism left its abiding
mark on the history of India. The Buddhist
Gist of NCERT (History)
showed a keen awareness of the problems
that faced the people of north-east India in
the the sixxth century B.C.
Undoubtedly the objective of the
Buddhist teaching was to secure the salvation
of the individual or nirvana.
Buddhism made an important impact on
society by keeping its doors open to women
and shudras. Since both women and shudras
were placed in the same category by
Brahmanism, they were neither given scred
thread nor allowed to read the Vedas. Their
conversion to Buddhism freed them from such
marks of inferiority.
With its emphasis on non-violence and
the sanctity of animal life, Buddhism boosted
the cattle wealth of the country. The earliest
Buddhist text Suttanipata declares the cattle
to be givers of food, beauty and happiness
(annada, Vannada, sukhada), and thus pleads
for their protection. This teaching came
significantly at a time when the non-Aryans
slaughtered animals for food, and the Aryans
in tghe name of religion.
Buddhism created and developed a new
awareness in the field of intellect and culture.
They enormously enriched Pali by their
writings. The early Pali literature can be
divided into three categories. The first
contains the sayings and teachings of the
Buddha, the second deals with the rules to
be observed by members of thesangha, and
the third presents the philosophical exposition
of the dhamma. In the first three centuries of
the Charistian era, by mixing Pali with San-
skrit the Buddhists created a new language
which is called Hybrid Sanskrit. The literary
activities of the Buddhist monks continued
even in the Middle Ages, and some famous
Apabhrams writing in east India were
composed
them.
Buddhist
monasteries developed as great centres of
learning, and can be called-residential
universities. Mention may be made of
Nalanda and Vikramashila in Bihar, and
Valabhi in Gujrat.
Buddhism left its mark on the art of
ancient India. The first human statues
worshipped in India were probably those of
the Buddha. From the first century A.D.
onwards the panel images of Gautama
Buddha began to be made. The Greek and
the Indian sculptors worked together to
create a new kind of art on the north-west
frontier of India, which is known as the
Gandhara art. For the residence of the monks
rooms were hewn out of the rocks, and thus
began the cave archtecture in the Barabar hills
in Gaya and in western India acround Nasik.
Buddhist art flourished in the Krishna delta
in the south and in Mathura in the north.
The Later Vedic Phase
TERRITORIAL STATES AND THE FIRST MAGADHAN EMPIRE
The Mahajanapadas
In the age of the Buddha we find 16
large states called Mahajanapadas, They were
mostly situated north of the Vindhyas and
extended from the north-west frontier to
Bihar. Of  these Magadha, Koshala, Vatsa and
Avanti seem to have been considerably
powerful. Beginning from the east we hear
of the kingdom of Anga which covered the
modern districts of Monghyr and Bhagalpur.
It had its capital at Champa, Eventually the
kingdom, of Anga was swallowed by its
powerful neighbour Magadha.
Magadha embraced the former districts
of patna, Gaya and parts of Shahbad, and
grew to be the leading state of the time.
North of the Ganga in the division of Tirhut
was the state of the Vajjis which included
eight clans. But the most powerful were the
Lichchhavis with their capital at Vaishali
which is identical with the village of Basarh
in the district of Vaishali. The Purnas push
the antiquity of Vaishali to a much earlier
period, but archaeologically Basarh was not
settled until the sixth century B.C.
Further west we find the kingdom of
Kashi with its capital at Varanasi. In the
beginning Kashi appears to be the most
powerful of the states, but eventually it had
to submit to the power of Koshala.
Koshala embraced the area occupied by
eastern Uttar Pradesh and had its capital at
Shravasti, which is identical with Sahet-Mahet
on the borders of Gonda and Bahraich
districts in Uttar Pradesh. But we see the
beginnings of a mud fort. Koshala contained
an important city called Ayodhya, which is
associated with the story in the Ramayana.
Koshala also included the tribal republican
territory of the Shaky as of Kapilvastu. The
capital of Kapilavastu has been identified
with Piprahwa in Basti district. Lumbini,
which lies at a distance of 15 km from
Piprahwa in Nepal served as another capital
of the Shakyas. In an Ashokan inscription it
is called the birthplace of Gautama Buddha
and it was here that he was brought up.
In the neighbourhood of Koshala lay the
republican clan of the Mallas, One of the capi-
tals of the Mallas lay at Kushinara where
Gautama Buddha passed away. Kushinara is
identical with Kasia in Deoria district. Fur-
ther west lay the kingdom of the Vatsas,
along the bank of the Yamuna, with its capi-
tal at Kaushambi near Allahabad. The Vatsas
were a Kuru clan who had shifted from
Hastinapur and settled down at Kaushambi.
Kaushambi was chosen because of its loca-
tion near, the confluence of the Ganga and
the Yamuna. We also hear of the older states
of the Kurus and the Panchalas which were
situated in western Uttar Pradesh, but they
no longer enjoyed the political importance
Gist of NCERT (History)
which they had attained in the later Veidc
period.
In central Malwa and the adjoining parts
of Madhya Pradesh lay the state of the
Avantis. It was divided into two parts. The
northern part had its capital at Uggain, and
the southern part at Mahishamati.
Rise and Growth of the Magadha Empire
Magadha came into prominence under
the leadership of Bimbisara, who belonged
to the Haryanka dynasty. He was a
contemporary of the Buddha. He started the
policy of conquest and aggression which
ended with the Kalinga war of Ashoka.
Bimbisara acquired Anga and placed it under
the viceroyaity of his son Ajatashatru at
Champa. He also strengthened his position
by marriage alliances. He took three wives.
His first wife was the daughter of the king
of Koshala and the sister of Parsenajit. His
second wife Chellana was a Lichchhavi
princess from Vaishali who gave birth to
Ajatashatru and his third wife was the
daughter of the chief of the Madra clan of
Punjab.
Magadha’s most serious rival was
Avanti with its capital at Ujjain. Its king
Chanda Pradyota Mahasena fought
Bimbisara, but ultimately the two thought it
wise to become friends. Later when Pradyota
was attacked by jaundice, at the Avanti king’s
request Bimbisara sent the royal physician
Jivaka to Ujjain.
The earliest capital of Magadha was at
Rajgir, which was called Girivraja at that time.
If was surrounded by five hills, the openings
in which were closed by stone-walls on all
sides. This made Rajgir impregnable.
According to the Buddhist chronicles,
Bimbisara ruled for 52 years. roughly from
544 B.C. to 492 B.C. He was succeeded by
his son Ajatashatru (492-460 B.C.). Ajatashatru
killed his father and seized the throne for
himself. Throughout his reign he pursued an
aggressive policy of expansion. This
provoked against him a combination of Kashi
and Koshala. There began a prolonged
conflict between Magadha and Koshala.
Ultimately Ajatashatru got the best of the
war, and the Koshalan king was compelled
to purchase peace by giving his daughter in
marriage to Ajatashatru and leaving him in
sole possession of Kashi.
Although his mother was a Lichchhavi
princess, this did not prevent him from
making war against Vaishli. He created
dissensions in the ranks of the Lichchhavis
and finally destroyed their independence by
invading their territory and by defeating
them in battle. It took him full 16 years to
destroy Vaishali. Eventually he succeeded in
doing so because of a war engine which was
used to throw stones like catapults. He also
possessed a chariot to which a mace was
attahced, and it facilitated mass killings. The
Magadhan empire was thus enlarged with the
addition of Kashi and Vaishali.
Ajatashatru faced a stronger rival in the
ruler of Avanti. Avanti had defeated the
Vatsas of Kaushambi and now threatened an
invasion of Magadha. To meet this danger
Ajatashatru began the fortification of Rajgir.
The remins of the walls can be still seen.
However, trie invasion did not materialize
in his lifetime.
Ajatashatru was succeeded by Udayin
(460-444 B.C.) His reign is important because
he built the fort upon the confluence of the
Ganga and Son at Patna. This was done
because Patna lay in the centre of the
Territorial States and the First Magadhan Empire
Magadhan kingdom, which now extended
from the Himalayas in the north to the hills
of Chotanagpur in the south.
Udayin was succeeded by the dynasty
of Shishunagas, who temporarily shifted the
capital to Vaishali. Their greatest achievement
was the destruction of the power of Avanti
with its capital at Ujjain. This brought to an
end the 100 year old rivalry between
Magadha and Avanti. From now onwards
Avanti became a part of the Magadhan empire
and continued to be so till the end of the
Maurya rule.
The Shishunagas were succeeded by the
Nandas, who proved to be the most powerful
rulers of Magadha. So great was their power
that Alexander, who invaded Punjab at that
time, did not dare to move towards the east.
The nandas added to the Magadhan power
by conquering Kalinga from where they
brought an image of the Jina as a victory
trophy. All this took place in the reign of
Mahapadma Nanda. He claimed to be ekarat,
the sole sovereign who destroyed all the
other ruling princes. It seems that he acquired
not only Kalinga but also Koshala which had
probably rebelled against him.
The later Nandas turned out to be weak
and unpopular. Their rule in Magadha was
supplanted by that of the Maurya dynasty
under which the Magadhan empire reached
the apex of glory.
THE AGE OF THE MAURYAS
Chandragupta Maurya
THE MAURYA dynasty was founded by
Chandragupta Maurya, who seems to have
belonged to some ordinary family. According
to the brahmanical tradition he was born of
Mura, a shudra woman in the court of the
Nandas. But an earlier Buddhist tradition
speaks of the existence of a kshatriya clan
called Mauryas living in the region of
Gorakhpur adjoining the Nepalese terai. In
all likelihood, Chandragupta was a member
of this clan. He took advantage of the
growing weakness and unpopularity of the
Nandas in the last days of their rule. With
the help of Chanakya, who is known as
Kautilya, he overthrew the Nandas and
established the rule of the Maurya dynasty.
The machinations of Chanakya against
Chandragupta’s enemies are described in
detail in the Mudrarakshasa, a drama written
by Vishakhadatta in the ninth century. Several
plays have been based on it in modern times.
Justin, a Greek writer, says that
Chandragupta overran the whole of India
with an army of 600,000. But Chandragupta
liberated north-western India from the
thraldom of Selucus, Chandragupta thus built
up a vast empire which included not only
Bihar and good portions of Orissa and Bengal
but also western and northwestern India, and
the Deccan. Leaving Kerala, Tamil nadu and
parts of north-easrtern India the Mauryas
ruled over the whole of the subcontinent. In
the north-west they held sway over certain
areas which were not included even in the
British empire.
Imperial Organization
The Mauryas organized a very elaborate
system of administration. We know about it
from the account of Megasthenes and the
Arthashastra of Kautilya. Megasthenes was
a Greek ambassador sent by Seleucus to the
court of Chandragupta Maurya. He lived in
the Maurya capital of Pataliputra and wrote
an account not only of the administration of
the city of Pataliputra but also of the Maurya
empire as a whole. The account of
Gist of NCERT (History)
Megasthenes have been published in the form
of a book called Indika, which throws
valuable light on the administration, society
and economy of Maurya times. The account
of Megasthenes can be supplemented by the
Arthashastra of Kautilya. Arthashastra gives
authentic information about the Maurya
administration and economy. On the basis of
these two sources we can draw a picture of
the administrative system of Chandra-gupta
Maurya. If we believe in a statement of the
Arthashastra, the king had set a high ideal
the happiness of his subjects lay his happiness
and in their troubles lay his troubles.
According to Megasthenes the king was
assisted by a council.
The empire was divided into a number
of provinces, and each province was placed
under a prince who was a scion of the royal
dynasty. The provinces were divided into
still smaller units, and arrangements were
made for both rural and urban administration.
Excavations The administration Pataliputra,
which was the capital of the Mauryas, was
carried on by six committees, each committee
consisting of five members. These committees
were entrusted with sanitation, care of
foreigners, registration of birth and death,
regulation of weights and measures and
similar other functions.
The most striking feature of Chandra-
gupta’s administration is the maintenance of
a Huge army. According to the account of a
Roman writer called Poiny, Chandragupta
maintained 600,000 foot-soldiers, 30,000 cav-
alry and 9000 elephants the Mauryas also
maintained a navy. The administration of the
armed forces, according to Megasthenes, was
carried on by a board of 30 officers divided
into six committees, consisting of five mem-
bers.
Ashoka (273-232 B.C.)
Chandragupta Maurya was succeeded
by Bindusara, whose reign is important for
continued links with the Greek princes. His
son, Ashoka, is the greatest of the Maurya
rulers. According to Buddhist tradition he
was so cruel in his early life that he killed his
99 brothers to get the throne. But since the
statement is based on a legend, it may well
be wrong. His biography, prepared by
Buddhist writerters, is so full of finction that
it cannot be taken seriously.
Ashokan Inscriptions
The history of Ashoka is reconstructed
on the basis of his inscriptions. These
incriptions, numbering 39, are classified into
Major Rock Edicts, Minor Rock Edicts,
Separate Rock Edicts, Major Pillar Edicts and
Minor Pillar Edicts. The name of Ashoka
occurs only in copies of Minor Rock Edict
found at three places in Karnataka and at one
in Madhya Pradesh.
All the other inscriptions mention only
devanamptya piyadasi, dear to gods, and
leave out the word Ashoka. The Ashokan
inscriptions are found in India, Nepal,
Pakistan and Afghanistan. Altogether they
appear at 47 places, and their total versions
number 182. They were generally placed on
ancient highways. Composed in Prakrit, they
were writtne in Brahmi script in the greater
part  of the subcontinent. But in its north-
western part they appeared in Aramaic
language and Kharoshthi script, and in the
Afghanistan they were written in both
Aramaic and Greek scripts and languages. He
is the first Indian king to speak directly to
the people through his inscriptions which
carry royal orders. The inscriptions throw
light on the career of Ashoka, his external
Territorial States and the First Magadhan Empire
and domestic polices, and the extent of his
empire.
Impact of the Kalinga War
The ideology of Buddhism guided
Ashoka’s state policy at home and abroad.
After his accession to the throne, Ashoka
fought only one major war called the Kalinga
War. According to him, 100,000 people were
killed in this war, several lakhs perished, and
150,000 were taken prisoners. At any rate it
seems that the king war moved by the
massacre in this war. So he abandoned the
policyof physical occupation in favour of
policy of cultural conquest. In other words,
bherighosha was replaced with dhamma-
ghosha. We quote below the worlds of
Ashoka from his Thirteenth Major Rock
Edict:
Ashoka no longer treated foreign
dominions as legitimate areas for military
conquest. He tried to conquer them
ideologically. He took steps for the welfare
of men and animals in foreigh lands, which
was a new thing considering the condition
of those days. He sent ambassadors of peace
to the Greek kingdoms in West Asia and
Greece. He sent mission-aries for the
propagation of Buddhism to Sri Lanka and
Central Asia. As an enlightened ruler Ashoka
tiled to enlarge his area of political influence
through propaganda.
It would be wrong to think that the
Kalinga war made Ashoka an extreme
pacifist. On the other hand he adopted a
practical policy of consolidating his empire.
He retained Kalinga after its conquest and
incorporated it into his empire. There is also
nothing to show that he disbanded the huge
army maintained from the time of
Chandragupta Maurya. Within the empire he
appointed a class of officers known as the
rajukas, who were vested with the authority
of not only rewarding people but also
punishing them, wherever necessary.
Internal Policy and Buddhism
Ashoka was converted to Buddhism as
a result of the Kalinga war. According to
tradition hs became a monk, made huge gifts
to the Buddhists and undertook pilgrimages
to the Buddhist shrines. The fact of his visiting
the Buddhist shrines is also suggested by the
dhamma yatras mentioned in his inscriptions.
According to tradition the Buddhist council
(Sangiti) was held by Ashoka and missionaries
were sent not only to south India but also to
Sri Lanka, Burma and other countries to
covert the people there. Brahmi inscriptions
of the second and first centuries B.C. have
been found Sri Lanka.
Ashoka set a very high ideal for himself,
and this was the ideal of paternal kingship.
He repeatedly asked his officials to tell the
subjects that the king looked upon them as
his children. As agents of the king, the official
were also asked to take care of the people.
Ashoka appointed Dhammama-hamatras for
propagating dharma among various social
groups including women. He also appointed
rajukas for the administration of justice in his
empire.
He disapporved of rituals, especially
those observed by women. He forbade
killing certain birds and animals, and
completely prohibited the slaughter of
animals in the capital. He interdicted gay
social functions in which people indulged in
revelries.
Ashoka’s Place in History
It is said that the pacific policy of
Ashoka rained the Maury a empire, but this
Gist of NCERT (History)
is not true. On the country Ashoka has a
number of achievements to his credit. He was
certainly a great missionary ruler in the
history of the ancient world. He worked
with great zeal and devotion to his mission
and achieved a lot, both at home and abroad.
Ashoka brought about the political
unification of the country. He bound it further
by one dharma, one language and practically
one script called Brahmi which was used in
most of his inscriptions. In unifying the
country he respected such scripts as Brashmi,
Kharoshthi, Aramaci and Greek. Evidently
he also accommodated such languages as
Greek, Prakrit and Sanskrit and various
religious sects. Ashoka follwed a tolerant
religious policy. He did not try to foist his
buddhist faith on his subjects. On the other
hand he made gifts to non-Buddhist and even
anti-Buddhist sects. Ashoka was fired with
zeal for missionary activities. He deputed
officials in the far-flung parts of the empire.
This helped the cause of ad-ministration and
also promoted cultural contacts between the
developed Gangetic basin and the backward
distant provinces. The material culture,
typical of the heart of the empire, spread to
Kalinga and the lower Deccan and norther
Bengal. Above all ashoka is important in
history for his policy of peace, non-
aggression and cultural conquest. He had no
model in early Indian history for pursuing
such a policy; nor did such an example exist
in any country except Egypt where Akhnaton
had pursued a pacific policy in the fourteenth
century B.C. But it is obvious that Ashoka
was not aware for his Egyptian predecessor.
However, Ashoka’s policy did not make
any lasting impression on his viceroys and
vassals,
declared
themselves
independent in their respective areas after
the retrirement of the king in 232 B.C.
Similarly, the policy could not convert his
neighbours, who swooped on the north-
western frontier of his empire within 30 years
of Ashoka’s exit from power in 232 B.C.
THE RISE AND GROWTH OF
THE GUPTA EMPIRE
Background
AFTER THE break-up of the Maurya
empire, the Satavahanas and the Kushans
emerged as two large political powers. The
Satavahanas acted as a stablizing factor in the
Deccan and south to which they gave political
unity and economic prosperity on the
strength of their trade with the Roman
empire. The Kushans performed the same role
in the north. Both these empires came to an
end in the middle of the third, century A.D.
On the ruins of the Kushan empire arose
a new empire, whiclvestablished its sway
over a good part of the former dominious of
both the Kushans and Satavahanas. This was
the empire of the Guptas, who may have been
of vaishya origin. Although the Gupta empire
was not as large as the Maurya empire, it kept
north India politically united for more than
a century from A.D. 335 to 455. The original
kingdom of the Guptas comprised Uttar
Pradesh and Bihar at the end of the third
century A.D. Uttar Pradesh seems to have
been a more important province for the
Guptas than Bihar, because early Gupta coins
and inscriptions have been mainly found in
that state. If we leave out some feudatories
and private individuals, whose inscriptions
have been mostly found in Madhya Pradesh,
Uttar Pradesh will stand out as the most
important area in respect of the finds of the
Gupta antiquitiews. Hence Uttar Pradesh
Territorial States and the First Magadhan Empire
seems to have been the place from where the
Guptas operated and fanned out in different
directions. Probably with their centre of
power at Prayag they spread in the
neighbouring regions.
The Guptas were possibly the
feudatories of the Kushans in Uttar Pradesh
and seems to have succeeded them without
any wide time-lag. At many places in Uttar
Pradesh and Bihar the Kushan antiquities are
immediately followed by the Gupta
antiquities. It is likely that the Guptas learnt
the use of saddle, reins, but-toned-coats,
trousers and boots from the Kushans. All
these gave them mobility and made them
excellent horsemen. In the Kushan scheme of
things, horse-chariots and elephants had
ceased to be important. Horsemen played the
main part. This also seems to have been the
case with the Gupta on whose coins horsemen
are represented. Although some Gupta kings
are described as excellent and unrivailed
chariot warriors, their basic strength lay in
the use of horses.
The Guptas enjoyed certain material
advantages. The centre of their operations
lay in the fertile land of Madhyadesha
covering Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. They could
exploit the iron ores of central India and
south Bihar. Further, they took advantage of
their proximity to the areas in north India
which carried on silk trade with the Eastern
Roman empire, also known as the Byzantine
empire. On account of these favourable
factors the Guptas set up their rule over
Anuganga (the middle Gangetic basin),
Prayag (modern Allahabad), Saketa (modern
Ayodhya) and Magadha. In course of time
this kingdom became an all-India empire.
The Kushan power in north India came to an
end around A.D. 230 and then a good part of
central India fell under the rule of the
Murundas, who were possibly the kinsmen
of the Kushans. The Murundas continued to
rule till A.D. 250. Twenty-five years later, in
about A.D. 275, they dynasty of the Gupta
came to power.
Chandragupta I (A.D. 319-334)
The first important king of the Gupta
dynasty was Chandragupta I. He married a
Lichchhavi princess most probably from Ne-
pal, which strengthened his position. The
Guptas were possibly vaishyas, and hence
marriage in a kshtriya family gave them pres-
tige. Chandragupta I seems to have been a
ruler of considerable importance because he
started the Gupta era in A.D. 319-20, which
marked the date of his accession. Later many
inscriptions came to be dated in the Gupta
Samudragupta (A.D. 335-380)
The Gupta kingdom was enlarged
enormously by Chandragupta I’s son and
successor Samudragupta (A.D. 335-380). He
was the opposite of Ashoka. Ashoka believed
in a policy of peace and son-aggression, but
Samudragupta delighted in violence and
conquest. His court poet Harishena wrote a
glowing account of the military exploits of
his patron. In a long inscription the poet
enumerates the peoples and countries that
were conquered by Samudragupta. The
inscription is engraved at Allahabad on the
same pillar which carries the inscriptions of
the peace-loving Ashoka. The places and the
countries conquered by Samudragupta can be
divided into five groups. Group one includes
princes of the Ganga-Yamuna doab who
were defeated and whose kingdoms were
incorporated into the Gupta empire. Group
Gist of NCERT (History)
two includes the rulers of the eastern
Himalayan states and some frontier states
such as princes of Nepal, Assam, Bengal, etc.,
who were made to feel states and some
frontier states such as princes of Nepal,
Assam, Bengal, etc., who were made to feel
the weight of Samudraguptas arms. It also
covers some republics of Punjab, The
republic, which flickered on the ruins of the
Maurya empire, were finally destroyed by
Samudragupta. Group three includes the
forest kingdoms situated in the Vindhya
region and known as Atavika raiyas; they
were brought under the control of
Samudragupta. Group four includes twelve
rulers of the eastern. Deccan and south India,
who were conquered and liberated.
Samudragupta’s arms reached as far as
Kanchi in Tamil Nadu, where the Pallavas
were compelled to recognize his suzerainty.
Group five includes the names of the Sankas
and Kushans, some of them ruling in
Afghanistan. It is said that Samudragupta
swept them out of power and received the
submission of the rulers of distant lands. The
prestige and influence of Samudragupa
spread even outside India. According to a
Chinese source, Meghavarman, the ruler of
Sri Lanka, sent a missionary to Samudragupta
for permission to build a Buddhist temple at
Gaya This was granted, and the temple was
developed
monastic
establishement. If we believe the eulogistic
inscription from Allahabad, it would appear
that Samudragupta never knew any defeat,
and because of his bravery and generalship
he is called the Napoleon of India. There is
no doubt that Samudragupta forcibly unified
the greater part of India under him, and his
power was felt in a much larger area.
Chandragupta II (A.D. 380-412)
The reign of Chandragupta II saw the
high watermark of the Gupta empire. He
extended the limits of the empire by marriage
alliance and conquests. Chandragupta
married his daughter Prabhavati with a
Vakataka prince who belonged to the
brahmana caste and ruled in central India.
The prince died, and was succeeded by his
young son. So Prabhavati became the virtual
paler. As shown by some of her land charters,
which betray the influence of the eastern
Gupta writing, she promoted the interests of
father
Chandragupta.
Chandragupta exercised indirect control over
the Vakataka kingdom in central India. This
afforded a-great advantage to him. With this
great influence in this area, Chandragupta II
conquered western Malwa and Gujarat,
which had been under the rule of the Shaka
Kshtraps for about four centuries by that time.
The conquest gave Chandragupta the wester
sea coast, famous for trade and commerce.
This contributed to the prosperity of Malwa,
and its chief city Ujjain. Ujjain seems to have
been made the second capital by
Chandragupta II.
Chandragupta II adopted the title of
Vikramaditya, which had been first used by
an Ujjain ruler in 57 B.C. as a mark of victory
over the Shaka Kshatrapas of western. India
The court of Chandragupta II at Ujjain was
adorned by numerous scholars including
Kalidasa and Anairasimlia. It was in
Chandragupta’s time that the chinese pilgrim
Fahsien (399-414) visited India and wrote an
elaborate account of the life of its people.
Fall of the Empire
The successors of Chandragupta II had
to face an invashion by the Hunas from
Territorial States and the First Magadhan Empire
Central Asia in the second half of the fifth
century A.D. Although in the be-ginning the
Gupta king Skandragupta tried effectively to
stem the march of the Hunas into India, his
successors proved to be weak and could not
cope with the Huna invaders, who excelled
in horsemanship and possibly used strrups
made of metal. They could move quickly and
being excellent archiers they seem to have
attained considerable successor not only in
Iran but also in India.
By 485 the Hunas occupied eastern
Malwa and a good portion of central India
where their inscriptions have been found. The
inter-mediate regions such as Punjab and
Rajasthan also passed under their possession.
This must have drastically reduced the extent
of the Gupta empire at the beginning of the
sixth century. Although the Huna power was
soon overthrown by Yashodharaman of
Malwa who belonged to the Aulikara
feaudatory family, the Malwas prince
successfully chanllenged the authority of the
Gupta snd set up in 532, pillars of victory
commemorating his conquest of almost the
whole of northern India, Yashodharman’s
rule was shortlived, but it meant a severe
blow to the Gupta empire.
The Gupta empire was further
undermined by the rise of the feudatories.
The governors appointed by the Gupta kings
in north. Bengal and their feudatories in
Samatata or south-east Bengal tended to
become independent. The late Guptas of
Magadha established their power in Bihar..
Alongside them the Maukharis rose to power
in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, and had their
capital at Kanauj. It seems that by 550 Bihar
and Uttar Pradesh had passed out of Gupta
hands. By the beginning of the sixth century
we find independent princes issuing land
grants in their own rights in northern Madhya
Pradesh, although they use the Gupta era in
dating their charaters. The rulers of Valabhi
established their authority in Gujarat and
western Malwa. After the reign of
Skandagupta, i.e. A.D. 467, hardly any Gupta
coin or inscription has been found in western
Malwa and Saurashtra.
The Gupta state may have found it
difficulut to maintain a large professional
army on account of the growing practice of
land grants for religious and other purposes,
which was bound to reduce their revenues.
Their income may have further been affected
by the decline of foreign trade. The
migration of a guild of silk-weavers from
Gujarat to Malwa in A.D. 473 and their
adoption of nonproductive professions show
that there was not much demand for cloth
produced by them. The advantages from
Gujarat trade gradually disappeared. After
the middle of the fifth century the Gupta
kings made desperate attempts to maintain
their gold currency by reducing the content
of pure gold in it. But this proved of no avail.
Although the rule of the Imperial Guptas
lingered till the middle of the sixth century
A.D., the imperial glory had vanished a
century earlier.
Gist of NCERT (History)
THE DELHI SULTANATE
Struggle for the
Establishment of a Strong Monarchy
Muizzuddin (Muhammad Ghori) was
suceeded (1206) by Qutbuddin Aibak, Turk-
ish slave who had played an important part
in the expansion of the Turkish Sultanat in
India after the battle of Tarain. Another slave
of Muizzuddin, Yalduz, succeeded at Ghazni.
As the ruler of Ghazni, Yalduz claimed to rue
over Delhi as well. This, however was not
accepted by Aibak and from this time, the
Delhi Sultanat severed its helped to Prevent
India being drawn into central Asian politics.
Illtutamis (1210-36)
In 1210, Aibak died of injuries received
in a fall from his horse while playing Chaugan
(polo). He was succeeded by Iltutmish who
was the son-in-law of Aibak. But before he
could do so, he had to fight and defeat the
son of Aibak.
Iltutmish must be regarded as the real
consolidator of the Turkish conquests in
North India. At the time of his accession, Ali
Mardan Khan had declared himself the king
of Bengal and Bihar, while Qubacha, a fel-
low slave of Aibak had declared himself an
independent ruler of Multan and seized La-
hore and parts of the Punjab. At first, even
some of the fellow officers of Iltutmish near
Delhi were reluctant to accept his authority.
The Rajputs took advantage of the situation
to assert their independence. Thus, Kalinjar,
Gwalior and the entire eastern Rajasthan,
including Ajmer and Bayana, threw off the
Turkish Yoke. During the early year of his
reign, Iltutmish’s attention was concentrated
on the north-west. A new danger to his posi-
tion arose with the conquest of Ghazni by
Khwarizm Shah. In order to avert this dan-
ger, Iltutmish marched to Lahore and occu-
pied it. In 1220, the Khwarizmi Empire was
destroyed by the Mongols who founded one
of the strongest empires in History, which at
its height extended from China to the shores
of the Mediterranean sea, and from the Cas-
pian sea to the river Jaxartes. The danger it
posed to India and its effects on the Delhi
Sultanat will be discussed in a subsequent
section. While the Mongol’s were busy else-
where, Iltutmish also ousted Qubacha from
Multan and Uchch.
Secure in the west, Iltutmish was able
to turn his attention elsewhere. In Bengal
and Bihar, a person called Iwaz who had
taken the title of sultan Ghiyasuddin had as-
sumed independence. While he made raids
on the territory of his neighbours, the Sena
rulers of East Bengal, and the Hindu rulers
of Orissa and Kamrup (Assam) continued
their sway. In 1226-27, Iwaz was defeated and
killed in a battle with Iltutmish’s on son near
Lakhanauti. Bengal and Bihar passed under
the Suzerainty of Delhi once again. But they
were a difficult charge, and repeatedly chal-
The Delhi Sultanate
lenged the authority of Delhi. At about the
same time, Iltutmish took step s to recover
Gwalior and Bayana. Ajmer and Negor re-
mained under his control. He sent expedi-
tions against Ranthambhor and Jalor to reas-
sert his suzerainty. He also attacked Nagda,
the capitals of Mewar (about 22 Km from
Udaipur), but had to beat a retreat at the ar-
rival of the Gujarat armies, which had come
to aid the Rana. As a revenge, Iltutmish dis-
patched an expedition against the Chalukyas
of Gujarat, but it was repulsed with Losses.
Raziya (1236-39)
After anxious consideration, Iltutmish
finally decided to nominate his daughter,
Raziya, to the throne, and induced the nobles
and the theologians (Ulama) to agree to the
nomnation the nomination of a woman in
preference to sons was a novel step. In order
to asset brothers as well as against powerful
Turkish nobles, and could rule only for three
years. Though brief, her rule had a number
of interesting features. it marked the monar-
chy and the Turkish chiefs, sometimes called
“the forty” or the Chahalgani. Iltutmish had
shown great deference to these Turkish
chiefs. After his death, these chiefs, drunk
with power and arrogance, wanted to install
on the throne a puppet whom they could con-
trol. They soon discovered that though a
woman, Raziya was not prepared to play their
game. She discarded the female apparel and
started holding court with her face unveiled.
She even hunted, and led army in war. The
Wazir, Nizam-ul-Mulk Junaidi, who had op-
posed her elevation to the throne, and backed
to supported a rebellion of nobles against
her, was defeated successfully established
law and order in the length and breath of
her Kingdom. But the attempt to create a
party of noble, Yaqut Khan. Rebellions broke
out at Lahore and sirhind. She personnaly
led an expedition against Lahore, and com-
pelled the governor to Submit. On the way
to Sirhind, internal rebellion broke out in
which Yaqut Khan was killed, an Raziya im-
prisoned at Tabarhinda (Bhatinda). However,
Raziya won over her captor, Altunia, and af-
ter marrying him made a renewed attempt
on Delhi. Raziya fought valiantly, but was
defeated and killed in fight by bandits.
Era of Balban (1246-87)
The struggle between the monarchy and
the Turkish chiefs continued, till one of the
Turkish chiefs, Ulugh Khan, Known in his-
tory by his later title of Balban, gradually
arrogated all power to himself, and finally
ascended the throne in 1265 during the ear-
lier period, Balban held the positon of Naib
or deputy of Nasiruddin Mahmud, a younger
son of Iltutmish, whom Balban had helped
in securing the throne in 1246. Balban fur-
ther strengthened his positon by marrying
one of his daughters to the young sultan. The
growing authority of Balban alienated many
of the Turkish chiefs who had hoped to con-
tinue their former power and influence in the
affairs of government, since Nasiruddin
Mahmud was young and inexperienced.
They, therefore, hatched a conspiracy (1250)
and outsted Balban from his position. Balban
was replaced by Imadduddin Raihan who
was an Indian Muslim. Balban agreed to step
aside, but carefully continued to build his own
group. Within one and a half years of his dis-
missal, he managed to win over some of his
opponents. Sultan Mahmud bowed to the
superior strength of Balban’s group and dis-
missed Raihan. After some time, Raihan was
defeated and killed. Balban got rid of many
of his other rivals by fair or foul means. He
even went so far as to assume the royal in-
Gist of NCERT (History)
signia, the Chhatr. But he did not assume the
throne himself, probably due to the senti-
ments of the Turkish, chiefs. In 1265, Sultan
Mahmud died. Some historians are of the
opinion that Balban poisoned the young king,
and also did away to the throne.
While Claiming to act as a champion of
the Turkish nobility, Balban was not prepared
to share power with anyone, not even with
members of his own family. His desporters.
Balban was determined to finally break the
power of the Chahalgani, i.e., the Turkish
nobles, and to exalt the power and prestige
of the monarchy. He did not hesitate even to
poison his cousin, Sher Khan, to achieve this
objective.
At the same time, in order to win the
confidence of the public, he administered
highest in the land were to be spared if they
transgressed his authority. To keep himself
well informed, Balban appointed strong cen-
tralized army, both to dela with internal
enterenched themselves in the Punjab and
posed a serious danger to the Delhi Sultanat.
For the purpose, he reorganized them mili-
tary department (Diwan-I-arz), and pen-
sioned off those soldiers and troopers who
were no longer fit for service. Since many of
the troopers were Turks who had come to
India in the time of Iltutmish, they raised a
hue and cry against this decision, but Balban
was not moved. The law and order situation
in the area around Delhi and in the doab had
deteriorated. In the Ganga-Jamuna doab and
Awadh, roads were, poor and were infested
with robbers and Dacoits, The Mewatis had
become so bold as to plunder people upto
the outskirts of Delhi. To deal with these el-
ements, Balban adopted a policy of “Blood
and Iron”. Robbers were mercilessy pursued
and put to Death.
THE DELHI  SULTANATE-II
(Circa 1200-1400)
AFTER THE death of Balban in 1286,
there was again confusion in Delhi for some
time. Balban’s chosen successor. Prince
Muhammad, had died earlier in a battle with
the Mongols. A second son, Bughra Khan,
preferred to rule over Bengal and Bihar
although he was invited by the nobles at Delhi
to assume the throne. Hence, a grandson of
Balban was installed in Delhi. But he was too
young and inexperienced to cope with the
situated.
The Khaljis (1290-1320)
For these reasons, a group of Khalji
nobles led by Jalaluddin Khalji, who had been
the warden of the marchese in the north-west
and had fought many successful engagements
against the Mongols, overthrew the incom-
petent successful engagements against the
Mongols, overthrew the incompetent succes-
sors of Balban in 1290. The Khalji rebellion
was welcomed by the non-Turkish sections
in the nobility. Jalaluddin Khalji ruled only
for a brief peiod of six years. He tried to
mitigate some of the harsh aspects of Baiban’s
rule. He was the first ruler of the Delhi
Sultanat to clearly put forward the view that
the state should be based on the willing sup-
port of the governed, and that since the large
majority of the people in India were Hindus,
the state in India could not be truly Islamic
state. Alauddin Khalji (1296-1316) came to the
throne by treacherously muraenng his uncle
and father-in-law, Jalaluddin Khalji. As the
governor of Awadh, Alauddin had accumu-
lated a vast treasure by invading Deogir in
the Deccan. Alauddin framed a series of regu-
lations to prevent the nobles from conspir-
ing against him. They were forbidden to hold
The Delhi Sultanate
banquest or festivities, or to form marriage
alliances without the permission of the sul-
tan. To discourage festive parties, he banned
the use of wines and intoxicants. He also in-
stituted a spy service to inform the sultan of
all that the nobles said and did.
By these harsh methods, Alauddin Khalji
cowed down the nobles, and made them
completely subservient to the crown. The old
noblity was destroyed, and the new nobility
was taught to accept anyone who could as-
cend the throne of Delhi. This becarrn ap-
parent after Alauddin Khalji’s death in 1316.
His favourite, Malik Kafur, raised a minor
son of Alauddin to the throne and irr
prisoned or blinded his other sons, without
encountering any opposition from the nobles.
Soon after this, Kafur was killed
The Tughlaqs (1320-1412)
Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq established a new
dynasty which ruled till 1412. The Tughlaqs
provided
three
competent
rulers:
Ghiyasuddin, his son Muhammad bin Tuglaq
(1324-51) , and his nephew Firoz Shah
Tughlaq (1351-88). The first two of these sul-
tanas ruled over an empire which comprised
almost the entire country. The Turkish rulers
had strong reasons for coveting Malwas and
Gujarat. Not only were these areas fertile and
populous, they controlled the western sea-
ports and the trade routes connecting them
with the Ganga valley. Another reasons for
the sultans of Delhi to establish their rule over
Gujarat was that it would secure them a bet-
ter control over the supply of horses to their
armies. The import of Arabi, Iraqi and Turki
horses to India from the western seaports
had been an important item of trade since
the eight century.
Early in 1299, an army under two of
Alauddin Khalji’s noted generals marched
against Gurajat by the way of Rajasthan. On
their way, they raided and captured Jaisalmer
also. The Gujarat ruler, Rai Karan, was taken
by surprise, and fled without offering a fight.
The famous temple of Somnath was plun-
dered and saked. It was here that Malik Kafur,
who later led the invasions of south India,
was captured. He was presented to Alauddin,
and soon rose in his estamation.
Rajasthan
After the conquest of Gujarat, Alauddin
turned his attention to the consolidation of
his rule over Rajasthan. The first to invite his
attention was Ranthambhor which was be-
ing ruled by the Chauhan successors of
Prithviraj. Its ruler, Hamirdeva, had em-
barked on a series of war like expeditions
against his neightbours. Alauddin despatched
an army commanded by one of his reputed
generals but it was repulsed with losses by
Hamirdeva. Finally, Alauddin himself had to
march against Ranthambhor. The famous
poet, Amir Khusrau, who went along with
Alauddin, has given a graphic description of
the fort and its investment. After three
months of close seige, the fear jauhar cer-
emony took place: the women mounted the
funeral pyre, and all the men came out to fight
to the last. This is the first description we
have of the jauhar in Persian. All the Mon-
gols, too, died fighting with the Rajputs. This
event took place in 1301.
Alauddin, next, turned his attention to-
wards Chittor which, after Ranthambhor, was
the most powerful state in Rajasthan. It was,
therefore necessary for Alauddin to subdue
it. Apart from this, its ruler Ratan Singh had
annoyed him by refusing permission to his
armies to march to this, its ruler Ratan Singh
had annoyed him by refusing permission to
his armies to march to Gujarat through Mewar
Gist of NCERT (History)
territories. There is a popular legend that
Alauddin attached Chittor because he cov-
eted Padmini, the beautiful queen of Ratan
Singh. However, many modern historians do
not accept this legnd because its mentioned
for the first time more than a hundred years
later. In this story, Padmini is the princess of
Singhal dvipa and Ratan Singh crosses the
seven seas to reach her and brings her back
to Chittor after many adventures which ap-
pear improbable. The Padmini legend is a part
of this account.
Alauddin closely invested Chittor Af-
ter a resistance by Mewar besieged for sev-
eral months Alauddin stormed the fort
(1303). The Rajputs performed jauhar and
most of the warriors died fighting. Alauddin
also overran Jalor which lay on the route to
Gujarat.
Deccan and South India
In 1306-7, Alauddin planned two cam-
paigns. The first was against Rai Karan who
after his expulsion from Gujarat, had been
holding Baglana on the border of Malwa. Rai
Karan fought bravely, but he could not resist
for long. The second expedition was aimed
against Rai Ramachandra, the ruler of Deogir,
who had been in alliance with Rai Karan. In
an earlier campaign, Rai Ramchandra had
agreed to pay an yearly tribute to Delhi. This
had failled into arrers. The command of the
second army was entrusted to Alauddins
slave, Malik Kafur. Rai Ramchandra who sur-
rendered to Kafur, was honourably treated
and carried to Delhi where, after some time,
he was restored to his dominaions with the
title of Rai Rayan. A gidt of one lakh tonkas
was given to him along with a gloden col-
oured canopy which was a symbol of
rulership. he was also given a district of
gujarat. One of his daughters was married
to Alauddin. The Alliance with Rai
Ramachandra was to prove to be of great
value to Alauddin in his further aggrandise-
ment in the Deccan.
Between 1309 and 1311, Malik Kafur led
two campaigns in south India - the firstagainst
Warangal in the Telegana area and the other
against Dwar Samudra and Mabar (modern
Karnataka) and Madurai (Tamil Nadu). The
court poet, Amir Khusrau made them the
subject of a book. For the first time, Muslim
armies penetrated as far south as Madurai,
and brought back untold wealth. The trade
routes to south India were well known and
when Kafur’s armies reached Paintan in
Mabar, they found a colony of Muslim mer-
chants settled there. The ruler even had a
contingent of Muslim tropps in his army.
These expeditions greatly raised Kafur in
public estimation and Alauddin appointed
him malik-naib or vice-gegent of the empire.
Following the accession of Ghiyasuddin
Tughlaq in 1320, a sustained and vigorous
forward policy was embarked upon. After
reorganizing his armies, the attacked again
and this time no quarter was given to the
Rai. This was followed by the conquest of
Mabar which was also annexed. Muhammad
bin Tughlaq them raided Orissa, and returned
to Delhi with rich plunder. Next year, he sub-
dued Bengal which had been independent
since the death of Balban. Thus, by 1324, the
territories of the Delhi Sultanat reached up
to Madurai. The last Hindu principality in the
area, Kampili in South Karnataka, was an-
nexed in 1328. A cousin of Muhammad bin
Tughlaq, who had rebelled, had been given
shelter there, thous providing a convenient
excus for attacking it.
The Delhi Sultanate
One of the first requirements of the new
rulers was houses to live in, and places of
worship. They at first converted temples and
other existing buildings into mosques. Exam-
ples of this are the Quwwat-ul-Islam mosque
near the Quatab Minar in Delhi and the build-
ing at Ajmer called Arhai Din ka Jhonpra. The
only new construction in Delhi was a facade
of three elaborately carved arches in front
of the deity room (garbha griha) which was
demolished. In their buildings, the Turks
used the arch and the dome on a wide scale.
Neither the arch nor the dome was a Turk-
ish or Muslim invention. The Arabs borrowed
them from Rome through the Byzantine em-
pire, developed them and made them their
The use of the arch and the dome had a
number of advantages. The dome rose
higher. Many experiments were made in
putting a round dome on a square building
and in raising the dome higher and higher.
In this way, many lofty and impressive build-
ing were constructed. The arch and the dome
dispensed with the need for a large number
of pillars to support the roof and enabled the
construction of large halls with a clear view.
Such places of assembly were useful in
mosques as well as in palaces. Howeever, the
arch and the dome needed a strong cement,
otherwise the stones could not be held in
place. The Turks used fine quality light mor-
tar in their buildings. Thus, new architectural
forms and mortar of a superior kind became
widespread in north India, with the arrival
of the Turks.
The arch and the dome were known to
the Indians earlier, but they were not used
on a large scale. The Turkish rulers used both
the dome and arch method as well as the slab
and beam method as well as slab and beam
method in their buildings. In the sphere of
decoration, the Turks eschewed representa-
tion of human and animal figures in the build-
ings. Instead, they used geometrical and flo-
ral designs, combining them with panels of
inscriptions containing verses from the
Quran. Thus, the Arabic script itself became
a work of a art. The combination of these
decorative devices was called Arabesque.
They also freely borrowed Hindu motifs such
as the bell motif, the bel motif, swastika, lo-
tus, etc.
The most magnificent building con-
structed by the Turks in the thirteenth cen-
tury was the Qutab Minar. This tapering
tower, originally 71.4 metre high, build by
Iltutmish, was dedicated to the Sufi saint,
Qutab-ud-Din Bakhtiyar Kaki, who was
greatly venerated by all the people of Delhi.
Although traditions of building towers are
to be found both in India and West Asia, the
Qutab Minar is unique in many ways.
The Khalji period saw a lot of building
ARCHITECTURE
Gist of NCERT (History)
activity. Alauddin built his capital at Siri, a
few kilometres away from the site around
the Qutab. But he added an entrance door to
the Qutab This door, which is called the Alai
Darwaza, has arches of very pleasing
proportions. It also contains a dome which,
for the first time was built on correct scientific
lines. Thus, the art of building the arch and
the dome on scientific lines had been
mastered by the Indian craftsmen by this
time. Ghiyasuddin and Muhammad Tughlaq
built the huge place-fortress complex called
Tughlaqabad. By blocking the passage of the
Jamuna, a huge artificial lake was created
around it. The tomb of Ghiyasuddin marks a
new trend in architecture. To have a good
skyline, the building was put upon a high
platform. Its beauty was heightened by a
marble dome.
A striking feature of the Tughlaq archi-
tecture was the sloping, walls. This is called
better and gives the effect of strength and
solidity to the building. However, we do not
find any batter in the buildings of Firoz
Tughlaq. A second feature of the Tughlaq ar-
chitecture was the deliberate attempt to com-
bine the principles of the arch, and the lintel
and beam in their buildings. This is found in
a marked manner in the buildings of Firoz
Tughlaq. In the Hauz Khas, which was a pleas-
ure resort and had a huge lake around it, al-
ternate stories have arches, and the lintel and
beam. The same is and had a huge lake
around it, alternate stories have arches, the
lintel and beam. The same is to be found in
some buildings of Firuz Shah’s new fort
which is now called the Kotla. The Tughlaqs
did not generally use the costly red sand-
stone in their buildings but the cheaper and
more easily available greystone. Another de-
vice used by the Lodis was placing their
buildings, especially tombs, on a high plat-
form, thus giving the Building a feeling of
size as well as a better skyline. Some of the
tombs were placed in the midst of gardens.
The Lodi Garden in Delhi is a fine example
of this. Some of the tombs were of an oc-
tagonal shap[e. Many of these features were
adopted by the Mughlas later on and then
culmination is to be found in the Taj Mahal
built by Shah Jahan.
Architecture
The Sufi Movement
Mystics, who are called Sufis, had risen
in Islam at a very early stage these saints
wanted to have nothing to do with the state
- a tradition which continued later on. Some
of the early Sufis, such as the woman mystic
Rabia and Mansur bin Hallj laid great em-
phasis on love as the bond between God and
the individual soul. But their pantheistic ap-
proach led them into conflict with the ortho-
dox elements who had Mansur executed for
heresy Despite this setback, mystic ideas con-
tinued to spread among the Muslim masses.
Al-Ghazzaili (1112), who is venerated
both by the orthodox elements and the Sufis,
tried to reconcile mysticism with Islamic or-
thodoxy. This he was able to do in a large
measure. He gave a further blow to the ra-
tionalist philosophy by arguing that positive
knowledge of God and his qualities cannot
be gained by reason, but only by revelation.
Thus, the revealed book, Quaran, was vital
for a mystic. Around this time, the Sufis were
organised in 12 orders or silsilahs. The
silsilahs were generally led by a prominent
mystic who lived in a khanqah or hospice
along with his disciples. The like between the
teacher or pir and his disciples or mufids was
a vital part of the Sufi system. Every pir
nominated a successor or wali to carry on
his work. The monastic organisation of the
Sufis, and some of their practices such as
15TH & 16TH CENTURY RELIGIOUS MOVEMENT
penanee, fasting and holding the breath are
sometimws traced to the, Buddhist and
Hindu yogic influence. Buddhism was widely
prevalent in Central Asia before the advent
of Islam, and the legend of the Buddha as a
saintly man had passed into the Islamic leg-
end. Yogis continued to visit West Asia even
after the advent of Islam and the yogic book,
Amrit-kund, had been translated into Per-
sian from Sanskrit.
The Sufi orders are broadly divided into
two: Ba-shara, that is, those which followed
the Islamic Law (shara) and be-shara, that is,
those which were not bound by it Both types
of orders prevailed in India, the latter being
followed more by wandering saints. Although
these saints did not establish an order, some
of them became figures of popular venera-
tion, often for the Muslims and Hindus alike.
The Chishti and Suharwardi Silsilahs
Of the bashara movements, only two
acquired significant influence and following
in north India during the thirteenth and four-
teenth centuries. These were the Chisti and
Suharwardi silsilahs. The Chisti order was
established in India by Khwaja Muinuddin
Chishti who came to India around 1192,
shortly after the defeat and death of Prithvi
Raj Chauhan. After staying for some time in
Lahore and Delhi he finally shfted to Ajmer
which was an important political centre and
already had a sizable Muslim population.
Gist of NCERT (History)
Among the disciples of Shaikh Muinuddin
were Bakhtiyar Kaki and his disciple Farid-
ud-Din Ganj-j-Shakar. Farid-ud-Din confined
his activities to Hansi and Ajodhan  (in mod-
ern Haryana and the Punjab, respectively).
He was deeply respected in Delhi, so much
so that streams of people would throng
around him whenever he visited Delhi. His
outlook was so broad and humane that some
of his verses are later found quoted in the
Adi-Granth of the Sikhs.
The most famous of the Chisti saints,
however, were Nizamuddin Auliya and
Nasiruddin Charigh-i-Delhi. These early Sufis
mingled frely with people of the lower classes,
including the Hindus. They led an austere,
simple life, and conversed with people in
their dialect, Hindawi or Hindi. Nizamuddin
Auliya adopted yogic breathing exercises, so
much so that the yogis called him a sidh or
perfect. After the death of Nasiruddin
Chiragh-i-Delhi in the middle of the four-
teenth century, the Chishtis did not have a
commanding figure in Delhi.
The Suharwardi order entered India at
about the same time, as the Chistis, but its
activities were confined largely to the Pun-
jab and and Multan. The most well-known
saints of the order were Shaikh Shihabuddin
Suharwardi and Hamid-ud-Din Nagore.
Unlike the Chistis, the Suharwardi saints did
not believe in leading a life of poverty. They
accepted the service of the state, and some
of them-held important posts in the ecclesi-
astical department. The Chistis, on the other
hand, preferred to keep aloof from state poli-
tics and shunned the company of rulers and
nobles.
The Bhakti Movement
However, the real development of
Bhakti took place in south Indian between
the seventh and the twelfth century. As has
been noticed earlier, the Shaiva nayanars and
the Vaishnavite alvarsh disregarded the
austerities preached by the Jains and the
Buddhists and preached personal devotion
to God as a means of salvation. They
disregarded the rigidities of the caste system
and carried their message of love and
personal devotion to God to various parts of
south India by using the local languages.
Although these were many points of contact
between south and north India, the
transmission of the ideas of the Bhakti saints
from south to north India was a slow and
long drawn-out process. The ideas of Bhakti
were carried to the north by scholars as well
as by saints. Among these, mention may be
made of the Maharashtrian saint, Namadeva,
who flourished in the first part of the
fourteenth century, and Ramananda who is
placed in the second half of the fourteenth
and the first quarter of the fifteenth century.
Namadeva was a tailor who had taken
to banditry before he became a saint. His
poetry which was written in Marathi
breathes a spirit of intense love and devotion
to God. Namadeva is said to have travelled
far and wide and engaged in discussions with
the Sufi saints in Delhi. Ramanda, who was a
follower of Ramanuja, was born at Prayag
(Allahabad) and lived there and at Banaras.
He substituted the worship of Rama in place
of Vishnu. He enrolled disciples from all
castes, including the low castes. Thus his
disciples included Ravidas, who was a
cobbler by caste; Kabir, who was a weaver;
Sena, who was a barber; and Sadhana, who
was a butcher. Namadeva was equally broad-
minded in enrolling his disciples. The seeds
scattered by these saints fell on fertile soil.
The brahmanas had lost both in prestige and
Literature Literature
power following the defeat of the Rajput
rulers and the establishment of the Turkish
Sultanat. As a result, movements, such as the
Nath Panthi movement challenging the caste
system and the superiority of the brahmanas,
had gained great popularity.
These concided with the Islamic ideas
of equality and brotherhood which had been
preached by the Sufi saints. People were no
longer satisfied with the old religion; they
wanted a religion which could satisfy both
their reason and emotions. It was due to
these factors that the Bhakti movement be-
came a popular movement in north India
during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
Among those who were most critical of
the existing social order and made a strong
plea for Hindu-Muslim unity, the names of
Kabir and Nanak stand out. These is a good
deal of undertainty about the dates and early
life of Kabir. Legend has it that he was the
son of a brahmana widow who abandoned
him after his birth and that he was brought
up in the house of a Muslim weaver.
He learned the profession of his
adopted father, but while living at Kashi, he
came in contact with both the Hindu and
Muslim saints. Kabir, who is generally placed
in the fifteenth century, emphasised the unity
of God whom he calls by several names, such
as Rama, Hari, Govinda, Allah, Sain, Sahib,
etc. He strongly denounced idol-worship, pil-
grimages, bathing in holy rivers or taking
part in formal worship, such as namaz. Nor
did he consider it necessary to abandon the
life of a normal householder for the sake of a
saintly life Kabirstrongly denounced the
caste system, especially the practice of
untouchability, and emphasized the funda-
mental unity of man. He was opposed to all
kinds of discrimination between human be-
ings, whether on the basis of castes or reli-
gion, race, family or wealth.
Guru Nanak, from whose teachings the
sikh religion was derived, was born in a
Khatri household in the village of Talwandi
(now called Nankana) on the bank of the
river Ravi in 1469. Sometime later, he had a
mystic vision and forsook the world. He com-
posed hymns and sang them to the accompa-
niment of the rabab, a stringed instrument
played by his faithful attendant, Mardana. It
is said that Nanak undertook wide tours all
over India and even beyond it, to Sri Lanka
in the south and Mecca and Medina in the
west. He attracted a large number of people
towards him and his name and fame spread
far and wide before his death in 1538. Like
Kabir, Nanak laid emphasis on the one God,
by repeating whose name and dwelling on it
with love and devotion one could get salva-
tion without distinction of caste, creed or
sect. However, Nanak laid great emphasis on
the purity on character and conduct as the
first condition of approaching God, and the
need of a guru for guidance. Like Kabir, he
strongly denounced idol worship, pilgrim-
ages and other formal observances of the
various faiths. He advocated a middle path
in which spritual life could be combned with
the duties of the householder.
Nanak had no intention of founding a
new religion. His catholic approach aimed at
bridging distinctions between the Hindus and
the Muslims, in order to create an atmosphere
of peace, goodwill and mutual give and take.
This was also the aim of Kabir.
The Vaishnavite Movement
Apart from the non-sectarian movement
led by Kabir and Nanak, the Bhakti
movement in north India developed around
the worship of Rama and Krishna, two of the
Gist of NCERT (History)
incarnations of the god Vishnu. The
childhood escapades of the boy Krishna and
his dalliance with the milk-maids of Gokul,
especially with Radha, became the themes of
a remarkable series of saint-poets who lived
and preached during the 15th and early 16th
centuries. They used the love between Radha
and Krishna in an allegoric manner to depict
the relationship of love, in its aspects of the
individual soul with the supreme soul. Like
the early Sufis, Chaitanya popularisied
musical gathering or kirtan as a special form
of mystic experience in which the outside
world disppeared by dwelling on God’s
name.
The writings of Narrsinha Mehta in
Gujarat, of Meera in Rajasthan, of Surdas in
western Uttar Pradesh and of Chaitanya in
Bengal and Orissa reached extraordinary
heights of Iyrical fervour and of love which
transcended all boundaries, including those
of caste and creed. this is seen most clearly
in the life of Chaitanya. Born and schooled
in Nadia which was the centre of Vedantic
rationalism, Chaitanya’s tenor of life was
changed when he visited Gaya at the age of
22 and was initiated into the Krishna cult by
a recluse. He became a god-intoxicated devo-
tee who incessantly uttered the name of
Krishna Chaitanya is said to have travelled
all over India, including Vrindavan, when he
revived the Krishna cult. But the one who
probably influenced the saint poets most was
Vallabha, a Tailang brahmana, who lived in
the last part of the fifteenth and the early
part of the sixteenth century.
Literature Literature
Sanskrit Literature
Following the great Sankara, works in
the field of Advaita philosophy by Ramanuja,
Mad-hava, Vallabha, etc., continued to be
written in Sanskrit. Besides philosophy,
works in the field of kavya (poetical narra-
tive), drama, fiction, medicine, astronomy,
music, etc., continued to be written. A large
number of commentaries and digests on the
Hindu law (Dharmashastras) were prepared
between the twelfth and the sixteenth cen-
tury. The great Mitakshara of Vijneshwar,
which forms one of the two principal Hindu
schools of law, cannot be placed earlier than
the twelfth century. Most of the works were
produced in the south, followed by Bengal,
Mithila and western India under the patron-
age of Hindu rulers. The Jains too, contrib-
uted to the growth of Sanskrit. Hemachandra
Suri was the most eminent of these. Little
attempt was made to translate Islamic works
of Persian literature into Sanskrit. Possibly,
the only exception was the translation of the
love story of Yusuf and Zulaikha written by
the famous Persian poet, Jami This might be
taken to be an index of the insularity of out-
look which had been mentioned by Albaruni
earlier.
Arabic and Persian Literature
Althoug the greatest amount of litera-
ture produced by the Muslims was in Arabic
which was the language of the Prophet and
was used as the language of literature from
Spain to Banghdad, the Turks who came to
India were deeply influenced by the Persian
language which had become the literary and
administrative language of Central Asia from
the tenth century onwards. In India, tghe use
of Arabnic remained largely confined to a
narrow circle of Islamic scholars and
philolophers, most of the original literature
on the subject being written in Arabic. A few
works on science and astronomy were also
translated into Arabic. In course of time, di-
gests of the Islamic law were prepared in
Persian with the help of Indian scholars. The
most well-known of these were prepared in
the reign of Firuz Tughlaq.
With the arrival of the Turks in India
during the tenth century, a new language in
Iran and Central Asia from the tenth century
onwards and some of the greatest poets of
the Persian language, such as Firdausi and
Sadi, lived and composed their works be-
tween the tenth and fourteenth centuries.
From the beginning the Turks adopted Per-
sian as the language of literature and admin-
istration in the country. Thus, Lahore
emerged as the first centre for the cultiva-
tion of the Persian language. However, the
most notable Persian writer of the period was
Amir Khusrau. Born in 1252 at Patiali (near
Badayun in western Uttar Pradesh), Amir
Khusrau took pride in being an Indian. He
LITERATURE
Gist of NCERT (History)
says: I have praised India for two reasons.
First, because India is the land of tmy birth
and our country. Love of the country is an
important obligation... Hindustan is like
heaven. Its climate is better than that of
Khurasan... it is green and full of flowers all
the year round... The brahmanas here are as
learned as Aristotle and there are many schol-
ars in various fields...
Khusrau has praised the Indian lan-
guages, including Hindi (which he calls
Hindavi). He was also an accomplished mu-
sician and took part in religious musical gath-
erings (ama) organised by the famous Sufi
saint, Nizamuddin Auliya. Khusrau it is said,
gave up his life the day after he learnt of the
death of his pir. Nizamuddin Auliya (1325).
He was buried in the same compound.
Apart from poetry, a strong school of
history writing in Persian developed in In-
dia during the period. The most famous his-
torians of this period were Ziauddin Barani,
Afif and Isami.Through the Persian language,
Indian was able to develop close cultural re-
lations with Central Asia and Iran. In course
of time, Persian became not only the language
of administration and diplomacy, but also the
language of the upper classes and their
dependents, at first in north India and later
of the entire country with the expansion of
the Delhi Sultanat to the south and the es-
tablishment of Muslim kingdoms in differ-
ent parts of the country.
At first, there was little interchange be-
tween the two. Zia Nakhshabi was the first
to translate into Persian Sanskrit stories
which were related by a parrot to a woman
whose husband had gone on a journey. The
book Tuti Nama (Book of the Parrot), writ-
ten in the time of Muhammad Tughlaq,
proved very popular and was translated from
Persian into Turkish and into many European
languages as Well. He also translated the old
Indian treatise on sexology, the Kok Shastra,
into Persian. Later, in the time of Firuz Shah,
Sanksrit books on medicine and music were
translated into Persian. Sultan Zain-ul-Abidin
of Kashmir had the famous historical work
Rajatarangini and the Mahabharata translated
into Persian. Sanskrit works on medicine and
music.
Regional Languages
During this period, literary works of
high quality were produced in many of the
regional languages as well. Amir Khusrau had
noted the existence of regional languages and
remarked: The use of the common language
by the Bhakti saints was, undoubtedly, an
important factor in the rise of these lan-
guages,. In fact, in many parts of the coun-
try, these early saints fashioned these lan-
guages for literary purposes. It seems that in
many regional kingdoms of the pre-Turkish
period, regional languages, such as Tamil,
Kan-nada, Marathi, etc. were used for ad-
ministrative purposes, in addition to San-
skrit. This must have been continued under
the Turkish rule, for we hear of Hindi know-
ing revenue accountants appointed in the
Delhi Sultanat. Later, when, the Delhi
Sultanat broke up, local languages, in addi-
tion to Persian, continued to be used for ad-
ministrative purpose in many of the regional
kingdoms. Thus, literature in Telugu devel-
oped in south India under the patronage of
the Vijayanagara rulers. Marathi was one of
the administrative languages in the Bahmani
kingdom, and later, at the court of Bijapur.
Nusrat Shah of Bengal had the Mahabharata
and the Ramayana translated into Bengali.
Maladhar Basu also translated the Bhagavata
Gita into Bengali under his partronage.
Literature Literature
WHEN HUMAYUN was retreating
from Bikaner, he was gallantly offered shelter
and help by the Rana of Amarkot. It was at
Amarkot, in 1542, that Akbar, the greatest of
the Mughal rulers, was born. When Humayun
died, Akbar was at Kalangaur in the Punjab,
commanding operations against the Afghan
rebels there. He was crowned at Kalanaur in
1556 at the young age of thirteen years and
four months.
Akbar succeeded to a difficult position.
The Afghans were still strong beyond Agra,
and were regrouping their forces under the
leadership of Hemu for a final showdown.
Kabul had been attacked and besieged.
Sikandar Sur, the defeated Afghan ruler, was
loitering in the Siwalik Hills, However,
Bairam Khan, the turor of the prince and a
loyal and favourite officer of Humayun, rose
to the occasion. He became the wakil of the
kingdom, with the title of Khan-i-Khanan and
rallied the Mughal forces. The threat from
the side of Hemu was considered the most
serious. Adil Shah had appointed him the
wazir with the title of Vikramajit, and
entrusted him with the task of expelling the
Mughals. Hemu captured Agra, and with an
army of 50,000 cavalry, 500 elephants and a
strong park of artillery marched upon Delhi.
In a well-contested battle, Hemu
defeated the Mughals near Delhi and
occupied the city. However, Bairam Khan
took energetic steps to meet the situation. His
bold stand put new heart into battle between
the Mughals and the Afghan forces led by
Hemu, took place once again at Panipat (5
November 1556). Although Hemu’s artillery
had been captured earlier by a Mughal
detachment, the tide of battle was in favour
of Hemu when an arrow hit him in the eye
and he fainted, the leaderless Afghan army
was defeated, Hemu was captured and
executed.
Early Phase -
Contest with the Nobility (1556-67)
Bairam Khan remained at the helm of
affairs of the empire for almost four years.
During the period, he kept the nobility fully
under control. Meanwhile, Akbar was
approaching the age of maturity. Bairam
Khan had offended many powerful persons
while he held supreme power. There was
friction on small points which made Akbar
realise that he could not leave the affiars of
the state in someone else’s hands for any
length of time.
Akbar played his cards deftly. He left
Agra on the pretext of hunting, and reached
Delhi. From Delhi he issued a farman
dismissing Bairam Khan from his office, and
calling upon all the nobles to come and
submit to him personally. Once Bairam Khan
MUGHAL EMPIRE
Gist of NCERT (History)
realised that Akbar wanted to take power in
his own hands, he was prepared to submit,
but his opponents were keen to ruin him.
They heaped humiliation upon him till fie was
goaded to rebel. Finally, Bairam Khan was
forced to submit Akbar received him
cordially, and gave him the option of serving
at the court or anywhere outside it or retiring
to Mecca.
Bairam Khan chose to go to Mecca.
However, on his way, he was assassinated at
Patau near Ahmedabad by an Afghan who
bore him a personal grudge. Bairam’s wife
and a young child were brought to Akbar at
Agra. Akbar married Bairam Khan’s widow
who was his cousin, and brought up the child
as his own son. This child later became
famous as Abdur Rahim Khan-i-Khanan and
held some of the most important offices and
commands in the empire. During Bairam
Khan’s rebellion, groups and individuals in
the nobility had become politically active.
They included Akbar’s foster-mother, Maham
Anaga, and her relations.
Though Maham Anaga soon withdrew
from politics, her son, Adham Khan was an
impetuous young man who assumed
independent airs when sent to command an
expedition against Malwa. Removed from the
command, he laid claim to the post of the
wazir, and when this was not conceded, he
stabbed the acting wazir in his office. Akbar
was enraged and had him thrown down from
the parapet of the fort so that he died (1561).
Between 1561 and 1567 they broke out in
rebellion several times, forcing Akbar to take
the field against them. Each time Akbar was
induced to pardon them. When they again
rebelled in 1565, Akbar was so exasperated
that he vowed to make Jaunpur his cpiatal
till he had rooted them out. Meanwhile, a
rebellion by the Mirzas, who were Timurids
and were related to Akbar by marriage, there
the areas west of modern Uttar Pradesh into
confusion. Encouraged by these rebellions,
Akbar’s half-” brother, Mirza Hakim, who
had seized control of Kabul, advanced into
the Punjab, and besieged Lahore. The Uzbek
rebels formally proclaimed him their ruler.
Early Expansion of the Empire (1560-76)
Following Bairam Khan’s regency, the
territories of the Mughal empire had been
expanded rapidly. Apart from Ajmer,
important conquests during this period
captured earlier were that of Malwa and
Gharh-Katanga. Malwa was being ruled, at
that time, by a young prince, Baz Bahadur.
The expedition against Malwa was led by
Admam Khan, son of Akbar’s foster-mother,
Maham Anaga. Baz Bahadur was badly
defeated (1561) and the Mughals took
valuable sopils, including Rupm-ati.
However, she preferred to commit suicide
to being dragged to Adham Khan’s karem.
Due to the senseless cruelties of Adham Khan
and his succeessor, there was a reaction
against the mughals which enabled Baz
Bahadur to recover Malwa.
After dealing with Bairam Khan’s
rebellion, akbar sent another expedition to
Malwa. Baz Bahadur had to flee, and for
some time he took shelter with the Rana of
Mewar. After wandering about from one area
to another, he finally repaired to Akbasr’s
court and was enrolled as a Mughal
mansabdar. The extensive country of Malwa
thus came under Mughal rule. At about the
same time, mughal arms overran the
kingdom of Gharh-Katanga. The kingdom of
Garh-Katanga included the Naramada valley
Mughal Empire
and the northern portions, of present
Madhya Pradesh. It had been welded
together by one Aman Das who flourished
in the second half of the fifteenth century.
Aman Das had helped Bahadur Shah of
Gujarat in the conquest of Raisen and had
received from him the title of Sangram Shah.
The kingdom of Ghar-Kartanga
included a number of Gond and Rajput
principalities. It was the most powerful
kingdom set up by the Gonds. We do not
know, however, to what extend these figures
are dependable. Sangram Shah had further
strengthened his position by marrying off his
son to a princess of the famous Chandella
rulers of Mahoba. This princess, who is
famous as Durgavati, became a widow soon
afterwards. But she installed her minor son
on the throne and ruled the country with
great vigour and courage. Meanwhile, the
cupidity of Asaf Khan, the Mughal governor
of Allahabad, was roused by the stories of
the fabulous wealth and the beauty of the
Rani. Asaf Khan advanced with 10,000 cavalry
from the side of Bundeikhand. Some of the
semi-independent rulers of Garha found it a
convenient moment to throw off the Gond
yoke. The Rani was thus left with a small force.
Though wounded, she fought on gallantly.
Finding that the battle was lost and that she
was in danger of being captured, she stabbed
herself to death. Asaf Khan then stormed the
capital, Chauragarh, near modern Jabalpur.
Out of all the plunder Asaf Khan sent only
two hundred elephants to the court, and
retained all the rest for himself.” Kamaladevi,
the younger sister of Rani, was sent to the
court.
When Akbar had dealt with the
rebellion of the Uzbek nobles he forced Asaf
Khan to disgorge his illegal gains. He
restored the kingdom of Garh-Katanga to
Chandra Shah, the younger son of Sangram
Shah, after taking ten forts to round off the
kingdom of Malwa.
During the next ten years, Akbar
brought the major part of Rajasthan under
his control and also conquered Gujarat and
Bengal. A major step in his campaign against
the Rajpur states was the siege of Chittor.
Chittor fell (1568) after a gallant siege of six
months. At the advice of his nobles, Rana
Udai Singh had retired to the hills leaving
the famous warriors, Jaimal and Patta, in
charge of the fort. The rajput warriors died
after extracting as much vengeance as
possible. In honour of the gallant Jaimal and
Patta, Akbar ordered that two stone statues
of these warriors, seated on elephants, be
erected outside the chief gate of the fort at
Agra.
The fall of Chittor was followed by the
conquest of Ranthambhor reputed to be the
most powerful forteress in Rajasthan. Jodhpur
had been conquered earlier. As a result of
these victories, most of the Rajpur rajas,
including those of Bikaner and Jaisalmer,
submitted to Akbar. Only Mewar continued
to resist.
In 1572, Akbar advanced on Ahmedabad
via Ajmer. Ahmedabad surrendered without
a fight. Akbar then turned his attention to
the Mirzas who held Broach, Baroda and
Surat. At Cambay, Akbar saw the sea for the
first time and rode on it in boat. A group of
Portuguese merchants also came and met him
for the first time. The Portuguese dominated
the Indian seas by this time, and had ambition
of establishing an empire in India. Akbar’s
conquest of Gujarat frustrated these designs.
Gist of NCERT (History)
While Akhar’s armies were besieging
Surat, Akbar crossed the river Mahi and
assaulted the Mirzas with a small body of
200 men which included Man Singh and
Bhagwan Das of Amber. For some time,
Akbar’s life was in danger. But the
impetuosity of his charge routed the Mirzas.
Thus, Gujarat came under Mughal control.
However, as soon as Akbar had turned his
back, rebellions broke out all over Gujarat.
Hearing the news, Akbar marched out of
Agra aride traversed across Rajasthan in nine
days by means of camels, horses and carts.
On the eleventh day, he reched Ahmedabad.
In this journey, which normally took six
weeks, only 3000 soldiers were able to keep
up with Akbar. With these he defeated an
enemy force of 20,000 (1573).
After this, Akbar turned his attention
to Bengal. The Afghans had continued to
dominate Bengal and Bihar. Internal fights
among the Afhans, and the declaration of
independence by the new ruler, Daud Khan,
gave Akbar the opportunity he was seeking.
In a stiff battle in Bihar in 1576, Daud Khan
was defeated and executed on the spot.
Thus ended the last Afghan kingdom in
northern India. It also brought to an end the
first phase of Akbar’s expansion of the
empire.
Administration
During the decade following the con-
quest of Gujarat, Akbar found time to look
at the administrative problems of the empire.
One of the most important problems
facing Akbar was the system of land revenue
administration. Sher Shah had instituted a
system by which the cultivated area was
menasured and a crop rate (ray) was drawn
up, fixing the dues of the peasant crop-wise
on the basis of the productivity of land.
Akbar adopted Sher Shah’s system. But it was
soon found that the fixing of central sched-
ule of prices often led to considerable delyas,
and resulted in great hardships to the peas-
antry.
Akbar, therefore, reverted to a system-
of Annual assessment. The quangos, who
were hereditary holders of land as well as
local officials conversant with local
conditions, were ordered to report on the
actual produce, state of cultivation, local
prices, etc. After returning from Gujarat
(1573), Akbar paid-personal attention to the
land revenue system, Officials called karoris
were appointed all over north India. They
were responsible for the collection of a crore
of dams (Rs 2,50,000), and also checked the
facts and figures supplied by the quangos.
On the basis of the information provided by
theist regarding the actual produce, local
prices, productivity, etc., in 1580, Akbar
instituted a new system called the dahsala.
Under this system, the average produce of
different crops as well as the average prices
prevailing over the last ten year were
calculated. One third of the average produce
was the state share. The slate demand was,
however, stated in cash. This was done by
converting the state share into money on the
basis of a schedule of avberage prices over
the past ten years. Thus, the produce of a
bigha of land under share was given in
manunds. But on the basis of average prices,
the state demand was fixed in rupees per
bigha.
There were number of advanteges of
this system. As soon as the area sown by the
peasant had been measured by means of the
bamboos linked with iron rings, the peasants
as well as the state knew what the dues were.
Mughal Empire
The peasant was given remission in the land
revenue if crops failed on account of drought,
floods, etc. The system of measurement and
the assessment based upon it is called the zabti
system. Akbar introduced this system in the
area from Lahore to Allahabad, and in Malwa
and Gujarat. The dahsala wsystem was a
further development of the zabti system.
A number of other systems of
assessment were also followed under Akbar.
The most common and, perhaps, the oldest
was called batai or ghalla-bakhshi. In this
system, the produce was divided between
the peasants and the state in fixed proportion.
The crop was divided after it had been
thrashed, or when it had been cut and tied
in stacks, or while it was standing in the field.
A third system which was widely used
in Akbar’s time was nasaq. It seems that it
meant a rough calculation of the amount
payable by the peasant on the basis of what
he had been paying in the past. It is also called
kankut.
Land which remained under cultivation
almost every year was called polaj. When it
remained uncultivated it was called  parati
(fellow). Parati land paid at the full (polaj)
rate when it was cultivated. Land which had
been fallow for two to three years was called
chachar, and if longer than that, banjar.
The dahsala was not a ten-year
settlment. Nor was it a permanent one, the
state retaining the right to modify it.
However, with some changes, Akbar’s
settlement remained the basis of the land
revenue system of the Mughal empire till the
end of the seventeenth century. The zabti
system is associated with Raja Todar Mal and
is sometimws called Todar mal’s bandobast.
Todar Mal was a brilliant revenue officer who
had first served under Sher Shah. But he was
only one of a team of brilliant revenue officials
who came to the forefront under Akbar.
Organisation of Government
Hardly any changes were made by
Akbar in the organisation of local government
The pargana and the sarkar continued as
before. The chief officers of the sarkar were
the faujdar and the amalguzar, the former
being in charge of law and order, and the
latter responsbile for the assessement and
collection of the land revenue. The territories
of the empire were divided into jagir, khalisa
and inam. Income from khalisa villages went
directly to the royal exchequer. The inam
lands were those which were allotted to
learned and religious men. The amalguzar
was required to exercise a general
supervision over all types of holdings so that
the imperial rules and regulations for the
assessment and collection of land revenue
were followed uniformly. Even there, Akbar
encouraged them to follow the imperial
system.
Akbar paid great attention to the
organisation of the central and provincial
governments. His system of central
government was based on the structure of
government which had eveolved under the
Delhi Sultanat, but the functions of the
vbarious departments were carefully
reorganised, and menticulous rules and
regulations were laid down for the conduct
of affairs. Thus, he gave a new shape to the
system and breathed new life into it.
The Central Asian and Timurid tradition
was of having an all-powerful wazir under
whom various heads of departments
cunfctions. He was the principal link between
the ruler and the administration. In course
Gist of NCERT (History)
of time, a separate department, the military
department, had come into being. The
judiciary had always been separate. Thus, in
practice, the concept of an all-powerful wazir
had been given up. However, in his capacity
as wakil, Bairam khan had exefcised the
power of an all-powerful wazir.
Akbar
reogganised
central
machinery of administration on the basis of
the division of power between various
departments, and of checks and balances.
While the post of wakil was not abolished, it
was stripped of all power and became largely
decorative. The head of the revenue
department continued to be the wazir. He
was not generally a person who held a high
position in the nobility. Many nobles held
mansabs which were higher than his./ Thus,
he was no longer the principal adviser to the
ruler, but an expert in revenue affairs. To
emphasise this point, Akbar generally used
the title of diwan or divan-i-ala in preference
to the word wazir. Sometimes, several
persons were asked to discharge the duties
of diwan jointly. The diwan was responsible
for all income and expenditure, and held
control over kahlisa, jagir and inam lands.
The head of the military department was
called the mir bakhshi. It was the mir bakhshi
and not the diwan who was considered the
head of the nobility. Therefore, only the
leading grandees were appointed to this post.
Recommendations for appointment to
mansabs or for promotions, etc. were made
to the emperor through the mir bakhshi.
Once the emperor had accepted a
recommendation, it was sent to the diwan
for confirmation and for assigning a jagir to
the appointee. The same procedure was
followed in case of promotions.
The mir bakhshi was also the head of
the intelligence and information agenceies of
the empire. Intelligence officers (barids) and
news reporters (waqia-navis) were posted to
all parts of the empire. There reports were
presented to the emperor at the court
through the mir bakhshi.
It will thus be seen that the diwan and
the mir bakhshi were almost on a par with,
and supported and checked, each other.
The third important officer was the mir
saman. He was in charge of the imperial
houshold, including the supply of all the
provisions and articles for the use of the
inmates of the harem or the female
apartments. The maintenance of etiquette at
the court, the control of the royal bodyguard,
etc, were all under the overall supervision of
this officer.
The fourth important department was
the judicial department headed by the chief
qazi. It fell into bad odoour due to the
corruption and venality of Akbar’s chief qazi,
Abdun Nabi.
CULTURAL AND RELIGIOUS DEVELOPMENTS
THERE WAS an outburst of many-sided
cultural activity in India under the Mughal
rule. The traditions in the field of
archietecture, painting, literature and music
created during this period set a norm and
deeply
influenced
succeeding
generations. It his sense, the Mughal period
can be called a second classical age following
the Gupta age in northern India. In this
cultural development, Indian traditions were
amalgamated with the Turko-Iranian culture
brought to the country by the Mughals. The
Timurid court at Samarqand had developed
as the cultural centre of West and Central
Asia. Babur was conscious of this cultural
Mughal Empire
heritage. He was critical of many of the
cultural forms existing in India and was
determined to set proper standards. The
development of art and culture in various
regiosns of India during the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries had led to a rich and
varied development from which it was
possible to draw upon. But for this, the
cultural efflorescence of the Mughal age
would hardly have been possible. Peoples
from different areas of India, as well as
peoples belonging to different faiths and
races
contributed
cultural
development in various ways. In this sense,
the culture developed during the period was
tending towards a truly national culture.
Architecture
The Mughals built magnificent forts,
palaces, gates, public buildings, mosques,
baolis (water tank or well), etc. They also laid
out many formal gardens with running water.
In facts, use of running water even in their
palaces and pleasure resorts was a special
feature of the Mughals. Babur was very fond
of gardens and laid out a few in the
neighbourhood of agra and Lahore. Some of
the Mughal gardens, such as the Nishat Bagh
in Kashmir, the Shalimar at Lahore, the Pinjor
garden in the Punjab foothilas, tec. have
survived to this day. A new impetus to
architecture was given by Sher Shah. His
famous mauoleum at Sasaram (Bihar) and his
mosque in the old fort at Delhi are considered
architectur\al marvels. They form the climax
of the pre-Mughal style of architecture, and
the starting point for the new.
Akbar was the first Mughal ruler who
had the time and means to undertake
construction on a large scale. He built a series
of forts, the most famous of which is the fort
at Agra. Built in red sandstone, this massive
fort had many magnificent gates. The climax
of fort building was reached at Delhi where
Shah Jahan built his famous Red Fort.
In 1572, Akbar commenced a palace-
cum-fort complex at Fatehpur Sikri, 36
kilometers from Agra, which he completed
in eight years. Built atop a hill, along with a
large artificial lake, it included many
buildings in the style of Gujarat and Bengal.
These included deep eaves, balconies, and
fanciful kiosks. In the Panch Mahal built for
taking the air, all the types of pillars uded in
various temples were employed to support
flat roofs. The Gujarat style of architecture
is used most widely in the palace built
probably his Rajput wife of ow wives.
Buildings of a similar type were also built in
the fort at Agra, though only a few of them
have survived. Akbar took a close personal
interest in the work of construction both at
Agra and Fatehpur Sikri. Persian or Central
Asian influence can be seen in the glazed blue
tiles used for decoration in the walls or for
tiling the roofs. But the most magnificent
building was the mosque and the gateway
to it called the Buland Darwaza or the Lofty
Gate, built to commemorate Akbar’s victory
in Gujarat. The gage is in the style of what is
called a half-dome portal. What was done was
to slice a dome into hald. The sliced portion
provided the massive outward facade of the
gate, while smaller doors could be made in
the rear wall where the dome and the floor
meet. This devise, borrowed from Iran,
became feature in Mughal buildings later.
With the consolidation of the empire,
the Mughal architecture reached its climax.
Towards the end of Jahangir’s reign began
the practice of putting up buildings, entirely
Gist of NCERT (History)
of marble and decorating the walls with floral
designs made of semi-precious  stones. This
method of decoration, called pietradura
became even more popular under Shah Jahjan
who used it on a large scale in the Taj Mahal,
justly regarded as a jewel of the builder’s art.
The Taj Mahal brought together in a pleasing
manner all the archietectural forms
developed by the Mughals. Humauyun’s
tomb built at Delhi towards the beginning of
Akbar’s reign, and which had a massive dome
of marble, may be considered a precursor of
the Taj. The double dome was another feature
of this building. This devise enabled a blgger
dome to be built with a smaller one inside.
the chief glory of the Taj is the massive dome
and the four slender minarets linking the
platform to the main building. The
decorations are kept to a minimum, delicate
marble screens, pietra dura inlay work and
kiosks (chahatris) adding to the effect. The
building gains by being placed in the mindst
of a formal garden.
Mosque-building also reached its climax
under Shah Jahan, the two most noteworthy
ones being “the Moti Masjid in the Agra fort
built like the Taj entirely in marble, and the
other the Jama Masjid at Delhi build tin red
sandstone. A lofty gate tall, slender minarets,
and a series of domes are a feature of the
Jama Masjid.
Although not many buildings were
build up by Aurangzeb who was economy-
minded, the Mughal archietctural traditions
based on a combination of Hindu and Turko-
Iranian forms and decorative designs, con-
tinued without a break into the eighteenth
and early nineteenth centuries. Thus, Mughal
traditions influenced the palaces and torts of
many provincial and local kingdoms. Even
the Harmandir of the Sikhs, called the
Golden, Temple at Amritsar which was re-
built several times during the period was
built on the arch and dome principle and in-
corporated many features of the Mughal tra-
ditions of architecture.
Painting
Mughals
distinctive
contribution in the field fo painting. They
introduced new themes depicting the court,
battle scenes and the chase, and added new
colours and new forms. They created a living
tradition of painting which continued to
work in different parts of the country long
after the glory of the Mughals had
disappeared. The richness of the style, again,
was due to the fact that India had an old
tradition of painting. The wall-paintings of
Ajanta are an eloquent indication of its vigour.
After the eighth century, the tradition seems
to have decayed, but palm-leaf manuscripts
and illustrated Jain texts from the thirteenth
century onwards show that the tradition had
not died.
Aprt from the Jains, some of the
provincial kingdoms, such as Malwa and
Gujarat extended their patronage to painting
during the fifteenth century. But a vigorous
revival began only under Akbar. While at the
court the court of the Shah of Iran, Humayun
had taken into his service two master painters
who accompanied him to India. Under therir
leadership, during the reign of Akbar,
painting was organised in one of the imperial
establishments (karkhanas). A large number
of painters from different parts of the
country were invited, many of them form
lowly castes. From the beginning, both
Hindus and Muslims joined in the work. Thus
Daswant and Basawan were two of the
famous painters of Akbars court. the scholl
Mughal Empire
developed rapidly, and soon became a
celebrated centre of production. Apart from
illustrating Persian books of fables, the
painters were soon assigned the task of
illustrating the Persian text of the
Mahabharata, the historical work Akbar
Nama, and others Indian themes and Indian
scenes and landscapes, thus, came in vogue
and helped to free the school from Persian
influence. Indian colours, such as peacock
blue, the Indian red, etc. began to be used.
Above all, the somewhat flat effect of the
Persian style began to be replaced by the
foundedness of the Indian brush, giving the
pictures a three-dimensional effect.
Mughal painting hunting, battle and
court scenes, under Jahangir, special progress
was made in portrait painting and painting
of animals. Mansur was the great name in
this field. Portrait painting also became
fashionable.
Under Akbar, European painting was
introduced at the court by the Portuguese
priests. Under their influence, the principles
of foreshortening, whereby near and distant
people and things could be placed in
perspective was quietly adopted.
While the tradition continued under
Shah Jahan, Aurangzeb’s lack of interest in
painting led to a dispersal of the artists to
different places of the country. This helped
in the development of painting in the states
of Rajasthan and the Punjab hills.
The Rajasthan style of painting
combined the themes and earlier traditions
of western India or Jain school of painting
with Mughal forms and styles. Thus, in
addition to hunting and court scenes, it had
paintings on mythological themes, such as the
dalliance of Krishna with Radha, or the
Barahmasa, that is, the seasons Ragas
(melodies). The Pahari school continued these
traditions.
Language, Literature and Music
The important rule of Persian and
Sanskrit as vehicles of thought and
government at the all India level, and the
development of regional languages, largely
as a result of the growth of the Bhakti
Movement, have already been mentioned.
Regional languages also developed due to the
patronage extended to them by local and
regional rulers.
These trends continued during the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. By the
time of Akbar, knowledge of Persian had
become so widespread in north India that he
dispensed with the tradition of keeping
revenue records in the local language
(Hindawi) in addition to Persian. However,
the tradition of keeping revenue records in
the local language continued in the Deccani
states till their extinction in the last quarter
of the seventeenth century.
Persian prose and poetry reached a
climax under Akbar’s reign. Abul Fazl who
was a great scholar and a stylist, as well as
the leading historian of the age, set a style of
prose-writing which was memulated for
many generations. The leading poet of the
age was his brother Faizi who also helped in
Akbar’s translation department. The
translation of the Mahabharata was carried
out under his supervision. Utbi and Naziri
were the two other leading Persian poets.
Though born in Persia, they were among the
many poets and scholars who migrated from
Iran to India during the period and made the
Mughal court one of the cultural centres of
the Islamic world. Hindus also contributed
Gist of NCERT (History)
to the growth of Persian literature. Apart
from literary and historical works a number
of famous dictionaries of the Persian
language were also compiled during the
period.
Although not much significant and
original work was done in Sanskrit during
the period, the number of Sanskrit works
produced during the period is quite
impressive. As befor, most of the works were
produced in south and east India under the
patronage of local rulers, though a few were
produced by brahmanas employed in the
translation department of the emperors.
Regional languages acquired stability
and maturity and some of the finest lyrical
poetry was produced during this period. The
dalliance of Krishna with Radha and the
milkmaids, pranks of the child Krishna and
stories from Bhagawat figure Iargely in
Iyrical poetry in Bengali” Oriya, Hindi,
Rajasthani and Gujarat! during this period.
Many devotional hymns to Rama were also
composed and  the Mahabharata translated
into the regional languages, especially if they
had not been translated earlier. A few
translations and adaptations from Persian
were also made Both Hindus and Muslims
contributed in this. Thus, Also composed in
Bengal and also translated from Persian. In
Hindi, the Padmavat, the story written by
the Sufi saint, Malik muhammad Jaisi, used
the attack of Alauddin Khalji on Chittor as
an allegory to expound Sufi ideas on the
relations of soul with God, along with Hidu
ideas about maya.
Medieval Hindi in the Brij form, mat is
the diaalect sopken in the neighbourhood of
Agra, was also patronised by the Mughal
emporors and Hindu rulers. From the time
of Akbar, Hindi poets began to be attached
to the Mughal court. A leading Mughal noble,
Abdur Rahim Khan-i-Khanan, produced a
fine blend of Bhakti poetry with Persian ideas
of life and human relations. Thus, the Persian
and the Hindi literary traditiona began to
influence each other. But the most influential
Hindi poet was Tulsidas whose hero was
Rama and who used a dialect of Hindi spoken
in the eastern parts of Uttar Pradesh. Pleading
for a modified caste system based not on
birth but on individual qualities, Tulsi was
essentially humanistic poet who upheld
family ideals and complete devotion to Rama
as a way of salvation open to all, irrespective
of caste.
In south India, Malyalam started its
literary career as a separate language in its
own right. Marathi reached its apogee at the
hands of Eknath and Tukaram. Asserting the
importance of Marath, Eknath exclaims. “If
Sanskrit was made by God, was Prakrit bom
of thieves and knaves? Let these errings of
vanity along. God is no partisan of tongues.
To Him Prakrit and Sanskrit are alike. My
language Marathi is worthy of expressing the
highest sentiments and is rich laden with the
fruits of divine knowledge.”
This undoubtedly expresses the
sentiments of all those writing in local
language. It also shows the confidence and
the status acquired by these languages. Due
to the writings of the Sikh Gurus, Punjabi
received a new life.
Music
Another branch of cultural life in which
Hindus and Muslims cooperated was music.
Akbar patronize Tansen of Gwalior who is
credited with composing many new melodies
(ragas). Jahangir and Shah Jahan as well as
Mughal Empire
many Mughal nobles followed this example.
There are many apocryphal stories about the
burial of music by the orthodox Aurangzeb.
Recent research shows the Aurangzeb
banished singing from his court, but not
playing of musical instruments. In fact,
Aurangzeb himself was an accomplished
veena player. Music in all forms continued to
be patronized by Aurangzeb’s queens in the
harem and by the noble. That is why the
larges number of books on classical Indian
music in Persian were written during
Aurangzeb’s reign. But some of the most
important development in the field of music
took place later on in the eighteenth century
during the reign of Muhammad Shah
(1719-48).
Gist of NCERT
Indian History
ISBN: 9789382732785
Book Code: F16
Gist of NCERT (History)
IMMENSE intellectual and cultural
strirings characterised 19th century India. The
impact of modern Western culture and
consciousness of defeat by a foreign power
gave birth to a new awakening. There was
an awareness that a vast country like India
had been colonised by a handful of foreigners
because of internal weaknesses of Indian
social structure and culture. Thoughful
Indians began to look for the strengths arid
weaknesses of their society and for ways and
means of removing the weaknesses. While a
large number of Indian refused to come to
terms with the West and still put their faith
in traditional Indian ideas and institutions,
others gradually came to hold that elements
of modern Western though bad to imbibed
for the regeneration of their society. They
were impressed in particular by modern
science and the doctrines of reason and
humanism. While differeing on the nature and
extent of reforms, nearly all 19th century
intellectuals shared the conviction that social
and religious reform was urgently needed.
Rommohan Roy
The central figure in this awakening was
Rammohan Roy, who is rightly regarded as
the first leader of modern India. Rammohan
Roy was moved by deep love for his people
and country and worked hard all his life for
their social, religous, intellectual and political
regeneration. He was pained by the
stagnation and corruption of contemporary
Indian society which was at that time
dominated by caste and convention. Popular
religion was full of superstitions and was
exploited by ignorant and corrupt priests.
The upper classes were selfish and often
sacrificed social interest to their own narrow
interests. to their own narrow interests.
Rammohan Roy possessed great love and
respect for the traditional philosophic
systems of the East; but, at the same time, he
culture alone would Indian society. In
particular, he wanted his countrymen to
accept the rational and scientific approach and
the principle of human dignity and social
equality of all men and women. He also
wanted the introduction of Modern capitalsm
and industry in the country.
Rammohan Roy represented a synthesis
of the though of East and West. He was a
scholar who knew over a dozen languages
including Sanskrit, Persian, Arabic, English,
French, Latin , Greek-and Hebrew. As a
young man he had studied Sanskrit literature
and Hindu philosophy at Varansi and the
Quaran and Persian and Arabic literature at
Patna. He was also well-acquianted with
Jainism and other religious movements and
sects of India. Later he made an intensive
study of Western thought and culture. To
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL AWAKENING
IN THE FIRST HALF OF THE 19TH CENTURY
Social and Cultural Awakening in the First Half of the 19th Century
study the Bible in the original he learnt Greek
and Hebrew. In 1809 he wrote in Persian his
famous work Gift to Monotheists in which
he put forward weighty arguments against
belief in many gods and for the worship of a
single God.
He settled in Calcutta in 1814 and soon
attracted a band of young men with whose
cooperation he started the Atmiya Sabha.
From now on he carried on a persistent
struggle against the religious and social evils
which were widely prevalent among the
Hindus in Bengal, In particular he vigorously
opposed the worship of idols, the rigidity of
caste, and the prevalence of meaningless
religious rituals. He condemned the priestly
class for encouraging these practices. He held
that all the principal ancient texts of the
Hindus preached monotheism or worship of
one God. He published the Bengali translation
of the Vedas and of five of the principal
Upanishads to prove his point. He also wrote
a series of trans and pamphlets in defence of
monotheism.
While citing ancient authority for his
philosophical views, Rammohan Roy relied
ultimately on the power of human reason
which was in his view the final touchstone of
the truth of any doctrine, Eastern or Western.
He believed that the philosophy of Vedanta
was based on this principle of reason. In any
case, one should not hesitate to depart from
holy books, scriptures and inherited
traditions if human reason so dictates and if
such traditions are proving harmful to the
society, But Rammohan Roy did not confine
his application of the rational approach to
Indian religions and traditions alone. In this
he disappointed his many missionary friends
who had hoped that his rational critique of
Hinduism would lead him to embrace
Christianity, Rammohan Roy insisted on
applying rationalism to Chirstianity too,
particularly to the elements of blind faith in
it. In 1820, he published his Precepts of Jesus
in which he tried to separate the moral and
philosophic meassage of the New Testament,
which he praised, from its miracle stories. He
wanted the high moral message of Christ to
be incorporated in Hinduism. This earned for
him the hostility of the missionaries.
Thus, as far as Rammohan was con-
cerned there was to be so blind reliance on
India’s own past or blind aping of the West.
On the other hand, he put forward the idea
that new India, guided few reasons should
acquire and treasure all that was best in the
East and the West, Thus he w-anted India to
learn from the West; but this learning was to
be an intellectual and creative process
through which  India culture and thought
were to be renovated; it was not to be an
imposition of Western culture on India. He,
threfore, stood for the reform of Hinduism
and opposed its supresession Christianity. He
vigorously defended Hindu religion and
philosophy from the ignorant attacks of the
missionaries at the same time. He adopted
an extremely friendly attitude towards other
relgions. He believed that basically all
regligions prereach a common message and
that their followers are all brothers under the
skin.
All his life Rammohan Roy paid heavily
for his daring religious outlook. The
orthodox condemned him for criticizing
idolatry and for his philosophic aminiration
of Christianity and Islam. They organized a
social boycott against him in which even his
mother joined. He was branded a heretic and
an outcaste.
Gist of NCERT (History)
In 1828 he founded a new religious
society, the Brahma Sabha, later known as the
Brahmo Samaj, whose purpose was to be
based on the twin pillars of reason, and the
Vadas and Upanishads. It was also to
incorporate the teachings of other religions.
The Brahmo Samaaj laid emphasis on human
dignity, opposed idolatry, and criticized such
social evils as the practice of sati.
Rammohan Roy was great thinker. he
was also a man of action. There was hardly
any aspect of nation-building which he left
untouched. In fact, just as he began the reform
of Indian society. The best example of his life-
long crusade against social evils was the
historic agitation he organized against the
inhuman custom of women becoming sati.
Beginning in 1818 he set out to rouse public
opinion on the question. On the one hand he
showed by citing the authority of the oldest
sacred books that the Hindu religion at its
best was opposed to the practice; on the other,
he appealed to the reason and humanity and
compassion of the people. He visited the
burning ghats at Calcutta to try to persuad
the relatives of widows to give up their plan
of self-immolation. He organized groups of
like minded the relatives of widows to give
up their plan of self-immolation. He
organized groups of like-minded people to
keep a strict check on such, performances and
to prevent any attempt to force the widows
to become sati. When the orthodox Hindus
petitioned to Parliament to withhold its
approval of Bentick’s action of banning the
rite of sati, he organized a counter-petition
of enlightened Hindus in favour of Bentick’s
action.
He was a stout champion of women’s
rights. He condemned the subjugation of
women and opposed the prevailing idea that
women were inferior to men in intellect or
in a moral sense. He attacked polygamy and
the degraded state to which widows were
often reduced. To raise the status of women
he demanded that they be given the right of
inheritance and property.
Rammohan Roy was one of the earliest
propagators of modern education which he
looked upon as a major instrument for the
spread of modern ideas in the country. In
1817, David hare, who had come out to India
in 1800 as a watchmaker but who spent his
entire life in the promotion of modern
education in the country founded the famous
Hindu College. Rammohhun Roy gave most
enthusiastic assistance to Hare in this and his
other educational projects. In addition, he
maintained at his own cost an English school
in Calcutta from 1817 in which, among other
subjects, mechanics and the philosophy of
Voltaire were taught. In 1825 he established
a Vedanta College in which courses both in
India learning and in Western social and
physical sciences were offered.
Rammohan Roy was equally keen on
making Bengali the vehicle of intellectual
intercourse in Bengal. He compiled a Bengali
grammar. Through his translations,
pamphlets and journals he helped evolve a
modern and elegant prose style for that
language. Rammohan represented the first
glimmerings of the rise of national
consciousness in India.
The vision of an independent and
resurgent India guided his thoughts and
actions. He believed that by trying to weed
out corrupt elements form Indian religions
and society and by preaching the Vedantic
message of worship of one God he was laying
Social and Cultural Awakening in the First Half of the 19th Century
the foundations for the unity of Indian society
which was divided into divergent groups. In
particular he opposed the rigidities of the
caste system which he declared, “has been
source of want of unity among us”. He
believed that the caste system was doubly
evil: it created inequality and it divided
people and “deprived them of patriotic
feeling”. Thus, according to him one of the
aims of religious reform was political uplift.
Rammohan Roy was a pioneer of Indian
journalism. He brought out journals in
Bengali, Persian, Hindi and English to spread
scientific; literary and political knowledge
among the people, to educate public opinon
on topics of current interest, and to represent
popular demands and grievances before the
Government.
He was also the initiator of public
agitation on political question in the country.
He condemned the oppressive practices of
the Bengal zamindars which had reduced the
peasants to a miserable condition. He
demanded that the maximum rents paid by
the actual cultivators of land should be
permanently fixed so that they too would
enjoy the benefits of the Permanent
Settlement of 1793. He also protested against
the attempts to impose taxes on taxes on tax-
free lands. He demanded the abolition of the
Company’s trading rifht and the removal of
heavy export duties on Indian goods. He also
raised the demands for the Indianization of
the superior services; separation of the
executive and the judiciary, trial by jury, and
judicial equality between Indians and
Europeans.
Rammohan was a firm believer in
internationalism and in free cooperation
“between nations. Feet Rabindranath Tagore
has rightly remarked: “Rammohan was the
only person in his time, in the whole world
of man, to realize completely the significance
of the Modern Age. He knew that the ideal
of human civilization does not lie in the
isolation of Independence, but in the
brotherhood of interdendence of individuals
as wail as nations in all spheres of thought
and activity”. Rammohan Roy took a keen
interest in international events and
everywhere he supported the cause of liberty
democracy, and nationalism and opposed
injustices oppression and tyranny in every
form. The new of the failure of the Revolution
in Naples in 1821 made him so sad that fee
cancelled all his social engagements on the
other hand he celebrated the success of the
Revolution in Spanish America in 1823 by
giving a public dinner. He condemned the
miserable condition of Ireland under the
oppressive regime of absentee English
landlordism. He publicly declared that the
would emigrate from the British Empire if
Parliament failed to pass the Reform Bill.
Rammohan was fearless as a lion. He
did not hesitate to support a just cause. All
his life he fought against social injustice and
inequality even at great personal loss and
hardship. In his life of service to society he
often clashed with his family, with rich
zamindars and powerful missionaries, and
with high officials and foreign, authorities.
Yet he never showed fear nor sharank from
his chosen course.
Rammohan was the brightest star in the
Indian sky during the first falf of the 19th
century, but he was not a lone star. He had
many distinguished associates, followers and
successors. In the field of education he was
greatly helped by the Dutch watchmaker
Gist of NCERT (History)
David Hare and the Scottish missionary
Alexander Duff. Dwarkanath Tagore was the
foremost of his Indian associates. He other
prominent followers were Prasanna Kumar
Tagore, Chandrashekhar Deb and Tarachand
Chakravarti, the first secretary of the Brahma
Sahha.
Derozio and Young Bengal
A radical trend arose among the Bengali
intellectuals during the late 1820s and the
1830s. This trend was more modern than even
Rammohan Roy’s and was known as the
Young Bengal movement. Its leader and in-
spirer was the young Anglo-Indian. Henry
Vivian Derozio who was born in 1809 and
who taught at Hindu College from 1826 to
1831. Derozio possessed a dazzling intellect
and followed the most radical views of the
time drawing his inspiration from the great
French Revolution. He was a brillinat teacher
who, in spite of his youth, attached to him-
self a host of bright and droing students. He
inspired these students to think rationally and
freely, to question all authority, to love lib-
erty, equality and freedom, and to worship
truth. Derozio and his famous followers,
known as the Derozians and Young Bengal,
were fiery patriots. Derozio was perhaps the
first nationalist poet of modern India.
Derozio was removed from the Hindu
College in 1831 because of his radicalism and
died to cholera soon after at the young age
of 22. The Derozians attacked old and
decadent customs, rites and traditions. They
were passionate advocates of women’s rights
and demanded education for them. They did
not, howeever, succeed in creating a
movement because social conditions were not
yet ripe for their ideas to flourish. They did
not take up the peasant’s cause and there was
no other class or group in Indian society at
the time which could support their advanced
ideas. Moreover they foregot to maintain
their links with the people. In fact, their
radicalism was bookish; they failed to come
to grips with the Indian reality. Even so, the
Derozians carried forward Rammohan’s
tradition of educating the people in social,
economic and political questions through
newspapers,
pamphlets
public
associations. They carried on public agitation
on public questions such as the revision of
the Company’s Charter, the freedom of the
Press, better treatment for Indian labour in
British colonies abroad, trial by fury,
protection of the Press, better treatment for
Indian labour in British colonies abroad, trial
by fury, protection of the ryots from
oppressive zamindars, and employment of
Indians in the higher grades of government
services. Surendranath Banerjee, the famous
leader of the nationalist movement, described
the Derozians as “the pioneeers of the modern
civilization of Bengal, the conscript fathers
of our race whose virtues will excite
veneration and whose failings will be treated
with gentlest cosideration”.
Debendranath
Tagore and Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar
The Branhamo Samaj had in the
meanwhile continued to exist but without
much life till Debendranath Tagore, father of
Rabindranath Tagore, revitalized it.
Debendranath was a product of the best in
the traditional Indian learning and the new
thought of the West. In 1839 he founded the
Tatvabodhini Sabha to propagate Rammohan
Roy’s ideas. In time it came to include most
of the prominent followers of Rammohan and
Derozio and other independent thinkers like
Social and Cultural Awakening in the First Half of the 19th Century
Iswar Chandra Vidyasagar and Akshay
Kumar Dutt. The Tatvabodhini Sabha and its
organ the Tatvabodhini Patrika promoted a
systematic study of India’s past in the Bengali
language. It also helped spread a rational
outlook among the intellectuals of Bengal. In
1843 Debendranath Tagore reorganised the
Brahmo Samaj and put new life into it. The
samaj actively supported the movement for
widow remarriage, abolition of polygamy
women’s education improvement of the
ryots condition and temperance.
The next towering personality to appear
on the Indian scene was Pandit Ishwar
Chandra Vidyasagar, the great scholar and
reformer. Vidyasagar dedicated his entire life
to the cause of social reform. Born in 1820 in
a very poor family, he struggled through
hardship to educate himself and in the end
rose in 1851 to the position of the principal
ship of the Sanskrit College Though he was a
great Sanskrit scholar, his mind was open to
the best in Western thought, and he came to
represent a happy blend of Indian and
Western culture. His greatness lay above all
in his streling character and shining intellect.
Possessed of immense courage and a fearless
mind he practised what he believed. There
was no lag between his beliefs and his action,
between his thought and his practice. He was
simple in dress and habits and direct in his
manner. He was a great humanist who
possessed immense sympathy for the poor,
the unfortunate and the oppressed.
In Bengal, innumerable strories
regarding his high character, moral qualities
and deep humanism are related till this day.
He resigned from government service for he
would not tolerate undue official interference.
His generosity to the poor was fabuulous.
He seldom possessed a warm coat for he
inviriably gave it to the first naked beggar
he met on the street.
Vidyasagar’s contribution to the mak-
ing of modern India is many sided. He
evolved a new methodology of teaching San-
skrit. He wrote a Bengali primer whiche is
used till this day. By his writings he helped
in the evolution of a modern prose style in
Bengali. He opened the gates of the Sanskrit
college to non-brahmin students for he was
opposed to the monopoly of Sanskrit studies
that the priestly caste was enjoy at the time.
He was determined to break the priestly
monoploy of scriptural knowledge. To  free
Sanskrit studies from the harmful effects of
self-imposed isolation, he introduced the
study of Wester though in the Sanskrit Col-
lege. He also helped found a college which is
now named after him.
Above all Vidyasagar is remembered
gratefully by his countrymen for his
contribution to the uplift of India’s down
trodden womanhood. Here he proved a
worthy successor to Rammohun Roy. He
waged a long struggle in favour of widow
remarriage. His humanism was aroused to
the full by the sufferings of the Hindu
widows. To improve their lot he gave his all
and virtually ruined himself. In 1855, he raifed
his powerful voice, backed by the weight of
immense traditional learning in favour of
widow remarriage. Soon a powerful
movement in favour of widow remarriage
was started which continues till this day.
Later in the year 1855, a large number of
petitions from Bengal, Madras, Bombay,
Nagpur and other cities of India were
presented to the Government asking it to
pass an act legalising the remarriage of
widows. This agitation was successful and
Gist of NCERT (History)
such a law was enacted. The first lawful
Hindu widow remarriage among the upper
castes in our country was celebrated in
Calcutta on 7 December 1856 under the
inspiration and superivision of Vidyasagar.
Widows of many other castes in different
parts of the country already enjoyed this right
under customary law. An observer has
described the ceremony in the following
words:
For his advocacy of widow re-marriage,
Vidyasagar had to face the bitter enmity of
the orthodox Hindus, At times even his life
was threatened. But he fearlessly pursued his
chosen course. Through his efforts, which
included the grant of monetary help to needy
couples twenty-five widow-remarriages
were performed between 1855 and 1880.
In 1850, Vidyasagar protested against
child-marriage. All his life he campaigned
against polygamy. He was also deeply
interested in the education of women. As a
Government Inspector of Schools, he
organised thirty-five girls schools, many of
which he ran at his own expense. As Secretary
to the Bethune School he was one of the
pioneers of higher education for women.
Some even believed that educated
women would lose their husband. The first
steps in giving a modern education to girls
were taken by the missionaries in 1821, but
these efforts were marred by the emphasis
on Christian religious education. The
Bethune School had great difficulty in
securing students. The young students were
shouted at and abuded and sometimes even
their parents were subjected to social boycott.
Many believed that girls who had received
Western education would make slave of their
husbands.
Pioneers of Reform in Western India
The impact of Western ideas was felt
much earlier in Bengal than in Western India
which was brought under effective British
control as late as 1818, Bal Shastri Jambekar
was one of the first reformers in Bombay. He
attacked Brahmanical orthodoxy and tried to
reform popular Hinduism. In 1832, he started
a weekly, the Darpan, whith the objective of
chasing away the mist of effor and ignorance
which clouded men’s minds, and shedding
over them the light of knowledge, in which
the people of Europe have advanced so far
before the other nations of the world”. 1849,
the the Praramahansa Madali was founjded
in Maharashta. Its founders believed in one
God and were primarily interested in
breaking caster rules. At its meetings
members took food cooked by low-caste
people.
They also believed its permitting widow
remarriage and in the education of women.
Branches of the Mandali’s influence on young
people, R.G. Bhandarkar, the famous
historian, later recalled: “When we went for
long wals in the evening. we talked about
the evils of caste distinctions, how much
damage was done by this division between
high and low, and how true progess for this
country could never be acieved without
removing these distrinctions”. In 1848, several
educated young men formed the Students
Literary and Scientific Society, which had two
branches, the Gujarat and the Marathi Dnyan
Prasarak Mandalis. The Society organised
lectures on popular science and social
questions. One of the aims of the society was
to start shcool at Poona and soon many other
scholls came up. Among the active promoters
of the these schools were Jagannath Shankar
Social and Cultural Awakening in the First Half of the 19th Century
Seth and Bhau Daji. Phule was also a pioneer
of the widow remarriage movement in
Maharashtra. Vishnu Shastri Pundit founded
the Widow Remarriage Association in the
1850s Another prominent worker in this field
was Karsondas Mulji who started the Saiya
Prakash m Gujarati in 1852 to advocate
widow remarriage.
An outstanding champion of new
learning and social reform in Maharashtra
was Gopal Hari Deshmukh, who became
famous by the pen-name ‘Lokahitawadi’. He
advocated fee reorganisation of the Indian
society on rational principles m & modern
humanistic and secular values. Jotiba Phule,
born in a low caste Mali family, was also
acutely aware of the socially degraded
position of non-Brahmins and untouchables
in Maharashtra. All his life he carried on a
campaign against upper caste domination and
Brahmanical, supremacy.Dadabhai Naoroji
was another leading social reformer of
Bombay. He was one of the founders of an
association to reform the Zoroastrian religion
and the Parsi Law Association which agitated
for the grant of a legal status to women and
for uniform laws of inheritance and marriage
for the Parsis. From the very beginning, it
was, in the main, through the Indian
language press and literature that the
reformers, carried on their straggle. To
enable. To enable Indian languages to play
this role successfully, they undertook such
humdrum tasks as preparation of language
primers, etc. For example, both Ishwar
Chandra Vidyasagar and Rabindranath
Tagore wrote Bengali primers which are
being used till this day. In fact, the spread of
modern and reformist ideas among the mass
of people occurred primarily through Indian
languages.We should also remember that the
signiciance of the 19th century reformers lay
not in their number but in the fact that they
were the trend, setters-it was their thought
and activity that were to have decisive impact
on the making of a new India.
Gist of NCERT
Geography
ISBN: 9789382732761
Book Code: F17
Gist of NCERT (History)
The Revolt of 1857
A MIGHTY popular revolt broke out in
Northern and Central India in 1857 and
nearly swept away the British rule. It began
with a mutiny of the sepoys or the Indian
soldiers of the Company’s army but soon
engulfed wide regions and involved the
masses.
General Causes
The Revolt of 1857 was much more than
a mere product of sepoy discontent. It was
in reality a product of the character and
policies of colonial rule, of the accumulated
grievances of the people against the
Company’s administration and of their
dislike for the foreign regime. For over a
century, as the British had been conquering
the country bit by bit, popular discontent and
hatred against foreign, rule had been gaining
strength among the different sections of
Indian society. It was this discontent that
burst forth into a mighty popular revolt.
Perhaps the most important cause of the
popular discontent was the economic
exploitation of the country by the British and
the complete destruction of its traditional
economic fabric; both impoverished the vast
mass of peasants, artisans and handicrafts-
men as also a large number of traditional
zamindars and chiefs. We have traced the
disastrous economic impact of early British
rule in another chapter. Other general causes
were the British land and land revenue
policies and the systems of law and
administration. In particular, a large number
of peasant proprietors, subjected to
exorbitant land revenue demand, lost their
lands to traders and money lenders and
found themselves hopelessly involved in
debt. The new landlords, lacking ties of
tradition that had linked the old zamindars
to peasants, pushed up rents to ruinous
heights and evicted them in case of non-
payments. The economic decline of the
peasantry found expression in twelve major
and numerous minor-famines from 1770 to
1857. Similarly, many zamindars were
harassed by demands for higher land revenue
and threatened with forfeiture of their
zamindari lands and rights and loss of their
status in the villages. They resented their loss
even more when they were replaced by rank
outsiders — officials. merchants and money-
lenders. In addition, common people were
hard hit by the prevalence of corruption at
the lower levels of administration. The police,
petty officials and lower law courts were
notoriously corrupt. William Edwards, a
British official, wrote in 1859 while discussing
the causes of the Revolt that the police were
“a scourge to the people and that “their
oppressions and exactions form one of the
THE REVOLT OF 1857
The Revolt of 1857
chief grounds of dissatisfaction with our
government”. The petty officials lost no
opportunity of enriching themselves at the
cost of the ryots and the zamindars. The
complex judicial system enabled the rich to
oppress the poor. Flogging, torture and
jailing of the cultivators for arrears of rent
or land revenue or interest on debt were
quite common. Thus the growing poverty of
the people made them desperate and led them
to join a general revolt in the hope of
improving their lot.
Another basic cause of the unpopularity
of British rule was its very foreignness. The
British remained perpetual foreigners in the
country. They had a feeling of racial
superiority and treated Indians with
contempt and arrogance. As Sayyid Ahmad
Khan wrote later: “Even natives of the highest
rank never came into the presence of officials
but with an inward fear and trembling”. Their
main aim was to enrich themselves and then
go back to Britain along with their wealth.
The people of India were aware of this
basically foreign character of the new rulers.
They refused to recognize the British as their
benefactors and looked with suspicion upon
every act of theirs. They had thus a vague
sort of anti-British feeling which had found
expression even earlier than the Revolt in
numerous popular uprisings against the
British.
The annexation of Awadh by Lord
Daihousie in 1856 was widely resented in
India iii general and in Awadh in particular,
More specifically, it created an atmosphere
of rebellion in Awadh and in the Company’s
army. Daihousie’s action angered the
Company’s sepoys, 75,000 of whom came
from Awadh. Lacking an all-India feeling,
these sepoys had helped the British conquer
the rest of India. But they did possess regional
and local patriotism and did not like that their
homelands should come under the
foreigner’s- sway. Moreover, the annexation
of Awadh adversely affected the sepoy’s
purse. He had to pay higher taxes on the land
his family held in Awadh.
The excuse Dalhousie had advanced for
annexing Awadh was that he wanted to free
people
Nawab’s
mismanagement and taluqdars oppression,
but,, in practice, the people got no relief.
Indeed, the common man had now to pay
higher land revenue and additional taxes on
articles of food, houses, ferries, opium, and
justice. The dissolution of the Nawab’s
administration and army threw out of jobs
thousands of nobles, gentlemen and officials
together with their retainers and officers and
soldiers, and created unemploy-ment in
almost every peasant’s home. These
dispossessed taluqdars, numbering nearly
21,000, anxious to regain their lost estates and
position, became the most dangerous
opponents of the British rule. The annexation
of Awadh, along with the other annexations
of Dalhousie, created panic among rulers of
the native states. This policy of annexation
and subordination was, for example, directly
responsible for making Nana Sahib, the Rani
of Jhansi and Bahadur Shah their staunch
enemies. Nana Sahib was the adopted son of
Baji Rao II, the last Peshwa. The British
refused to grant for Nana Sahib the pension
they were paying to Baji Rao II, the last
Peshwa, and forced him to live at Kanpur,
far away from his family seat at Poona.
Similarly, the British insistence on the
annexation of Jhansi -incensed the proud Rani
Gist of NCERT (History)
Lakshmibai who wanted her adopted son to
succeed her deceased husband. The house of
the Mughals was humbled when Dalhousie
announced in 1849 that the successor to
Bahadur Shah would have to abandon the
historic Red Fort and move to a humbler
residence at the Qutab on the outskirts in
1856, Canning announced that after Bahadus
Shah’s death the Mughals would lose the title
of kings and would be known as mere
princes.
An important factor in turning the
people against British rule was their fear that
it endangered their religion. This fear was
largely due to the activities of the Christian
missionaries who were “to be seen
everywhere — in the schools, in the hospitals,
in the prisons and at the market places”.
These missionaries tried to convert people
and made violent and vulgar public attacks
on Hinduism and Islam. The actual
conversions made by them appeared to the
people as living proofs of the threat to their
religion. Popular suspicion that the alien
Government supported the activities of the
missionaries was strengthened by certain acts
of the Government and the actions of some
of its officials. In 1850, the Government
enacted a law which enabled a convert to
Christianity to inherit his ancestra1property.
Moreover, the Government maintained at its
cost chaplains or Christian priests in the army.
Many officials, civil as well as military,
considered it their religious duty to
encourage missionary propaganda and to
provide instruction in Christianity in
government schools and even in jails.
The conservative religious and social
sentiments of many people were also hurt by
some of the humanitarian measures which the
Government had undertaken on the advice
of Indian reformers. They believed that an
alien Christian government had no right to
interfere in their religion and customs. The
abolition of the custom of Sati, the legalisation
of widow remarriage, and the opening of
Western education to girls appeared to them
as examples of such undue interference. The
Revolt of 1857 started with the mutiny of the
Company’s sepoys. The sepovs were after all
a part of Indian society and, therefore, felt
and suffered to some extent what other
Indians did. The hopes, -sires, and, despairs
of the other sections of society, especially the
peasantry, were reflected in them. an Act was
passed under which every new recruit under
took to serve even oversas. if required. This
hurt the sepoys sentiments as, according to
the current religious beliefs of the Hindus,
travel across the sea was forbidden and led
to loss of caste. The sepoys also had
numerous other grievances. A wide gulf had
come .‘into existence between the officers and
the sepoys who were often treated with
contempt by their British officers. A more
immediate cause of the sepoys’ dissatisfaction
was the recent order that they would not be
given the foreign sendee allowance (baita)
when serving in Sindh or in the Punjab. This
order resulted in a big cut in the salaries of a
large number of them. The annexation of
Awadh, the home of many sepoys, further
inflamed their feelings.
The Immediate Cause
By 1857, the material for a mass up-
heaval was ready, only a spark was needed
to set it afire, The episode of the greased car-
tridges provided this spark for the sepoys
and their mutiny provided the general popu-
lace the occasion to revolt. The new Enfield
The Revolt of 1857
rifle had been first introduced in the army.
Its cartridges had a greased paper cover
whose end had to be bitten off before the
cartridge was loaded into the rifle. The grease
was in some instances composed of beef and
pig fat. The sepoys, Hindu as well as Mus-
lim, were enraged. The use of the greased
cartridges would endanger their religion.
Many of them believed that the Government
was deliberately trying to destroy their reli-
gion and convert them to Christianity. The
time to rebel had come.
The Beginning and Course of the Revolt
The Revolt began at Meerut, 58 km from
Delhi, on 10 May 1857 and then, gathering
force rapidly it cut across Northern India as
if like sword, It soon embraced a vast area
form the Punjab in the north and the Narmada
in the south to Bihar in the east and Rajputana
in the west.
Even before the outbreak at Meerut,
Mangal Pande had become a martyr at
Barrackpore. Mangal Pande, a young soldier,
was hanged on 29 March 1857 for revolting
single-handed and attacking his superior
officers. And then came the explosion at
Meerut. On 24 April, ninety men of the 3rd
Native Cavalry refused to accept the greased
cartridges. On 9 May, eighty-five of them
were dismissed, sentenced to 10 years
imprisonment and put into fetters. This
sparked off a general mutiny among the
Indian soldiers, stationed at Meerut. The
very next day, on 10 May, they released their
imprisoned comrades, killed their officers,
and unfurled the banner of revolt. As if
drawn by a magnet, they set off for Delhi
after sunset. When the Meerut soldiers
appeared in Delhi the next morning, the local
infantry joined them, killed their own
European officers, and seized the city.
The rebellious soldiers now proclaimed
the aged and powerless Bahadur Shah the
Emperor of India Delhi was soon to become
the centre of the Great Revolt and Bahadur
Shah its great symbol. This spontaneous
raising of the last Mughal king to the
leadership of the country was recognition of
the fact that the long reign of the Mughal
dynasty had made it the tracliti6nal symbol
of India’s political unity. With this single act,
the sepoys had trans-formed a mutiny of
soldiers into a revolutionary. This is why
rebellious sepoys from all over the country
automatically turned their steps towards
Delhi and all Indian chiefs who took part in
the Revolt hastened to proclaim their loyalty
to the Mughal Emperor. Bahadur Shah, in
turn, under the instigation and perhaps the
pressure of the sepoys, and alter initial
vacillation wrote letters to all the chiefs and
rulers of India urging them to organize a
confederacy of Indian states to fight and
replace the British regime.
The entire Bengal Army soon rose in
revolt which spread quickly. Awadh,
Rohilkhand, the Doab, the Bundelkhand,
Central India, large parts of Bihar, and the
East Punjab all shook off British authority. In
many of the princely states, rulers remained
loyal to their British overlord but the soldiers
revolted or remained on the brink of revolt.
Many of Indores troops rebelled and joined
the sepoys. Similarly over 20,000 of Gwalior’s
troops went over to Tantia Tope and the Rant
of Jhansi. Many small chiefs of Rajasthan and
Maharashtra revolted with the support of the
people who were quite hostile to the British.
Local rebellions also occurred in Hyderabad
and Bengal.
Gist of NCERT (History)
The tremendous sweep and breadth of
the Revolt was matched by its depth.
Everywhere in Northern and Central India,
the mutiny of the sepoys triggered popular
revolts of the civilian population. After the
sepoys had destroyed British authority, the
common people rose up in arms often fighting
with spears and axes, bows and arrows, lathis
and sickles, arid crude muskets. They took
advantage of the Revolt to destroy the
money-lenders’ account books and records
of debts. They also attacked the British-
established law courts, revenue offices
(tehsils) and revenue records, and thanas. It
is of some importance to note that in many
of the battles commoners far surpassed the
sepoys in numbers. According to one
estimate, of the total number of about 150.000
men who died fighting the English in Awadh,
over 100,000 were civilians.
The popular character of the Revolt of
1857 also became evident when the British
ferried to crush it. They had to wage a
vigorous and ruthless war not only against
the rebellious sepoys but also against- the
people of Delhi Awadh, North-Western
Provinces and Agra, Central lndias arid
Western Bihar, burning entire villages and
massacring villagers and urban people.
Much of the strength of the Revolt of
1857 lay in Hindu-Muslim unify Among the
soldiers and the people as well as among the
leaders there was complete cooperation as
between Hindus and Muslims. All the rebels
recognized Bahadur Shah, a Muslim, as their
Emperor. Also the first thoughts of the Hindu
sepoys at Meerut was to march straight to
Delhi. The Hindu and Muslim rebels and
sepoys respected each other’s sentiments. For
example, wherever the Revolt was successful,
orders were immediately issued banning
cow-slaughter out of respect for Hindu
sentiments. Moreover, Hindus and Muslims
were. equally well represented at all levels
of the leadership. The role of Hindu-Muslim
unity in the Revolt was indirectly
acknowledge later by Aitchison, a senior
British official, complained: “In this instance
we could not play off the Mohammedans
against the Hindus’. In fact the events of 1857
clearly bring cut that the people and politics
of India were basically not communal in
medieval times and before 1858.
The storm-centres of the Revolt of 1857
were at Delhi, Kanpur, Lucknow, Bareilly,
Jhansi, and Arrah in Bihar. At Delhi the
nominal and symbolic leadership belonged
to the Emperor Bahadur Shah, but the real
command lay with a Court of Soldiers headed
by General Bakht Khan who had led the
revolt of the Bareilly troops and brought
them to Delhi. In the British army he had
been an ordinary subedar of artillery. Bakht-
Khan represented the popular and plebeian
element at the headquarters of the Revolt.
The Emperor Bahadur Shah was perhaps the
weakest link in the chain of leadership of the
Revolt. His weak personality, old age and
lack of qualities of leadership, ctreated
political weakness at the nerve centre of the
Revolt and did incalculable damage to it.
At Kanpur the Revolt was led by Nana
Sahib, the adopted son of Baji Rao II, the last
Peshwa. Nana Sahib expelled the English
from help of the sepoys and proclaimed
himself the Peshwa. At the same time he
acknowledged Bahadur Shah as the Emperor
of India and declared himself to be his
Governor. The chief burden of fighting on
behalf of Revolt was Nana Sahib fell on the
The Revolt of 1857
shoulders of Tantia Tope, one of his most
loyal servants, Tantia Tope has won immortal
fame by his patriotism, determined lighting,
and skillful guerrilla operations. Azimullah
was another loyal servant of Nana Sahib. He
was an expert in political propaganda
Unfortunately, Nana Sahib tarnished his
brave record by deceitfully killing the British
garrison at Kanpur after he had agreed to
give them safe conduct.
The revolt at Lucknow was led by
Hazrat Mahal, the Begum of Awadh, who had
proclaimed her young son, Birjis Kadir, as the
Nawab of Awadh. Helped by the sepoys at
Lucknow, and by the zamindars and peasants
of Awadh, the Begum, organized an. all-out
attack on the British, Compelled to give up
the city, the latter entrenched themselves in
the Residency building. In the end, the siege
of the Residency failed, as the small British
garrison fought back with exemplary
fortitude and valour.
One of the great leaders of the Revolt
of l957s and perhaps one of the greatest
heroines of Indian history, was the young
Rani Lakshmibai of Jhansi. The young Rani
joined the rebels when the British refused to
acknowledge right to adopt an heir to the
Jhansi’s gaddi, annexed her state, and
threatened to treat her as an instigator of the
rebellion of the sepoys at Jhansi- The Rani
vacillated for some time. But once she had
decided to throw in her lot with the rebels,
she fought valiantly at the head of her troops.
Tales of her bravery and courage and
military’ skill have inspired her countrymen
ever since. Driven out of Jhansi by the British
forces after a fierce battle in which “even
women were seen working the batteries and
distributing ammunition’, she administered
the oath to her followers that ‘with our own
hands we shall not our Azadshahi
(independent rule) bury”. She captured
Gwalior with the help of Tantia Tope and her
trusted Afghan guards Maharaja Sindhia,
loyal to the British, made an attempt to fight
the Rani but most of his troops deserted to
her. Sindhia sought refuge with the English
at Agra. The brave Rani died fighting on 17
June 1858, clad in the battle dress of a soldier
and mounted on a companion, a Muslim girl.
Kunwar
Singh,
ruined
discontented zamindar of Jagdishpur near
Arrah, was the chief organizer of the Revolt
in Bihar. Though nearly 80 years old, he ‘as
perhaps the most Outstanding military leader
and strategist of the Revolt. Maulavi
Ahmudullah of Faizabad was another
outstanding leader of the Revolt. He was a
native of Madras where he had started
preaching armed rebellion. In January 1857
he moved towards the north to Faizabad
where he fought a large-scale battle against
a company of British troops sent to stop him
from preaching sedition When the general
revolt broke cut in May, he emerged as one
of its acknowledged leaders in Awadh. The
greatest heroes of the Revolt were, however,
the sepoys, many of whom displayed great
courage in the field of battle and thousands
of whom unselfishly laid down their lives.
More than anything else, it was their
determination and sacrifice that nearly led
to the expulsion of the British from India In
this patriotic struggle, they sacrificed even
their deep religious prejudices They had
revolted on the question of the greased
cartridges but now to expel the hated
foreigner they freely used the same
cartridges in their battles.
Gist of NCERT (History)
The Weaknesses of
the Revolt and its Suppression
Even though spread over a vast territory
and widely popular among the people, the
Revolt of 1857 could not embrace the entire
country or all the groups and classes of Indian
society- It did not spread to South India and
most of Eastern and Western India because
these regions had repeatedly rebelled earlier.
Most rulers of the Indian states arid the big
zamindars selfish to the core and fearful of
British might, refused to join in. On the
contrary, the Sindhia of Gwalior, the Holkar
of Indore, the Nizam of Hyderabad, the Raja
of Jodhpur and other Rajput rulers, the
Nawab of Bhopal, the rulers of Patiala,
Nabha, Jind, and other Sikh chieftains of
Punjab, the Maharaja of Kashmir, the Ranas
of Nepal, and many other ruling chiefs, and
a large number of big zamindars gave active
help to the British in suppressing the Revolt.
In fact, no more than one per cent of the chiefs
of India joined the Revolt. Governor General
Canning later remarked that these rulers and
chiefs “acted- as the breakwaters to the storm
which would have otherwise swept us in one
great wave”. Madras, Bombay Bengal and
the Western Punjab remained undisturbed,
even though the popular feeling in—these
provinces favoured ‘the rebels. Moreover,
except for the discon-tented and the
dispossessed zamiridars, the middle and
upper classes were mostly critical of the
rebels; most of the propertied classes were
either cool towards them or actively hostile
to them. Even many of the taluqdars (big
zamindars) of Awadh, who had joined the
Revolt, abandoned it once the Government
gave them an assurance that their estates
would be returned to them, This made it
very’ difficult for the peasants and soldiers
of Awadh to Sustain a prolonged guerrilla
campaign.
The money-lenders were the chief
targets of the villagers attacks. They were,
therefore, naturally hostile to the Revolt. The
merchants, too, gradually became unfriendly.
The rebels were compelled to impose heavy
taxation on them in order to finance the war
or to seize their stocks of foodstuffs to feed
the army. The merchants often hide their
wealth and goods and refused to give free
supplies to the rebels. The zamindars of
Bengal also remained loyal to the British.
They were after all a creation of the British.
Moreover, the hostility of Bihar peasants
towards their zamindars frightened the
Bengal zamindars. Similarly, the big
merchants of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras
supported the British because their main
profits came from foreign trade and
economic connections with the British
merchants.
The modern educated Indians also did
not support the Revolt. They were repelled
by the rebels appeals to superstitions and
their opposition to progressive social
measures. As we have seen, the educated
Indians wanted to end the backwardness of
their country. They mistakenly believed that
the British rule would help them accomplish
these tasks of moderni-zation while rebels,
led by zamindars, old rulers and chieftains
and other feudal elements, would take the
country backward. Only later did the
educated Indians learn from experience that
foreign rule was incapable of modernizing
the country and that it would instead
impoverish it and keep it backward. The
revolutionaries of 857 proved to be more far-
sighted in this respect; they had a better,
The Revolt of 1857
instinctive understanding of the evils of
foreign rule and of the necessity to get rid of
it. On the other hand, they did not realise, as
did the educated intelligentsia, that the
country had fallen prey to foreigners
precisely because it had stuck to rotten and
outmoded
customs,
traditions
institutions. They failed to; see that national
salvation lay not in going back to feudal
monarchy hut in going forward to a modern
society, a modern economy, scientific
education and modern political institutions.
In any case, it cannot be said that the
educated Indians were anti-national or loyal
to a foreign regime. As events after 1858 were
to show, they were soon to lead a powerful
and modern national movement against
British rule.
Whatever the reasons for the disunity
of Indians, it was to prove fatal to the Revolt.
But this was not the only weakness from
which the cause of the rebels suffered. They
were short of modern weapons and other
materials of var. Most of them fought with
such ancient weapons as pikes and swords.
They were also poorly organised. The sepoys
were brave and selfless but they were also
ill- disciplined. Sometimes they behaved
more like a riotous mob than a disciplined
army. The rebel units did not have common
plans of military action, or authoritative
heads, or centralized leadership. The
uprisings in different parts of the country
were completely uncoordinated. The leaders
were joined together by a common feeling
of hatred for the alien rule but by nothing
else. Once they overthrew British power from
an area, they did not know what sort of
political power or institutions to create in its
place. They were suspicious and jealous of
one another and often indulged in suicidal
quarrels. Similarly, the peasantry having
destroyed revenue records and money
lenders books, and overthrown the new
zamindars, became passive, not knowing
what to do next.
In fact, the weakness of the Revolt went
deeper than the failings of individuals. The
movement had little understanding of
colonialism, which had overpowered India,
or of the modern world. It lacked a forward-
looking programme, coherent ideology, a
political perspective or a vision of the future
society and economy. The Revolt represented
no societal alternative to be implemented
after the capture of power. The diverse
elements which took part in the Revolt were
united only by their hatred of British rule,
but each of them had different grievances and
differing conceptions of the politics of free
India. This absence of a modern and
progressive programme enabled the
reactionary princes and zamindars to seize
the levers of power of the revolutionary
movement. But the feudal character of the
Revolt should not be stressed over much.
Gradually the soldiers and the people were
beginning to evolve a different type of
leadership. The very effort to make the
Revolt a success was compelling them to
create new types of organisation. For
example, at Delhi, a court of administrators,
consisting of ten members, six army men and
four civilians, was established. All its
decisions were taken by a majority vote. The
court took all military and administrative
decisions in the name of the Emperor. Similar
efforts to create new organisational
structures were made in other centres of the
rebellion. As Benjamin Disraeli warned the
British Government at the time, if they did
not suppress the Revolt in time, they would
Gist of NCERT (History)
“find other characters on the stage, with
whom to contend, besides the princes of
India.
In the end, British imperialism, with a
developing capitalist economy and at the
height of its power the world over, and
supported by most of the Indian princes and
chiefs, proved militarily too strong for the
rebels. The British Government poured
immense supplies of men, money and arms
into the country, though Indians had later to
repay the entire cost of their own
suppression. The Revolt was suppressed.
Sheer courage could not win against a
powerful and determined enemy who
planned its every step. The rebels were dealt
an early blow when the British captured Delhi
on 20 September 1857 after prolonged and
bitter fighting. The aged Emperor Bahadur
Shah was taken prisoner. The Royal Princes
were captured and butchered on the spot.
The Emperor was tried and exiled to
Rangoon where he died in 1862, lamenting
bitterly the fate which had buried him Tar
away from the city of his birth. Thus the great
House of the Mughals was finally and
completely extinguished.
With the fall of Delhi the focal point of
the Revolt disappeared. The other leaders of
the Revolt carried on the brave but unequal
struggle, with the British mounting a
powerful offensive against them. John
Lawrence, Outram, Have lock, Neil,
Campbell, and Hugh Rose were some of the
British commanders who earned military
fame in the course of this campaign. One by
one, all the great leaders of the Revolt fell.
Nana Sahib was defeated at Kanpur. Defiant
to the very end and refusing to surrender,
he escaped to Nepal early in 1859, never to
be heard of again. Tantia Tope escaped into
the jungles of Central India where he carried
OR bitter and brilliant guerrilla warfare until
April 1859 when he was betrayed by a
zamindar friend and captured while asleep-
He was put to death after a hurried trial on
15 April 1859. The Rani of Jhansi had died on
the field of battle earlier on 17 June 1858. By
1859, Kunwar Singh, Bakht Khan, Khan
Bahadur Khan of Bareilly, Rao Sahib, brother
of Nana Sahib, and Maulavi Ahmadullah were
all dead, while the Begum of Awadh was
compelled to hide in Nepal.
By the end of 1859, Bntish authority
over India was fully re-established, but the
Revolt had not been in vain. It is a glorious
landmark in our history. Though it was a
desperate effort to save India in the old way
and under traditional leadership, it was the
first great struggle of the Indian people for
freedom from British imperialism, it paved
the way for the rise of the modern national
movement. The heroic and patriotic struggle
of 1857, and the series of rebellions preceding
it, left an unforgettable impression on the
minds of the Indian people, established
valuable local traditions of resistance to
British rule, and served as a perennial source
of inspiration in their later struggle for
freedom. The heroes of the Revolt soon
became household names in the country, even
though the very mention of their names was
frowned upon, by the rulers.
The Revolt of 1857
GROWTH OF NEW INDIA -
RELIGIOUS AND SOCIAL REFORM AFTER 1858
THE RISING tide of nationalism and
democracy, which led to the struggle for
freedom, also found expression in movements
to reform and democratise the social
institutions and religious outlook of the
Indian people. Many Indians realised that
social and religious reformation was an
essential condition for the all-round
development of the country on modern lines
and for the growth of national unity and
solidarity. The growth of nationalist
sentiments, emergence of new economic
forces, spread of education, impact of modern
western ideas and culture, and increased
awareness of the world not only heightened
the consciousness of the backwardness and
degeneration of Indian society but further
strengthened the resolve to reform.
After 1858, the earlier reforming ten-
dency was broadened. The work of earlier
reformers, like Raja Rammohan Roy and Pan-
dit Vidyasagar, was carried further by major
movements of religious and social reforms
Religious Reform
Filled with the desire to adapt their
society to the requirements of the modern
world of science, democracy and nationalism,
and determined to let no obstacle stand in
the way, thoughtful Indians set out to reform
their traditional religions, for religion was
in those times a basic part of peoples life and
there could be little social reform without
religious reform. While trying to remain true
to the foundations of their religions, they
remodeled them to suit the new needs of the
Indian people.
Brahmo Samaj
The Brahmo tradition of Raja Rammohan
Roy was carried forward after 1843 by
Devendranath Tagore, who also repudiated
the doctrine that the Vedic scriptures were
infallible, and after 1866 by Keshub Chandra
Sen. The Brahmo Samaj made an effort to
reform Hindu religion by removing abuses
and by basing it on the worship of one God
and on the teachings of the Vedas and
Upanishads even though it repudiated the
doctrine of the infallibility of the Vedas. It
also tried to incorporate the best aspects of
modern western thought.
Most of all it based itself on human
reason which was to be the ultimate criterion
for deciding what was worthwhile and what
was useless in the past or present religious
principles and practices. For that reason, the
Brahmo Samaj denied the need for a priestly
class for interpreting religious writings.
Every individual had the right and the
capacity to decide with the help of his own
intellect what was right and what was wrong
in a religious book or principle. Thus the
Brahmos were basically opposed to idolatry
Gist of NCERT (History)
and superstitious practices and rituals, in fact
to the entire Brahmanical system. They could
worship one God without the mediation of
the priests. The Brahmos were also great
social reformers. They actively opposed the
caste system and child-marriage and
supported the general uplift of women,
including widow remarriage, and the spread
of modern education to men and women.
The Brahmo Samaj was weakened by
internal dimensions in the second half of the
19th century. Moreover, its influence was
confined mostly to urban educated groups.
Yet it had a decisive influence on the
intellectual, social, cultural and political life
of Bengal, and the rest of India in the 19th
and 20th centuries.
Religious Reform in Maharashtra
Religious reform was begun in Bombay
in 1840 by the Parmahans Mandali which
aimed at fighting idolatry and the caste
system. Perhaps the earliest religious
reformer in western India was Gopal Hari
Deshmukh, known popularly as Lokahit
wadi, who wrote in Marathi, made powerful
rationalist attacks on hindu orthodoxy. and
preached religious anti social equality.
He also said that if religion did not
sanction social reforms then religion should
be changed, for after all religion was made
by human beings and scriptures, written long
ago. might not remain relevant to later times.
Later the Prarthana Samaj was started with
the aim of reforming hindu religious thought
and practice in the light of modern
knowledge. It preached the worship of one
God and tried to free religion of caste
orthodoxy and priestly domination. Two of
its great leaders were R G. Bhandarkar, the
famous Sanskrit scholar and historian, and
Mahadev Govind Ranade (1842-1901). It was
powerfully influenced by the Brahmo Samaj.
Its activities also spread to south India as a
result of the efforts of the Telugu reformer,
Viresalingam. One of the greatest rationalist
thinkers of modern India, Gopal Ganesh
Agarkar, also lived and worked in
Maharashtra at this time. Agarkar was an
advocate of the power of human reason. He
sharply criticised any blind dependence on
tradition or false glorification of India’s past.
Ramakrishna and Vivekananda
Ramakrishna Parmahamsa (1834-86 was
a saintly person who sought religious
salvation in the traditional ways of
renunciation, meditation and devotion
(bhakti). In his search for religious truth or
the realisation of God, he lived with mystics
of other faiths, Muslims and Christians. He
again and again emphasised that there were
many roads to God and salvation and that
service of men was service of God, for man
was the embodiment of God.
It was his great disciple, Swami Viveka-
nanda (1863-1902), who popularised his
religious message and who tried to put it in
a form that would suit the needs of
contemporary Indian society. Abode all,
Vivekananda stressed social action.
Knowledge unaccompanied by action in the
actual world in which we live was useless,
he said. He too, like his guru, proclaimed the
essential oneness of all religions and
condemned any narrowness in religious
matters. Thus, he wrote in 1898; “For our
own motherland a junction of the two great
systems, Hinduism and Islam is the only
hope’. At the same time, he was convinced
of the superior approach of the Indian
philosophical tradition. He himself
Growth of New India - Religious and Social Reform After 1858
subscribed to Vedanta which he declared to
be a fully rational system.
Vivekananda criticised Indians for
having lost touch with the rest of the world
and become stagnant and mummified. He
wrote: ‘The fact of our isolation from all other
nations of the world is the cause of our
degeneration and its only remedy is getting
back into the current of the rest of the world.
Motion is the sign of life.”
Vivekananda condemned the caste
system and the current Hindu emphasis on
rituals and superstitions, and urged the
people to imbibe the spirit of liberty, equality
and free-thinking.
Like his guru, Vivekananda was also a
great humanist. Shocked by the poverty,
misery and suffering of the common people
of the country.
The only God in whom I believe, the
sum total of all souls, and above all, my God
the wicked, my Cod the afflicted, my God
the poor of all races.
In 1897 Vivekanand founded the Rama-
krishna Mission to carry on humanitarian
relief and social work. The Mission had many
branches in different parts of the country had
carried on social service by opening schools,
hospitals and dispensaries, orphanages.,
libraries, etc. It thus laid emphasis not on
personal salvation but on social good or social
service.
Swami Dayanand and the Arya Samaj
The Arya Samaj undertook the task of
reforming Hindu religion in north India. It
was founded in 1875 by Swami (1824-83).
Swami Dayannd believed that selfish and
ignorant priests had perverted Hindu religion
with the aid of the Puranas which, he said,
were full of false teachings. For his own’
inspiration, Swami Dayanand went to the
Vedas which he regarded as infallible, being-
the inspired word of God, and as the fount
of all knowledge. He rejected such later
religious thought as conflicted with the
Vedas. This total dependence on the Vedas
and their infallibility gave his teachings an
orthodox colouring, for infallibility meant that
human reason was not to be the final deciding
factor. However, his approach had a
rationalist aspects because the Vedas, though
revealed were to be rationally interpreted by
himself and others, who were human beings.
Thus individual reason was the decisive
factor.
He believed that every person had the
right of direct access to God. Moreover,
instead of supporting Hindu orthodoxy, he
attacked it and led a revolt against it. The
teachings he derived from his own
interpretation
Vedas
consequently similar to the religious and
social reforms that other Indian reformers
were advocating. He was opposed to idolatry,
ritual and priesthood, and particularly to the
prevalent caste practices and popular
Hinduism as preached by brahmins. He also
directed attention towards problems of men
as they lived in this real world and away
from the traditional belief in the other world.
He also favoured the study of western
sciences. Interestingly enough, Swami
Dayanand had met and had discussions with
Keshab Chandra Sen, Vidyasagar, Justice
Ranade, Gopal Hari Deshmukh and other
modern religious and social reformers. In
fact, the ideas of the Arya Samaj with its
Sunday meeting resembled the practices of
the Brahmo Samaj and the Prarthana Samaj
in this respect.
Gist of NCERT (History)
Some of Swami Dayanand’s followers
later started a network of schools and colleges
in the country to impart education on
western lines. Lala Hansraj played a leading
part in this effort. On the other hand, in 1902,
Swami Shradhananda started the Gurukul
near Hardwar to propagate the more
traditional ideals of education.
The Arya Samajists were vigorotts
advocates of social reform and worked
actively to improve the condition of women,
and to spread education among them. They
fought untouchability and the rigidities of the
hereditary caste system. They were thus
advocates’ of social equality and promoted
social solidarity and “consolidation. They
also inculcated a spirit of self-respect and self-
reliance among the people. This promoted
nationalism. At the same time, one of the
Arya Samaj’s objectives was to prevent the
conversion of Hindus to other religions.
This led it to start a crusade against
other religions. This crusade became a
contributory factor in the growth of
communalism in India in the 20th century.
While the Arya Samaj’s reformist work
tended to remove social ills and to unite
people, its religious work tended, though
perhaps unconsciously, to divide the growing
national unity among Hindus, Muslims,
Parsis, Sikhs and Christians. It was not seen
clearly that in India national unity had to be
secular and above religion so that it would
embrace the people of all religions.
The Theosophical Society
The Theosophical Society was founded
in the United States by Madam H.P. Blavatsky
and Colonel H.S. Olcott, who later came to
India and founded the headquarters of the
Society at Adyar near Madras in 1886. The
Theosophist movement soon grew ‘in India
as a result of the leadership given to it by
Mrs. Annie Besant who had come to India in
1893. The Theosophists advocated the revival
and strengthening ancient religious of Hin-
duism Zoroastrianism and Buddhism. They
recognised the doctrine of the transmigra-
tion of the soul. ‘They also preached the uni-
versal brotherhood of man. As religious re-
vivalists, the Theoso-phists were not very
successful. But they made a peculiar contri-
bution to developments in modern India. It
was a movement led by westerners, who glo-
rified Indian religious and theosophical tra-
ditions. This helped Indians recover their self-
confidence, even though it tended to give
them a sense of false pride in their past great-
ness.
One of Mrs. Besants many achievements
in India was the establishment of the Central
Hindu School at Benaras which was later
developed by Madan Mohan Malaviya into
the Benaras Hindu University.
Syed Ahmad-Khan and the Aligarh School
Movements for religious reform were
late in emerging among the Muslims. The
Muslim upper classes had tended to avoid
contact with western education and culture,
and it was mainly after the Revolt of 1857
that modern ideas of religious reform began
to appear. A beginning in this direction was
made when the Muhammedan Literary
Society was founded at Calcutta in 1863. This
Society promoted discussion of religious,
social and political questions in the light of
modern ideas and encouraged upper and
middle class Muslims to take to western
education. The most important reformer
among die Muslims was Syed Ahmad Khan
(1817-98). He was tremendously impressed
Growth of New India - Religious and Social Reform After 1858
by .modern scientific thought and worked
all his life to reconcile it with Islam. This he
did, first of all, by declaring that the Quran
alone was the authoritative work for Islam
and all other Islamic writings were secondary.
Even the Quran he interpreted in the light of
contemporary rationalism and science. In his
view any interpretation of the Quran that
conflicted with human reason science or
nature was in reality a misister-pretation. Nor
were religious tenets immutable, he said. If
religion tenets change with time, it would
become fossilised as had happened in India.
All his life he struggled against blind
obedience to tradition, dependence on
custom, ignorance and irrationalism. He
urged the people to develop a critical
approach and freedom of thought So long as
freedom of thought is not developed, there
can be no civilised life,” he declared. He also
warned
against
fanaticism,
narrow
mindedness, and exclusiveness, and urged
students and others to be broadminded and
tolerant. A closed mind, he said, was the
hallmark of social and intellectual
backwardness.
Sayyid Ahmad Khan was a great
believer in religious toleration. He believed
that all religions had a certain underlying
unity which could be called practical
morality. Believing that a persons religion was
his or her private affair, he roundly
condemned any sign of religious bigotry in
personal relations. He was also opposed to
communal friction. Appealing to Hindus and
Muslims to unite.
Moreover, Hindus, Parsis and Christians
had freely contributed to the funds of his
college whose doors were also open to all
Indians. For example, in 1898, there were 64
Hindu and 285 Muslim students in the
college. Out of the seven Indian teachers, two
were Hindu, one of them being a Professor
of Sanskrit. However, towards the end of his
life, he been to talk of Hindu domination to
prevent his followers from joining the rising
national movement. This was unfortunate,
though basically he was not a communalist.
He only wanted the backwardness of the
Muslim middle and upper classes to go. His
politics were the result of his firm belief that
immediate political progress was not possible
because the British.
Government could not be easily
dislodged. On the other hand, any hostility
by the officials might prove dangerous to the
educational effort which he saw as the need
of the hour. He believed that only when
Indians had become as modern in their
thinking and actions as the English were,
could they hope to successfully challenge
foreign rule. He, therefore, advised all
Indians and particularly the educationally
backward Muslims to remain aloof from
politics for some time to come. The time for
politics, he said, had not yet come. In fact, he
had become so committed to his college and
the cause of education that he was willing to
sacrifice all other interests to them.
Consequently, to prevent the orthodox
Muslims from opposing his college, he
virtually gave up his agitation in favour of
religious reform. For the same reason, he
would not do anything to offend the
government and, on the other hand,
encouraged communalism and separatism.
This was, of course, a serious political error,
which was to have harmful consequences in
later years. Moreover, some of his followers
deviated from his broad-mindedness and
Gist of NCERT (History)
tended later to glorify Islam and its past
while criticizing other religions.
Sayyid Ahmads reformist zeal also
embraced the social sphere. He urged
Muslims to give up medieval customs ways
of thought and behaviour. In particular he
wrote in favour of raising women’s status in
society and advocated removal of purdah
and spread of education among women. He
also condemned the customs of polygamy and
easy divorce.
Sayyid Ahmad Khan was helped by a
band of Joyal followers who are collectively
describe as the Aligarh School. Chiragh Au,
the Urdu poet Altaf Husain Hali, Nazir
Ahmad and Maulana Shibli Nomani were
some of the other distinguished leaders of
the Aligarh School.
Muhammad Iqbal
One of the greatest poets of modern
India, Muhammad Iqbal (1876-1938) also
profoundly influenced through his poetry the
philosophical and religious outlook of the
younger generation of Muslims as well as of
Hindus. Like Swami Vivekananda, he
emphasised the need for constant change and
ceaseless activity and condemned resignation
contemplation, and quiet contentment. He
urged the adoption of a dynamic outlook that
would help change the world. He was
basically a humanist. In fact, be raised human
action to the status of a prime virtue. Man
should not submit to nature or powers that
be, he said, but should control this world
through constant activity. Nothing was more
sinful in his eyes than the passive acceptance
of things as they were. Condemning ritualism
and other-worldly attitude, he urged men to
work for and achieve happiness in this world
of the living. In his earlier poetry, he extolled
patriotism, though later he encouraged
Muslim separatism.
Religious Reform among the Parsis
Religious reform was begun among the
Parsis in Bombay in the middle of the 19th
century. In 1851, the Rehnumai Mazdayasan
Sabha or Religious Reform Association was
started by Naoroji Furdonji, Dadabhai
Naoroji, S.S. Bengalee, and others. It
campaigned against the entrenched
orthodoxy in the religious field and initiated
the modernization of Parsi social customs
regarding the education of women, marriage
and the social position of women in general.
In course of time, the Parsis became socially
the most westernized section of Indian society.
Religious Reform among the Sikhs
Religious reform among the Sikhs was
begun at the end of the 19th century when
the Khalsa College was started at Amritsar.
But the reform effort gained momentum after
1920 when the Akali Movement rose in the
Punjab. The main aim of the Akalis was to
purify the management of the gurudwaras
or Sikh shrines. These gurudwara had been
heavily endowed with land and money by
devout Sikhs But they had come to be
managed autocratically by Corrupt and
selfish mahants. The Sikh masses led by the
Akalis started in 1921 a powerful satyagraha
against the mahants and the Government
which aided them.
The Akalis soon forced the Government
to pass a new Gurudwara Act in 1922 which
was later amended in 1925. Sometimes with
to aid of the Act, but often through direct
action, the Sikhs gradually turned out of the
gurudwaras the corrupt mahants, even
though hundreds of lives had to be sacrificed
in the process.
Growth of New India - Religious and Social Reform After 1858
Apart from the reform movements and
individual reformers discussed above, there
were numerous other similar movements and
individuals during the 19th and 20th
centuries.
The religious reform movements of
modern tines had an underlying unity -most
of them were based on the twin doctrines of
Reason (Rationalism) and Humanism, though
they also sometimes tended to appeal to faith
and ancient authority to bolster their appeal.
Moreover, it was to the rising middle classes
and the modem educated intellectuals that
they appealed most. They tried to free from
anti-intellectual religious dogmas and blind
faith the human intellect’s capacity to think
and reason They opposed the ritualistic, su-
perstitious, irrational and obscurantist ele-
ments in Indian religions. Many of them aban-
doned, though to varying degrees, the prin-
ciple of authority in religion and evaluated
truth in any religion and its holy books by
its conformity to logic reasons, are science.
Some of these religious reformers
appealed to tradition and claimed that they
were merely reviving the pure doctrines,
beliefs and practices of the past. But, in fact,
the past could not be revived. Often there
was no agreed picture of the past. The
problems that an appeal to the past often
created were posed by Justice Ranade, who
has himself often asked the people to revive
the best tradition of the past, in the following:
What shall we revive? Shall we revive the
old habits of our people when the most sacred
of our castes indulged in all the abominations,
as we now understand them, of animal food
and intoxicating drink? Shall we revive the
twelve forms of sons, or eight forms of
marriage, which included capture, and
recogised
mixed
illegitimate
intercourse?... Shall we revive the hacatombs
of animals sacrificed from year’s end to
year’s end, in which even human beings were
not spared as propitiatory offering to God?
... Shall we revive the sati, and infanticide
customs?
And he came to the conclusion that the
society as a living organism is constantly
changing and can never go back to the past.
The dead and-the buried or burnt are dead,
buried, and burnt once for all, and the dead
past cannot, therefore, be revived.” he wrote.
Every reformer, who appealed to the past,
so interpreted it as to make it appear to agree
with the reforms he was suggesting. Often
the reforms and the outlook were new, only
their justification was based on an appeal to
the past. Many of the ideas which conflicted
with, modern scientific knowledge were
usually declared to be a later accretion or
misinter-pretation. And since the orthodox
could not accept this view, the religious
reformers came into conflict with the
orthodox sections and became, at least in the
beginning, religious and social rebels.
Similarly, Sayyid Ahmed Khan aroused
the anger of the traditionalists. They abused
him, issued fatwas (religious decrees) against
him and even threatened his life.
The humanist aspect of the religious
reform movements was expressed in the
general attack on priesthood and rituals, and
the emphasis on the individual’s right to
interpret religious scriptures in the light of
human reason and human welfare. A
significant feature of humanism was
expressed in a new humanitarian morality
which include the notion that humanity can
progress and has progressed and that moral
values are, ultimately, those which favour
Gist of NCERT (History)
human progress. The social reform
movements were an embodiment of this new
humanitarian morality.
Though the reformers tried to reform
their religions, their general outlook was
universalistic. Rammohan Roy saw different
religions as particular expression of a
universal God and religious truth. Sayyid
Ahmad Khan said that prophets had the same
faith or din and every people had been sent
prophets by God. Keshab Chandra Sen
expressed the same idea as follows: “Our
position is not that truths are to be found in
all religions, but all established religions are
true.
Apart
purely
religious
considerations, these religious reform
movements fostered among Indians greater
self-respect, self-confidence, and pride in their
country. By interpreting their religious past
in modern rational terms and by weeding out
many of the corrupting and irrational
elements from the 19th century religious
beliefs and practices, the reformers enabled
their followers to meet the official taunt that
their religions and society were decadent and
inferior.
The religious reform movements helped
many Indians to come to terms with the
modern world. In fact they arose to recast
the old religions into a new modern mould
to suit the needs of new social groups of
society. Thus pride in the past did not prevent
Indians from accepting the essential -
superiority of the modern world in general
and modern science in particular. Of course,
some people insisted that they were merely
going back to the original, most ancient
scriptures which were suitably interpreted.
As a result of the reformed outlook, many
Indians began to acquire a modern, this-
worldly, secular and national outlook in place
of a narrow outlook dominated by
considerations of caste and religion, though
the latter tendency by no means came to an
end. Moreover, more and more people began
to think in terms of promoting their physical
and cultural welfare in this world in place of
passively accepting their lot and waiting for
improvement in life after death. These
movements also-to some extent ended
India’s cultural and intellectual isolation from
the rest of the world and enabled Indians to
share in the stream of world ideas. At the
same time, they were no longer bewitched
by everything in the West; those who copied
the West blindly were increasingly looked
down upon. In fact, while adopting a critical
attitude towards backward elements of
traditional religions and culture and
welcoming positive elements of modern
Culture, most of the religious reformers—
opposed blind imitation of the West and
waged an ideological struggle against the
colonialisation of Indian culture and thought.
The problem here was to maintain a balance
between the two aspects. Some went too far
in modernisation and tended to encourage
colonialisation of culture; others defended
traditional thought, culture and institutions
to the extent of glorifying them and opposing
any introduction of modern ideas and
culture. The best of reformers argued that
modern ideas and culture could be best
imbibed by integrating them into Indian
cultural streams.
Two negative aspects of the religious
reform movements may also be noted. Firstly,
all of them catered to the needs of a small
percentage of the population -the urban
middle and upper classes. None of them could
Growth of New India - Religious and Social Reform After 1858
reach the vast masses of the peasantry and
the urban poor, who continued by and large
to lead their lives in the traditional, custom-
ridden ways. This was because they basically
gave voice to the urges of the educated and
urban strata of Indian society.
The second limitation, which later
became a major negative factor, was the
tendency to look backward, appeal to past
greatness, and to rely on scriptural authority,
these tended to go against the positive
teachings f the reform movements
themselves. They undermined to some extent
the supremacy of human reason and scientific
outlook.
They encouraged mysticism in new
garbs, and fostered pseudo-scientific
thinking. Appeals to past greatness created
false pride and smugness, while the habit of
finding a Golden Age in the past acted as a
check on the full acceptance of modern science
and hampered the effort to improve the
present. But, most of all, there tendencies
tended to divide Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, and
Parsis as also high caste Hindus from low
caste Hindus. Any over-emphasis on religion
in a country containing many religions was
bound to have a divisive effect. Moreover,
the reformers put a one-sided emphasis on
the religious and philosophical aspects of the
cultural heritage. These aspects were,
moreover, not a common heritage of all
people. On the other hand, art and
architecture, literature, music, science and
technology, etc., in which all sections of
people had played an equal role, were not
sufficiently emphasised.
In addition, the Hindu reformers
invariably confined their praise of the Indian
past to its ancient period. Even a broad-
minded man like Swami Vivekananda talked
of the Indian spirit or India’s past
achievements in this sense alone. These
reformers looked upon the medieval period
of Indian history as essentially an era of
decadence. This was not only unhistorical but
also socially and politically harmful. It tended
to create the notion of two separate peoples.
Similarly an uncritical praise of the ancient
period and religions could not be fully
acceptable to the persons coming from lower
castes who -had for centuries suffered under
the most destructive caste oppression which
had developed precisely during the ancient
period. The result of all these factors was that
instead of all Indians taking an equal pride
in their past material and cultural
achievements and deriving inspiration from
them, the past became a heritage of the few.
Moreover the past itself tended to be torn
into compartments on a partisan basis. Man
in the Muslim middle classes went to the
extent of turning to the history of West Asia
for their traditions and moments of pride.
Increasingly, Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs and
Parsis, and later on lower-caste Hindus who
had been influenced by the reform
movements tended to be different from one
another. On the other hand, the Hindu and
Muslim masses who followed traditional
ways untouched by the reform movements
still lived in harmony, practising their
different religious rituals. To some extent the
process of the evolution of a composite
culture that had been going on for centuries
was arrested; though in other spheres
national unification of the Indian people was
accelerated. The evil aspects of this
phenomenon became apparent when it was
found that, along with a rapid rise of national
consciousness, another conscious-ness
Gist of NCERT (History)
communal consciousness - had begun to rise
among the middle classes. Many other factors
were certainly responsible for the birth of
communalism in modern times; but,
undoubtedly, the nature of the religious
reform movements also contributed to it.
Social Reform
The major effect of national awakening
in the 19th century was seen in the field of
social reform. The newly educated persons
increasingly revolted against rigid social
conventions and outdated customs. They
could no longer tolerate irrational and
dehumanizing social practices. in their revolt
they were inspired by the humanistic ideals
of social equality and the equal worth of all
individuals.
Nearly all the religious reformers con-
tributed to the social reform movement. This
was because the backward features of Indian
society, such as the caste system or inequal-
ity of the sexes, had religious sanctions in the
past. In addition, certain other organisations
like the Social Conference, Servants of India
Society, an, the Christian missionaries worked
actively for social reform. Many prominent
persons Jotiba Govind Phule, Gopal Han
Deshmukh, Justice Ranade. K T. Telang. B.M.
Malabari. O.K Karve, Sasipada Banerjee, B.C.
Pal. Viresalingam, Sri Narayn Guru. E.V.
Ramaswami Naiker and B.R. Ambedkar, and
many others - also played an important role.
In the 20th century, and especially after 1919.
the national movement became the main
propagator of social reform. Increasingly, the
reformers took recourse to propaganda in the
Indian language to reach the masses. They
also used novels, dramas, poetry, short sto-
ries, the Press and, in the thirties, the cinema
to spread their views.
While social reform was linked with
religious reform in some cases during the
19th century, in later years it was increasingly
secular in approach. Moreover, many people
who were orthodox in their religious
approach participated in it. Similarly, in the
beginning social reform had largely been the
effort of newly educated Indians belonging
to higher castes to adjust their social
behaviour to the requirements of modem
western culture and values. But gradually it
penetrated down to the lower strata of
society and began to revolutions strata of
society and began to revolutionize and
reconstruct the social sphere. In time the ideas
and ideals of the reformers won almost
universal acceptance and are today enshrined
in the Indian Constitution.
The social reform movements tried in
the main to achieve two objectives: (a) eman-
cipation of women and extension of equal
rights to them; and (b) removal of caste
rigidities and in particular the abolition of
untouchability.
Emancipation of Women
For countless centuries women in India
had been subordinated to men and socially
oppressed. The various religions practised in
India as well as the personal laws based on
them consigned women to a status inferior
to that of men. The condition of upper class
women was in this respect worse than that
of peasant women. Since the latter worked
actively in the fields alongside men, they
enjoyed relatively greater freedom of
movement and in some respects a better
status in the family than the upper class
women. For example, they seldom observed
purdah and many of them had the right to
remarry. The traditional view often praised
Growth of New India - Religious and Social Reform After 1858
the role of women as wives and mothers but
as individuals, they were assigned a very
lowly social position. They were supposed
to have no personality of their own apart
from their ties to their husbands. They could
not find any other expression to their inborn
talents or desires except as housewives. In
fact, they were seen as just adjuncts to men.
For example, a woman could only marry once
among Hindus, a man was permitted to have
more than one wife. Among Muslims too this
custom of polygamy prevailed. In large parts
of the country women had to live behind the
purdah.
The custom of early marriage prevailed,
and even children of eight or nine were
married Widows could not remarry and had
to lead an ascetic and new life. In many parts
of the country, the horrifying custom of Bati
or self-immolation of widows prevailed.
Hindu women had no right to inherit
property, nor did they enjoy the right to
terminate an undesirable marriage. Muslim
women could inherit property but only half
as much as a man could; and in the matter of
divorce even theoretically there was no
equality between husband and wife. In fact,
Muslim women dreaded divorce.
The social position of Hindu and Muslim
women as well as their values were similar.
Moreover, in both cases they were
economically and socially totally dependent
on men. Lastly, the benefit of education was
denied to most of them. In addition, women
were taught to accept their subjection and
even to welcome it as a badge of honour. It
is true that occasionally women of the
character and personality of Razia Sultana,
Chand Bibi or Ahilya Bai Holkar arose in
India. But the’ were exceptions to the general
pattern, and do not in any way change the
picture.
Moved by the humanitarian and
egalitarian impulses of the 19th century, the
social reformers started a powerful
movement to improve the position of women.
While some reformers appealed to doctrines
of individua-lism and equality, others
declared that true Hinduism or islam or
Zoroastrianism did not sanction the infe-rior
status of women and that true religion
assigned them a high social position.
Numerous individuals, reform societies;
and religious organizations worked hard to
spread education among women, to
encourage widow remarriage, to improve the
living conditions of widows, to prevent
marriage of young children, to bring women
out of the purdah, to enforce- girl They were
bound to assert their monogamy, and to
enable middle class rights as human beings
women to take up professions or public.
Another Important development was
employment. After the l880s, when the birth
of a women’s movement in the Dufferin
hospitals (named after Lady country. Up to
the l920s enlightened men Dufferin the wife
of the Viceroy) were started, efforts were
made to make modern medicine and child
delivery techniques available to Indian
women.
The movement for the liberation of the
most outstanding of women received a great
stimulus from the rise of the militant national
movement in the 20th century. Women played
an active and important role in the struggle
for freedom. They participated in large
numbers in the agitation against the partition
of Bengal and in the Home Rule movement.
After 1918, they marched in political
Gist of NCERT (History)
processions, picketed shops selling foreign
cloth and liquor, spun and propagated khadi.
went to jail in the non-cooperation
movements, faced lathis is, tear gas and
bullets during public demonstrations,
participated actively in the evolutionary
terrorist movement, and voted in elections
to legislatures and even stood as candidates.
Sarojini Naidu, the famous poetess, became
the president of the National Congress.
Several women became ministers or
parliamentary secretaries in the popular
ministries of 1937. Hundreds of them became
members of municipalities and other organs
of local government. When the trade union
and kisan movements arose in the 1920s,
women were often found in their forefront.
More than any other factor, participation in
the national movement contributed to the
awakening of Indian women and their
emancipation. For how could those who had
braved British jails and bullets be declared
inferior. And how could they any longer be
confined to the home and be satisfied with
the life of a doll or a slave girl? They were
bound to assert their rights as human beings.
Another important development was
the birth of a women’s movement in the
country. Up to the 1920s enlightened men had
worked for the uplift of women. Now aware
and self-confident women under-took the
task. They started many organisations and
institutions for the purpose, the most
outstanding of which was the All India
Women’s Conference founded in 1927.
Women’s struggle for equality took a
big step forward with the coming of
independence. “Articles 14 and 15 of the
Indian Constitution (1950) guaranteed the
complete equality of men and women. The
Hindu Succession Act of 1956 made the
daughter an equal co-heir with the son. The
Hindu Marriage Act of 1955 permitted
dissolution of marriage on specific grounds.
Monogamy was also made mandatory on
men as well as women. But the evil custom
of dowry still continues even though the
demanding of dowry has been banned. The
Constitution gives women equal right to
work and to get employment in state
agencies. The Directive Principles of the
Constitution lay down the principle of equal
pay for equal work for both men and women.
Of course many visible and invisible obstacles
still remain in putting the principle of the
equality of sexes into practice. A proper social
climate has still to be created. But the social
reform movements, the freedom struggle,
women’s own movement, and the
Constitution of free India have made a big
contribution in this direction.
Struggle Against Caste
The caste system was another major
target of attack for the social reform
movement. The Hindus were at this time
divided into numerous castes (jatis). The
caste into which a man was born determined
large areas of his life. It determined whom
he would marry and with whom he would
dine. It largely determined his profession as
also his social loyalties. Moreover, the castes
were carefully graded into a hierarchy of
status. At the bottom of the ladder came the
untouchables or scheduled castes as they
came to be called later, who formed about 20
per cent of the Hindu population. The
untouchables suffered from numerous and
severe disabilities and restrictions, which of
course varied from place to place. Their touch
was considered impure and was a source of
Growth of New India - Religious and Social Reform After 1858
pollution. In some parts of the country,
particularly in the south, their very shadow
was to be avoided, so that they had to move
away if a brahrnin was seen or heard coming.
An untouchables dress, food, place of
residence, all were carefully regulated. He
could not draw water from wells and tanks
used by the higher castes; he could do so only
from wells and tanks specially reserved for
untouchables. Where no such well or tank
existed, he had to drink dirty water from
ponds and irrigation canals. He could not
enter the Hindu temples or study the
shastras. Often his children could not attend
a school in which the children of caste Hindus
studied. Public services such as the police and
the army were closed to him. The
untouchables were forced to take up menial
and other such jobs which were considered
unclean’, for example, scavenging, shoe-
making, removing dead bodies, skinning
dead animals, tanning hides and, skins.
Usually denied ownership of land, many of
them worked even as tenants-at-will and
field labourers.
The caste system was an evil in another
respect. Not only was it humiliating and
inhuman and based on the anti-democratic
principle of inequality by birth, it was a cause
of social disintegration. It splintered people
into numerous groups. In modern times it
became a major obstacle in the growth of a
united national feeling and the spread of
democracy. It may also be noted that caste
consciousness particularly with regard to
marriage prevailed also among Muslims,
Christians, and Sikhs, who practised
untouchability though in a less virulent form.
British rule released many forces which
gradually undermined the caste system. The
introduction of modern industries and
railways and buses and growing urbanisation
made it difficult to prevent mass contact
among persons of different castes, especially
in the cities. Modern commerce and industry
opened new fields of economic activity to all.
For example, a brahmin or upper caste
merchant could hardly miss the opportunity
of trading in skins or shoes nor would he
agree to deny himself the opportunity of
becoming a doctor or a soldier. Free sale of
land upset the caste balance in many villages.
The close connection between caste and
vocation could hardly continue, in a modern
industrial society in which the profit motive
was increasingly becoming dominant.
In administration, the British intro-
duced equality before law, took away the
judicial functions of caste panchayats, and
gradually opened the doors of administrative
services to all castes. Moreover, the new
educational system was wholly secular and,
therefore, basically opposed to caste
distinctions and .caste outlook.As modern
democratic and rationalist ideas spread
among Indians, they began to raise their voice
against the caste system. The Brahmo Samaj,
the Prarthana Samaj, Arya Samaj the
Ramakrishna Mission, the Theosophists, the
Social Conference, and nearly all the great
reformers of the 19th century, attacked it.
Even though many of them defended the
system of four varnas, they were critical of
the caste (Jan) system. In particular they
condemned the inhuman practice of
untouchability. They also realised that
national unity and national progress in
political, social and economic fields could not
be achieved so long as millions were
deprived of their right to live with dignity
and honour.
Gist of NCERT (History)
The growth of the national movement
played a significant role in weakening the
caste system. The national movement was
opposed to all those institutions which
tended to divide Indian people. Common
participation in public demonstrations, giant
public meetings, and satyagraha struggles
weakened caste consciousness. In any case
those who were fighting for freedom from
foreign rule in the name of liberty and
equality could hardly support the caste
system which was totally opposed to these
principles. Thus, from the beginning, the
Indian National Congress and in fact the
entire national movement opposed. caste
privileges and fought for equal civic rights
and equal freedom for the development of
the individual without distinctions of caste,
sex or religion.
All his life Gandhiji kept the abolition
of untouchability in the forefront of his public
activities. In 1932, he founded the All India
Harijan Sangh for the purpose. His campaign
for the root and removal ounrnuchability’
was on the grounds of humanism and reason.
He argued that there was no sanction for
untouchability in Hindu shastras. But, if any
shastra approved of untouchability, it should
be ignored for it would then .be going against
human dignity. Truth, he said, could not be
confined within the covers of a book.
Since the middle of the 19th century,
numerous individuals and organizations
worked to spread education among the
untouchables (or depressed classes and
scheduled castes as they came to be called
later), to open the doors of schools and tem-
ples to them, to enable them to use public
wells and tanks, and to remove other social
disabilities and distinctions from which they
suffered.
As education and awakening spread,
the lower castes themselves began to stir.
They became conscious of their basic human
rights and began to rise in defence of these
rights. They gradually built up a powerful
movement against the tradi-tional oppression
by the higher castes. In Maharashtra, in the
second half of the 19th century, Jyotiba Phule,
born in a lower caste family, led a lifelong
movement against Brahmanical religious
authority as part of his struggle against upper
caste domination. He regarded modern
education as the most important weapon for
the liberation of the lower castes He was the
first to open several schools for girls of the
lower castes. Dr; B.R. Ambedkar, who
belonged to one of the scheduled castes,
devoted his entire life to fighting against caste
tyranny. He organised the All India Scheduled
Castes Federation for the purpose. Several
other scheduled caste leaders founded the
All India Depressed Classes Association. In
Kerala, Sri Narayan Guru organised a life
long struggle against the caste system. He
coined the famous slogan: “One religion, one
caste and one God for mankind. In south
India, the nonbrahmins organised during the
1920s the Self-Respect Movement to fight the
disabilities which brahmins had imposed
upon them. Numerous sat agraha movements
were organised all over India jointly by the
upper and depressed castes against the ban
on the latter’s entry into temples and other
such restrictions.
The struggle against untouchability
could not, however, be fully successful under
alien rule. The foreign government was afraid
of arousing the hostility of the orthodox
sections of society. Only the government of a
free India could under-take a radical reform
of society. Moreover, the problem of social
Growth of New India - Religious and Social Reform After 1858
uplift was closely related to the problem of
political and economic uplift. for example,
economic progress was essential for raising
the social status of the depressed castes; so
also were the spread of education and
political rights. This was fully recognised by
Indian leaders.
The Constitution of 1950 has provided
the legal framework for the final abolition of
untouchability. It has declared that
‘“untouchability’ is abolished and its practice
in any form is forbidden. The endorsement
disability
arising
‘untouchability’ shall be an offence punishable
in accordance with law”. The Constitution
further forbids any restriction the use of
wells, tanks, and bathing ghats, or on the
access to shops, restaurants, hotels and
cinemas. Furthermore, one of the Directive
Principles it has laid down for the guidance
of the government says: “The State shall
strive to promote the welfare of the people
by securing and protecting as effectively as
it may a social order in which justice, social,
economic and political, shall inform all the
institutions of the national life’. The struggle
against the evils of the caste system, however,
still remains an urgent task before the Indian
people, especially in the rural areas.
Gist of NCERT
Indian Economy
ISBN: 9789351720256
Book Code: F22
Gist of NCERT (History)
The Partition of Bengal
The conditions for the emergence of
militant nationalism had thus developed
when in 1905 the partition of Bengal was
announced and the Indian national movement
entered its second stage. On Curzon issued
an order dividing the province of Bengal into
two parts: Eastern Bengal and Assam with a
population of 31 million and the rest of Bengal
with a population of 54 million, of whom 18
million were Bengalis and 36 million Biharis
and Oriyas. It was said that the existing
province of Bengal was-too big to be
efficiently administered by a single provincial
government. However, the officials who
worked out the plan had also other political
ends in view. They hoped to stem the rising
tide of nation-alism in Bengal, considered at
the time to be the nerve centre of Indian
nation-alism.
The nationalists saw the act of partition
as a challenge to Indian nationalism and not
merely an adminis-trative measure. They saw
that it was a deliberate attempt to divide the
Bengalis territorially and on religious
grounds for in the Eastern part Muslims
would be in a big majority and in the Western
part Hindus and thus to disrupt and weaken
nationalism in Bengal.
It would also be a big blow to the
growth of Bengali language and culture. They
pointed out that administrative efficiency
could have been better secured by separating
the Hindi speaking Bihar and the Oriya
speaking Orissa from the Bengali speaking
part of the province. Moreover the official
step had been taken in utter disregard of
public opinion. Thus the vehemence of
Bengal’s protest against the partition is
explained by the fact that it was a blow to
the sentiments of a very sensitive and
courageous people.
The Anti-Partition Movement
The Anti-Partition Movement was the
work of the entire national leadership of
Bengal and not of any one section of the
movement. Its most prominent leaders at the
initial stage were moderate leaders like
Surendranath Banerjea and Krishna Kumar
Mitra; militant and revolutionary nationalists
took over in the later stages. In fact both the
moderate and militant The Anti-Partition
Movement was initiated on 7 August 1905.
On that day a massive demonstration against
the partition was organised in the Town Hall
in Calcutta. From this meeting delegates
dispersed to spread the movement to the rest
of the province.
The partition took effect on 16 October
1905. The leaders of the protest movement
declared it to be a day of national mourning
throughout Bengal. It was observed as a day
NATIONALIST MOVEMENT
Nationalist Movement
of fasting. There was a hartal in Calcutta.
People walked barefooted and bathed in the
Ganga in the early morning hours.
Rabindranath Tagore composed the national
song, Amar Sonar Bangla, for the occasion
which was sung by huge crowds parading
the streets. This song was adopted as its
national anthem by Bangladesh in 1971 after
liberation. The streets of Calcutta were full
of the cries of ‘Bande Mataram which
overnight became the national song of Bengal
and which was soon to become the theme
song of the national movement. The
ceremony of Raksha Bandhan was utilised in
a new way. Hindu and Muslims tied the rakhi
on one another’s wrists as a symbol of the
unbreakable unity of the Bengalis and of the
two halves of Bengal.
In the afternoon, there was a great
demonstration when the veteran leader
Ananda Mohan Bose laid the foundation of
a Federation Hall to mark the indestructible
unity of Bengal. He addressed a crowd of
over 50,000.
The Swadeshi and Boycott
The Bengal leaders felt that mere
demonstrations, public meetings and
resolutions were not likely to have much
effect on the rulers. More positive action that
would reveal the intensity of popular feelings
and exhibit them at their best was needed.
The answer was Swadeshi and Boycott. Mass
meetings were held all over Bengal where
Swadeshi or the use of Indian goods and the
boycott of British goods were proclaimed and
pledged. in many places public burning of
foreign cloth were organised and shops
selling foreign cloth were picketed.
An important aspect of the Swadeshi
Movement was the emphasis placed on self
reliance or Atmasakti’. Self-reliance meant
assertion of national dignity, honour and self
confidence. In the eco-nomic field, it meant
fostering indigenous industrial and other
enterprises. Many textile mills, soap and
match factories, handloom weaving concerns,
national banks, and insurance companies
were opened. Acharya P.C. Ray organised his
famous Bengal Chemical Swadeshi Stores.
Even the great poet Rabindranath Tagore
helped to open a Swadeshi store.
The Swadeshi Movement had several
consequences in the realm of culture. There
was a flowering of nationalist poetry, prose
and journalism. The patriotic songs written
at the time by poets like Rabindranath
Tagore, Rajani Kant Sen. Syed Abu Moham-
med and Mukunda Das are sung in Bengal
to this day. Another self-reliant, constructive
activity undertaken at the time was that of
National Education. National educational
institutions where literary, technical, or physi-
cal education’ was imparted were opened by
nationalists who regarded the existing sys-
tem of education as denation-alising and, in
any case, inadequate. On 15 August 1906, a
National Council of Education was set up. A
National College with Aurobindo Ghose as
Principal was started in Calcutta.
The Role of Students,
Women, Muslims and the Masses
A prominent part in the Swadeshi
agitation was played by the students of
Bengal. They practised and propagated
Swadeshi and took the lead in organising
picketing of shops selling foreign cloth. The
government made every attempt to suppress
the students. Orders were issued to penalise
those schools and colleges whose students
took an active part in the Swadeshi agitation;
their grants-in-aid and other privileges were
Gist of NCERT (History)
to be with-drawn, they were to be
disaffiliated, their students were not to he
permitted to compete for scholarships and
were to be barred from all service under the
government.
Disciplinary action was taken against
students found guilty of anticipating in the
nationalist agitation. Many of them were
fined, expelled from schools and colleges,
arrested, and sometimes beaten by the police
with lathis.
The students, however, refused to be
cowed down. A remarkable aspect of the
Swadeshi agitation was the active
participation of women in the movement. The
traditionally home-centred women of the
urban middle classes joined processions and
picketing. From then on they were to take
an active part in the nationalist movement.
Many prominent Muslims joined the
Swadeshi Movement including Abdul Rasul,
the famous barrister, Liaquat Hussain, the
popular agitator, and Guznavi, the
businessman. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad
joined one of the revolutionary terrorist
groups. Many other middle and upper class
Muslims, however, remained neutral or, led
by the Nawab of Dhaka, (who was given a
loan of Rs. 14 lakh by the Government of
India), even supported Partition on the plea
that East Bengal would have a Muslim
majority. In this communal attitude, the
Nawab of Dhaka and others were encouraged
by the officials. In a speech at Dhaka, Lord
Curzon declared that one of the reasons for
partition
invest
Mohammedans in Eastern Bengal with a
unity which they have not enjoyed since the
days of the old Mussalman Viceroys and
Kings”.
All India Aspect of the Movement
The cry of Swadeshi and Swaraj was
soon taken up by other provinces of India.
Movements in support of Bengal’s unity and
boycott of foreign goods were organized in
Bombay, Madras and northern India. The
leading role in spreading the Swadeshi Move-
ment to the rest of the country was played
by Tilak. Tilak quickly saw that with the in-
auguration of this movement in Bengal, a new
chapter in the history of Indian nationalism
had opened. Here was a challenge and an
opportunity to lead ? popular struggle against
the British Raj and to unite the entire coun-
try in one bond of common sympathy.
Growth of Militancy
The leadership of the Anti-Partition
Movement soon passed to militant
nationalists like Tilak, Bipin Chandra Pal and
Aurobindo Ghose. This was due to many
factors.
Firstly, the early movement of protest
led by the Moderates failed to yield results.
Even the Liberal Secretary of State, John
Morley, from whom much was expected by
the moderate nationalists, declared the
Partition to be a settled fact which would not
be changed. Secondly, the Governments of
the two Bengals, parti-cularly of hast Bengal,
made active efforts to divide Hindus and
Muslims. Seeds of Hindu-Muslim disunity in
Bengal politics were perhaps sown at this
time. This embittered the nationalists. But,
most of all, it was the repressive policy of
the government which led people to militant
and revolutionary politics. The Government
of East Bengal, in particular, tried to crush
the nationalist movement. Official attempts
at preventing student participation in the
Swadeshi agitation have already been
Nationalist Movement
mentioned above. The singing of Bande
Mataram in public streets in East Bengal was
banned. Public meetings were restricted and
sometimes forbidden. Laws controlling the
Press were enacted. Swadeshi workers were
prosecuted and imprisoned for long periods.
Many students were awarded even corporal
punishment. From 1906 to 1909, more than
550 political cases came up before Bengal
courts. Prosecutions against a large number
of nationalist newspapers were launched and
freedom of the Press was completely
suppressed Military police was stationed in
many towns where it clashed with the
people. One of the most notorious examples
of repression was the police assault on the
peaceful delegates of the Bengal Provincial
Conference at Barisal in April 1906. Many of
the young volunteers were severely beaten
up and the Conference itself was forcibly
dispersed. In December 1908, nine Bengal
leader, including the venerable Krishna
Kumar Mitra and Ashwini Kumar Dutt, were
deported. Earlier, in 1907, Lala Lajpat Rai and
Ajit Singh had been deported following riots
in the canal colonies of the Punjab. In 1908,
the great Tilak was again arrested and given
the savage sentence of 6 years imprisonment.
Chidambaram Pillai in Madras and
Harisarvottam Rao and other in Andhrawere
put behind bars.
As the militant nationalists came to the
fore, they gave the call for passive resistance
in addition to Swadeshi and Boycott. They
asked the people to refuse to cooperate with
the Government and to boycott government
service, the courts, government school and
colleges and municipalities and legislative
councils, and thus, as Aurobindo Ghose put
it, to make the administration under present
condition impossible. The militant nationalist
tried to transform the Swadeshi and Anti
Partition agitation into a mass movement and
gave the slogan of independence from foreign
rule. Aurobindo Ghose openly declared:
‘Political freedom is the life breath of a nation.
Thus, the question of partition of Bengal
became a secondary one and the question of
India s freedom became the central question
of Indian politics. The militant nationalists
also gave the call for self-sacrifice without
which no great aim could be achieved.
It should be remembered, however, that
the militant nationalists also failed in giving
a positive lead to the people. They were not
able to give effective leadership or to create
an effective organisation to guide their
movement. They aroused the people but did
not know how to harness or utilise the newly
released energies of the people or to find new
forms of political struggle. Passive resistance
and non-cooperation -remained mere ideas.
They also failed to reach the real masses of
the country, the peasants. Their movement
remained confined to the urban lower and
middle classes and zamindars. They had come
to a political dead end by the beginning of
1908. Consequently, the government
succeeded to a large extent in suppressing
them.
Their movement could not survive the
arrest of their main leader, Tilak and the
retirement from active politics of Bipin
Chandra Pal and Aurobind Ghose.
But the upsurge of nationalist sentiments
could not die. People had been aroused from
their slumber of centuries; they had learned’
to take a bold and fearless attitude in politics.
They had acquired self-confidence and self-
reliance and learnt to participate in new
Gist of NCERT (History)
forms of mass mobilization and political
action. They now waited for a new
movement to arise. Moreover, they were able
to learn valuable lessons from their
experience. Gandhiji wrote later that “after
the Partition, people saw that petitions must
be backed up by force and that they must be
capable of suffering”. The Anti-Partition
agitation
marked
great
revolutionary leap forward for Indian
nationalism. The later national movement
was to draw heavily on its legacy.
Growth of Revolutionary Nationalism
Government repression and frustration
caused by the failure of the leadership to
provide a positive lead to the people
ultimately resulted in revolutionary
terrorism. The youth of Bengal found all
avenues of peaceful protest and political
action blocked and out of desperation they
fell back upon individual heroic action and
the cult of the bomb. They no longer believed
that passive resistance could achieve
nationalist aims. The British must, therefore,
be physically expelled. As the Yugantar wrote
on 22 April 1906 after the Barisal Conference:
‘The remedy lies with the people themselves.
The 30 crores of people inhabiting India must
raise their 60 crores of hands to stop this curse
of oppression. Force must be stopped by
force. But the revolutionary young men did
not try to generate a mass revolution. Instead,
they decided to copy the methods of the Irish
terrorists and the Russian Nihilists, that is,
to assassinate unpopular officials. A
beginning had been made in this direction
when, in 1897, the Chapekar brothers
assassinated two unpopular British officials
at Poona. In 1904, V.D. Savarkar had
organized the Abhinava Bharat a secret
society of revolutionaries. After 1905, several
newspapers had begun to advocate
revolutionary terrorism. The Sandhya the
Yugantar in Bengal and the Kal in
Maharashtra were the most prominent
among them.
In December 1907 an attempt was made
to the life of the Lieutenant Governor of
Bengal, and in April 1908 Khudiram Bose and
Prafulla Chaki threw a bomb at a carriage
which they believed was occupied by
Kingsford, the unpopular Judge at
Muzaffarpur. Prafulla Chaki shot himself
dead while Khudi Boss tried and hanged. The
era or revolutionary terrorism had begun.
Many secret societies of terrorist youth came
into existence. The most famous of these were
the Anushilan Samiti whose Dhaka Section
alone had 500 branches, and soon
revolutionary terrorist societies became I
active in the rest of the country also. They
became so bold as to throw a bomb at the
Viceroy Lord Hardinge, while he was riding
on an elephant m a state procession at Delhi.
The Viceroy was wounded.
The revolutionaries also established cen-
tres of activity abroad. In London, the lead
was taken by Shri Krisbnavarma, V.D.
Savarkar, and Har Dayal, while in Europe
Madame Cama and Ajit Singh were the
prominent leaders. Terrorism too gradually
petered out. In fact, terrorism as a political
weapon was bound to fail It could not mobi-
lize the masses; in fact it had no base among
the people. But the terrorist did- make a valu-
able contribution growth of nationalism in
India. As historian has put it, “they gave us
back the pride of our manhood. Because of
their heroism, the terrorists became im-
mensely popular among their compatriots
even though most of the politically conscious
Nationalist Movement
people did not agree with their political ap-
proach.
The Indian National Congress 1905-1914
The agitation against the partition of
Bengal made a deep impact on the Indian
National Congress. All sections of the
National Congress united in opposing the
Partition. its session of 1905, Gokhale the
President of the Congress, roundly
condemned the Partition as well as the
National Congress also supported the
Swadeshi and Boycott Movement of Bengal.
There was much public debate and
disagreement between the moderate and the
militant nationalists. The latter wanted to
extend the Swadeshi and Boycott movement
from Bengal to the rest of the country and to
extend the Boycott to every form of
association with the colonial government. The
Moderates wanted to confine the Boycott
movement to Bengal and even there to limit
it to the boycott of foreign goods. There was
a tussle between the two groups for the
president ship of the National Congress for
that year (1906). In the end, Dadabhai
Naoroji, respected by all nationalists as a great
patriot, was chosen as a compromise.
Dadabhai electrified the nationalist ranks by
openly declaring in his presidential address
that the goal of the Indian national movement
was” ‘self-government’ or Swaraj like that of
the United Kingdom or the Colonies”.
But the differences dividing the two
wings of the nationalist movement could not
be kept in check for long. Many of the
moderate nationalists did not keep pace with
events. They were not able to see that their
outlook and methods, which had served a
real purpose in the past, were no longer
adequate. They had failed to advance to the
pew stage of the national movement. The
militant nationalists, on the other hand, were
not willing to be held back. The split between
the two came at the Surat accession of the
National Congress in December 1907. The
moderate leaders having captured the
machinery of the Congress ‘excluded the
militant elements from it.
But, in the long run, the split did not
prove useful to either party. The moderate
leaders lost touch with the younger
generation of nationalists. The British
Government played the game of ‘Divide and
Rule’. While suppressing the militant
nationalists, it tried to win over moderate
nationalist opinion so that the militant
nationalists could be isolated and suppressed.
To placate the moderate nationalists: it
announced constitutional concessions
through the Indian Councils Act of 1909
which are known as the Morle Minto Reforms
of 1909. In 1911, the Government also
announced the annulment of the Partition of
Bengal. Western and Eastern Bengals were
to be reunited while a new province
consisting of Bihar and Orissa was to be
created at the same time the seat of the
Central Government was shifted from
Calcutta to Delhi.
The Morley-Minto Reforms increased
the number of elected members in the
Imperial’ Legislative Council and the
provincial councils. But most of the elected
members were elected indirectly, by the
provincial councils in the case of the Imperial
Council and by municipal committees and
district boards in the case of provincial
councils. Some of the elected seats were
reserved for landlords and British capitalists
in India. For instance, of the 68 members of
Gist of NCERT (History)
the Imperial Legislative Council, 36 were
officials and 5 were nominated non officials.
Of the 27 elected members, 6 were to
represent the big landlords and 2 the British
capitalists. Moreover, the reformed councils
still enjoyed no real power, being merely
advisory bodies. The reforms in no way
changed the undemocratic and foreign
character of British rule or the fact of foreign
economic exploitation of the country. They
were, in fact, not designed to democratize
Indian adminis-tration. Morley openly
declared at the, time: “If it could be said that
this chapter of reforms led directly or
necessarily to the establishment of a
parliamentary system in India, I for one
would have nothing at all to do with it”. His
successor as the Secretary of Sate, Lord
Crewe, further clarified the position in 1912.
“There is a certain section in India which
looks forward to a measure of self-
government approaching that which has been
granted in the dominions. I see no future for
India on those lines”. The real purpose of the
Reforms of 1909 was to confuse the moderate
nationalists to divide the nationalist ranks,
and to check the growth of unity among
Indians.
The Reforms also introduced the system
of separate electorates under which all
Muslims were grouped in separate
constituencies from which Muslims alone
could be elected. This was done in the name
of protecting the Muslim minority. Bi in
reality this was a part of the policy of dividing
Hindus and Muslims and thus maintaining
British supremacy in India. The system of
separate electorates was based on the notion
that the political and economic interests of
Hindus and Muslims were separate. This
notion was—unscientific because religions
cannot be the basis of political and economic
interests or of political groupings. What is
even more important, this system proved
extremely harmful in practice. It checked the
progress of India’s unification which had
been a, continuous historical process. It
became a potent factor in the growth of
communalism -both Muslim and Hindu- in
the country. Instead of removing the
educational and economic backwardness of
the middle class Muslims and thus integrating
them into the mainstream of Indian
nationalism, the system of separate
electorates ended to perpetuate their
isolation from the developing nationalist
movement. It encouraged separatist
tendencies. It prevented people from
concentrating on economic and political
problems which were common to all Indians,
Hindu or Muslim.
The moderate nationalists did not fully
support the Morley-Minto Reforms. They
soon realised that the Reforms had not really
granted much. But they decided to cooperate
with the government in working the reforms.
This cooperation with the government and
their opposition to the programme of the
militant nationalists proved very costly to
them. They gradually lost the respect and
support of the public and were reduced to a
small political group.
The Nationalist and the First World War
In June 1914, the First World War broke
out between Great Britain, France, Russia and
Japan on one side (joined later by Italy and
USA), and Germany, Austria-Hungary, and
Turkey on the other. In India the years of the
War marked the maturing of nationalism.
In the beginning, the Indian nationalist
leaders, including Lokamanya Tilak, who had
Nationalist Movement
been released in June 1914, decided to
support the way effort of the government in
the mistaken belief that grateful Britain
would repay India’s loyalty with gratitude
and enable India to take a long step forward
on the road to self-government. They did not
realise fully that the different powers were
fighting the First World War precisely to
safeguard their existing colonies.
The Home Rule Leagues
At the same time, many Indian leaders
saw clearly that the Government was not
likely to give any real concessions unless
popular pressure was brought to bear upon
it. Hence, a real mass political movement was
necessary. Some other factors were leading
the nationalist movement in the same
direction. The World War, involving mutual
struggle between the imperialist powers of
Europe, destroyed the myth of the racial
superiority of western nations over the Asian
peoples. Moreover the War led to increased
misery among the poorer classes of Indians.
For them the War had meant heavy taxation
and soaring prices of the daily necessities of
life. They were getting ready to join any
militant movement of protest. Consequently,
the war years were years of intense
nationalist political agitation.
But this mass agitation could not be
carried out under the leadership of the
Indian National Congress, which had
become, under Moderate leadership, a
passive and inert political organisation with
no political work among the people to its
credit. Therefore, two Home Rule Leagues
were started in 1915 16, one under the
leadership of Lokamanya Tilak and the other
under the leadership of Annie Besant, an
English admirer of Indian culture and the
Indian people, and S. Subramaniya Iyer. The
two Home Rule Leagues worked in
cooperation and carried out intense
propaganda all over the country in favour of
the demand for the grant of Home Rule or
self-government to India after the War. It was
during this agitation that Tilak gave the
popular slogan: “Home Rule is my birthright
and I will have it’. The two Leagues made
rapid progress and the cry of Home Rule
resounded throughout the length and
breadth of India. Many moderate nation-
alists, who were dissatisfied with the
Congress inactivity, joined the Home Rule
agitation. The Home Rule Leagues soon
attracted the governments anger. In June
1917, Annie Besant was arrested. Popular
protest forced the govern-ment to release her
in September 1917.
The war period also witnessed the
growth of the revolutionary movement. The
terrorist, groups spread from Bengal and
Maharashtra to the whole of northern India.
Moreover, man Indians began to plan a
violent rebellion to overthrow British rule.
Indian revolutionaries in the United States
of America and Canada had established the.
Ghadar (Rebellion) Party in 1913. Most of the
members of the party were Punjabi Sikh
peasants and ex-soldiers, who had migrated
there in search of livelihood, and who faced
the fun brunt of racial and economic
discrimination. Lala Har Dayal, Mohammed
Barkatullah, Bhagwan Singh, Ram Chandra
and Sohan, Singh Bhakna were some of the
prominent leaders of the Ghadar Party. The
party was built around the weekly paper the
Ghadar which, carried the caption on the
masthead: Angrezi Ka Dushman (An Enemy
of British Rule). “Wanted brave soldiers”, the
Ghadar declared, “to Stir up Rebellion in
Gist of NCERT (History)
India. Pay death; Price -martyrdom Pension
liberty; Field of Battle India’. The ideology
of the party was strongly secular. In the
words of Sohan Singh Bhakna, who later
became a major peasant leader of Punjab: “We
were not Sikhs or Punjabis. Our religion was
patriotism’. ‘The party had active members
in other countries such as Mexico, Japan,
China, Philippines, Malaya, Singapore,
Thailand, Indo-China and East and South
Africa.”
The Ghadar Party was pledged to wage
revolutionary war against the British in India.
As soon at the First World War broke out in
1914, the Ghadarites decided to send arms
and men to India to start an uprising with
the help of soldiers and local revolutionaries.
Several thousand men volunteered to go back
to India. Millions of dollars were contributed
to pay for their expenses. Many gave their
life-long savings and sold lands and other
property. The Ghadarites also contacted
Indian soldiers in the Far East, South-East
Asia and all over India and per-suaded
several regiments to rebel. Finally, 21
February 1915 was fixed as the date for an
armed revolt in the Punjab. Unfortunately,
the authorities came to know of these plans
and took immediate action. The rebellious
regiments were disbanded and their leaders
were either imprisoned or hanged. For
example, 12 men of the 23rd Cavalry were
executed. The leaders and members of the
Ghadar Party in the Punjab were arrested on
a mass scale and tried. Forty-two of them
were hanged, 114 were transported for life,
and 93 were sentenced to long terms of
imprisonment. Many of them after their
release founded the Kirti and Communist
movements in the Punjab. Some of the
prominent Ghadar leaders were: Baba
Gurmukh Singh, Kartar Singh Saraba, Sohan
Singh Bhakna, Rahmat Ali Shah, Bhai
Parmanand, and Mohammad Barkatullah.
Inspired by the Ghadar Party, 700 men
of the 5th Light Infantry at Singapore
revolted under the leadership of Jamadar
Chisti Khan and Subedar Dundey Khan. They
were crushed after a bitter battle in which
many died. Thirty-seven other were publicly
executed, while 41 were transported for life.
Other revolutionaries were active in
India and abroad. In 191 during an unsuc-
cessful revolutionary attempt Jatin Mukherjee
popularly known as ‘Bagha Jatin’ gave his life
fighting a battle with the police at Balasore.
Rash Bihari Bose, Raja Mahendra Pratap, Lala
Hardayal,
Abdu1
Rahim,
Maulana
Obaidullah Sindhi, Champa-karaman Pillai,
Sardar Singh Rana, and Madame Cama were
some of the prominent Indians who carried
on revolution-ary activities and propaganda
outside India where they gathered the sup-
port of socialists and other anti-imperialists.
Lucknow Session of the Congress (1916).
The nationalists soon saw that disunity
in their ranks was injuring their cause and
that they must put up a united front before
the Government. The growing nationalist
feeling in the country and the urge for
national unity produced two historic
developments at the Lucknow session of the
Indian National Congress in 1916. Firstly, the
two wings of the Congress were reunited.
The old contro-versies had lost their meaning
and the split in the Congress had led to
political inactivity. Tilak, released from jail in
1914, immediately saw the change in the
situation and set out to unify the two streams
of Congressmen. To conciliate the moderate
nationalists, he declared:
Nationalist Movement
I may state once for all that we are
trying in India, as the Irish Home rulers have
been all along doing in Ireland, for a reform
of the system of administration and not for
the Over throw of Government; and I have
no hesitation in saying that the acts of
violence which have been committed in the
different parts of India are not only
repugnant to me, but have, in my opinion,
only unfortunately retarded to a great extent,
the pace of our political progress.
On the other hand, the rising tide of
nationalism compelled the old leaders to
welcome back into the Congress Lokamanya
Tilak and other militant nationalists. The
Lucknow Congress was the first united
Congress since 1907. It demanded further
constitutional reforms as a step towards self-
government.
Secondly, at Lucknow, the Congress and
the All India Muslim League sank their old
differences and put up common political
demands before the Government While the
War and the two Home Rule Leagues were
creating a new sentiment in the country and
changing the character of the Congress, the
Muslim League had also been undergoing
gradual changes. We have already noted
earlier that the younger section of the
educated Muslims was turning to bolder
nationalist politics. The War period witnessed
further developments in that direction.
Consequently, in 1914, the government
suppressed the publication of the Al-Hilal of
Abul Kalam Azad and the Comrade of
Maulana Mohamed Ali. It also interned the
Ali Brothers Maulanas Mohamed Ali and
Shaukat Ali and Hasrat Mohani and Abul
Kalam Azad. The League reflected, a least
partially, the political militancy of its younger
members. It gradually began to outgrow the
limited political outlook of the Aligarh school
of thought and moved nearer to the policies
of the Congress.
The Unity between the congress and the
league was brought about by the singing of
the Congress-league pact, known popularly
as the Lucknow pact. An important role in
bringing the two together was played by
Lokamanya Tilak and Mohammed Au Jinnah
because the two believed that India could win
self- government only through Hindu-
Muslim unity. Tilak declared at the time It
has been said, gentlemen, by some that we
Hindus have yielded too much to our
Mohammedan brethren. I am Sure ‘I
represent the sense of the Hindu community
all over India when I say that we could not
have yielded to much’. I would not care if
the rights of self- government are granted to
the Mohammedan community only- ... I
would not care if they are granted to the
lower and the lowest classes of the Hindu
population. ... When we have to fight, against
a third party, it is a very important thing that
we stand on this platform united, united in
race, united In religion, as regard all different
shades of political creed.
The two organisations passed the same
resolutions at their sessions, put forward a
joint scheme of political reforms based on
separate electorates, and demanded that the
British Government should make a
declaration that it would confer self-
government on India at an early date. The
Lucknow Pact marked an important step
forward
Hindu-Muslim
unity.
Unfortunately, it did not involve the Hindu
and Muslim masses and it accepted the
pernicious principle of separate electorates.
Gist of NCERT (History)
It was based on the notion of bringing
together the educated Hindus and Muslims
as separate political entities; in other words,
without secularization of their political
outlook which would make them realize that
in politics they had no separate interests as
Hindus or Muslims. The Lucknow Pact,
therefore, left the way open to future
resurgence of communalism in India politics.
But the immediate effect of the
developments at Lucknow was tremendous.
The unity between the moderate nationalist
and between the National Congress and the
Muslim League aroused great political
enthusiasm in the country. Even the British
Government felt it necessary to placate the
nationalists. Hitherto it had relied heavily on
repression to quieten the nationalist agitation.
Large number of radicial nationalist and
revolutionaries had been jailed or interned
under the notorious Defence of India Act and
other similar regulations. The government
now decided to appease nationalist opinion
and announced on 20 August 1917 that its
policy in India was the gradual development
of self-governing institutions with a view to
the progressive realization of Responsible
Government of India as an integral part of
the British Empire”. And in July 1918 the
Montague Chelmsford Reforms were
announced. But Indian nationalism was n
appeared. Infact, the Indian national
movement was soon to enter its third and
last phase- the era of mass struggle or the
Ghandian Era.
Gist of NCERT
General Science
ISBN: 9789351720188
Book Code: F20
Nationalist Movement
1. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) The last 11 hymns are known as
Balakhilya which are considered as
the oldest part of Rigveda.
(ii) Mandalas are further divided into
Astakas and upanishadas.
(iii) Rigveda comprises of 1028 hymns.
(iv) Third Mandala of Rigveda is
composed by Manu.
(a) i, ii & iii (b)
ii, iii & iv
(c) i & iii
all of the above.
2. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) The third Mandala of Rigveda
comprises of Gayatri Mantra,
composed by Viswamitra.
(ii) Fourth Mandala depicts the word
Haryupia which has been related
with Harappa.
(iii) Ninth Mandal is dedicated to
Soma.
(iv) Tenth Mandala describes about the
four varnas.
(a) i, iii & iv
(b) i, ii & iv
(c) i, ii, iii & iv (d)
i only
3. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) First type Krishna’s description has
found
Mundaka
Upanishada.
(ii) Gaytri Mantra is dedicated to
Soma, who was deity of Sun family.
(iii) Veda means knowledge.
(iv) Rigveda is divided into 10
Mandalas.
(a) i, ii, iii & iv (b)
iii only
(c) i, iv
iii & iv
4. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Atharvaveda is related to some
Non-Aryan traditions like magical
charm & spell.
(ii) Somaveda
elaborate
elucidation of Rituals.
(iii) Aitreya and Kausilaki Brahmanas
are related with Rigveda.
(iv) Satpath Brahamana, related with
Yajurveda, describes about Aryan’s
extention in Gangeticvalley.
(a) ii & iv
ii only
(c) i, iii & iv
all of the above.
5. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Aryankas are philosophical in
content.
(ii) Rituals related to agriculture have
also been described in Satpath
Brahman related with Yajurveda.
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTION
Gist of NCERT (History)
(iii) Upanishadas are called Vedanta.
(iv) Total number of Upanishadas are
according
Shankracharya
number
Upanishadas is 15.
(a) i & iii
(b) all of the above.
(c) none of the above
(d) i, ii & iii
6. Which of the following is not correct
regarding the Upanishadas?
(i) Upanishadas mainly revolves
around South and Brahma.
(ii) Chandogya Upanishad depicts
Satyamev Jayte.
(iii) Upanishadas are called Vedanta.
(iv) Katha Upanishad give reference to
first type Krishna.
(a) i & iii
(b) i, ii & iv
(c) all of the above
(d) ii & iv
7. Which of the following is not correct.
(i) Tenth Mandala describes about the
four varnas known as Brahman,
Kshtriya, Vaishya & Sudra.
(ii) Mundaka Upanishad describes the
story of Yama & Nachiketa.
(iii) Atharva veda, Samveda and
Yajurveda are collectively known
as Trayee.
(iv) Krishna-Yajurveda comprises the
description in prose.
(a) ii & iii
i & iv
(c) i & iii
iii & iv
8. Which of the following is correct.
(i) Rig means Hymns.
(ii) Third Mandal of Rigveda is
composed by Viswamitra.
(iii) Tenth Mandal is dedicated to
Soma.
(iv) Philosophy about unity of Atma &
Parmatma has been described in
Upanishadas.
(a) all of the above
(b) iii only
i, ii & iv
(d) none of the above.
9. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) The second to seventh Mandala of
Rigveda are known as family text.
(ii) Except 78 hymns all other hymns
of Samveda have been taken from
Rigveda.
(iii) Tenth Mandala is also known as
Purusha Sukta.
(iv) Fourth Mandala consists of
references of Agricultural work.
(a) ii & iii
i only
(c) all of the above
(d) i & iv
10. The last 11 hymns, which are considered
as the oldest part of Rig Veda are known
(a) Purusha Sukta
(b) Trayee
(c) Aryankas
Balakhilya
11. Who was the greatest author on
Chhanda Shastra
(a) Panini
Valmiki
(c) Pingal
Yaska
12. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Yaska is the first known writers on
Sikha.
(ii) There are three Sutra related to
rituals namely Dharma, Sraut and
Grihya.
Multiple Choice Question
(iii) Valmiki wrote Katyayan Vartika
and Astadhyayi.
(iv) Nirukta refers to the Etymology.
(a) i, ii & iv
(b) ii only
(c) none of the above
(d) i & iii
13. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is not correct.
(i) Panini was a greatest Grammarian
and he wrote Astadhyayi, Patanjali
Mahabhasya & Katyayan Vartika.
(ii) Panini for the first time used the
word ‘Sanskrit’ as nomenclature of
the literacy language.
(iii) Harivanshapuran of Mahabharat
comprises genealogy of the rulers.
(iv) manu is called Adikavi.
(a) i & iii
ii & iv
(c) ii & iii
i, ii & iv
14. Which is known as Sat Saharsi Samhita?
(a) Manu Smriti
(b) Yajnalkya Smriti
(c) Parasar Smriti
(d) Mahabharat
15. Which is the earliest Smriti?
(a) Yajnovalkya Smriti
(b) Manu Smriti
(c) Narad Smriti
(d) Parasar Smriti.
16. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is true.
(i) Geeta is a part of Bhisma Parva.
(ii) Harivanshapuran of Mahabharat
compirises of genealogy of the
rulers.
(iii) Mahabharta is also known as
Panchasu veda.
(iv) Yaj nalkya Smriti first described the
origin of Kayasthas.
(a) i, ii & iv
i & ii
(c) iii only
all of the above.
17. Which Smriti describes the classes of
Brahmanas who were against accepting
alms.
(a) Narad Smriti
(b) Yajnalkya Smriti
(c) Parasar Smriti
(d) Manu Smriti.
18. Which is not the feature of Puranas
(a) Sarg
Vansa
(c) Chhanda
Manvantar
19. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is not correct.
(i) Vayu Puran mentions about
Geography of Indian Culture and
about prominent Indian Dynasties.
(ii) Sulva Sutra means genealogy.
(iii) Vishnu dharmottara Puran depicts
about
paintings
iconometry.
(iv) Manu-Smriti describes about
rituals related with Manu Mission
of Seth.
(a) i & iii
ii & iii
(c) none of the above
(d) ii & iv
20. Match the following
Ashvini Kumars
belonged to Kushava
period & wrote
charak Samhita
Vagbhata
wrote Astang thidya
which mentions
about eight Major
Organs of Human
Body.
Dhanvantri
were physicians of
Celestial world who
got Knowledge of
Gist of NCERT (History)
Ayurveda from
Brahma.
Charaka
is considered as
father of Ayurveda.
21. Who wrote Asva Chikitsa
(a) Palkappya
(b) Charka
(c) Dhanvantri
(d) Salihanna
22. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Atharva Veda gives first hand
information about Ayurveda
System.
(ii) Shshurut wrote Shrshrut Samhita
which also refers to surgical
operation.
(iii) Palkappya wrote on Gaja Chikitsa.
(iv) Srimad Bhagvat Purana is the
greatest puran in respect to Bhakti
cult.
(a) i & ii
(b) i & iii
(c) none of the above
(d) all of the above.
23. Match the following
Vriksha Parasa
is considered as
earliest text on
astrology as well as
astronomy.
Aryabhatta
describes about
numerous. Medicinal
herbs and plants.
Vedang Jyotisha
wrote Brahmsphuta
Sidhanta.
Brahm Gupta
wrote Surya
Sidhantika.
(iii)
(b) (iv)
(iii)
(iii)
(d) (iii)
24. Match the following
Sulva Sutra
described Decimal
system and about
zero.
Bhas Kara charya
describes about vedic
Alters.
(iii)
Aryabhatta
wrote Lilavati.
Shilpa Sutra
Manual of
Architecture.
(iii)
(b) (iii)
(iii)
(iii)
25. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Earliest information about painting
and iconometry is given in
Vishnudharmottara Purana.
(ii) Sulva Sutra is the earliest text
which comprises information on
Geometry.
(iii) Bhasa
wrote
palys
(Sivapanvashaduttam and Pratisna
Yangandhanaiyan are his most
famous plays).
(iv) Buddha charitam was written by
Asvagosh.
(a) i, ii & iii
(c) i, ii & iv
ii, iii & iv
26. Match the following
Sudraka
Swapan
Vashaduttam
Visakhadutta
Sutra Lankar
(iii)
Asvagosh
Devi Chandra
Guptam
Bhasa
Mricheha Katikam
Multiple Choice Question
(a) (iv) (iii)
(b) (iii) (iv)
(iv) (iii)
(iii)
27. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Kamandaka’s - Nitisar describes
about Saptang theory of State and
enlightened despolism of Maurya
period.
(ii) Arthashastra was written during
Gupta period.
(iii) Sutta pitak provides teachings and
preachings of Lord Buddha.
(iv) Vinay pitak provides Monastical
rules and discipline & order.
(a) i & ii
ii & iii
(c) all of the above
iii & iv
28. Match the following
Milindpanho
Monastical discipline
Nayadhani
Bhavat Geeta of
Kathasutra
Buddhims
(iii)
Acharang Sutra
Written in Pali by
Nagsena
Dhanind Pad
Gospel of Mahavira.
(a) (iii) (iv)
(b) (iii)
(iii)
(iii)
29. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is incorrect.
(i) Only two of Ashoka’s inscription
were written in Kharosthi script
which were found in Mansehsa and
Sahbajgarhi.
(ii) Dhandeva’s
inscription
Pushyamitra describe about the
Asvamegha Yajur performed by
(iii) Helioderus pillar inscription also
called as Besnagar Garudadhivaj
which describes about the cult of
Panchvrishti Veera.
(iv) Girnar inscription was first
inscription of Sanskrit Language
about saka ruler Rudradaman I
(a) i & ii
i & iv
(c) all of the above
(d) none of the above.
30. Match the following
Allahabad
depicts Sakanda
inscription
Gupta’s victory over
hunas
Aihole
Belongs to the period
inscription
of Chandra Gupta
Vikramditya
(iii)
Bhitari
describes about
inscription
Samudra Gupta’s
conquests
Udaigiri
Depicts the name of
inscription
Kalidasa
(iii)
(b) (iii) (iv)
(iii)
(iii)
31. Match the following
Indo Bacterians
coins have trident
symbol of Lord Shiva
Kushavas
coins depicts
Buddah’s figure.
(iii)
Vim Kedphises
introduced gold cins
in India with the
figure of King,
Queen & Date
mentioned on them.
Kanishka
issued purest gold
coins in India which
were called Dinaras.
(iii)
(b) (iv) (iii)
(iii) (iv)
(d) (iii) (iv)
Gist of NCERT (History)
32. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Kushavas & Kunindas never issued
silver coins.
(ii) Chandragupta Vikramaditya was
the first to issue silver coin.
(iii) Paper Rupees were first issued by
Lord canning.
(iv) Our earliest coin was made of
Gold.
(a) i, ii & iii
ii & iv
(c) all of the above
(d) none of the above.
33. Which was the most frequently depicted
animal.
(a) Elephant
(b) Unicorn
(c) Rhino
Tiger.
34. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Pashupati Seal has been forund
from Lothal.
(ii) The Harappan bricks were made
in ratio of 1:2:4.
(iii) For small measurement binary
system and for big measurement
decimal system were used in
harappa.
(iv) Persian Gulf seals have been found
in Lothal.
(a) i, ii & iii
ii & iv
(c) ii, iii & iv
(d) all of the above.
35. Match the following
Cemetrics
Daimabad
‘H’ & R 37’
Dockyard
Mohanjodaro
(iii)
Pashupati Mahadev C.
Harappa
Copper Chariot
Lothal
(iv) (iii)
(b) (iv) (iii)
(iii)
(iii)
36. Remains of Horse bones have been
found from.
(a) Lothal
Surkotada
(c) Kalibangan (d)
Dholavira
37. A Seal depicting Mother Goddess with
a plant growing form her womb has
been found from:—
(a) Harappa
Kalibangan
(c) Daimabad
Mohanjodara
38. There has been an absence of seal in
(a) Alamgirpur (b)
Mohanjodaro
(c) Harappa
Lothal
39. A stone cut water Reservoir has been
discovered from
(a) Surkotada
Kalibangan
(c) Dholavira
Harappa.
40. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) The predominence of Mother
Goodess denotes people’s faith in
fertility cult.
(ii) Mainly offensive weapons were
found in Harappa.
(iii) Six types of pottery have been
discovered from Kalibangan.
(iv) Painting on a jar resembling the
story of the cunning for the
Panchtantra has been found from
Lothal.
(a) i, & iv
(b) all of the above.
(c) none of the above
(d) iii only.
Multiple Choice Question
41. Match the following
Harappa
copper elephant
Daimabad
Bronze Dancing girl
(iii)
Mohanjodaro
Granary outside
citadel
Furrow Marks
Kalibangan
(iii)
(iii)
(iv) (iii)
(d) (ii)
(iii)
42. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) The first man made port was found
in Harappa.
(ii) The main crops of Indus Valley
civilization were wheat & Barley.
(iii) The Largest Harappan Settlemtn in
India is Rakhigarhi in Haryana.
(iv) The Largest number of settlements
are in Ghaggar-Hakar Valleys.
(a) i & ii
(b) all of the above
(c) ii, iii & iv
(d) none of the above.
43. Match the following
Mohanjodaro
Daya Ram Sahni
Chanhudaro
S.R. Rao
(iii)
Harappa
R.D. Banerjee
Lothal
M.G. Majumdar
(a) (iii)
(b) (iii) (iv)
(iii)
(iii)
44. Match the following
Ghaggat
Mohanjodaro
Kalibangan
(iii)
Indus
Lothal
Bhogava
Harappa
(iii)
(b) (iii) (iv)
(iii)
(iii)
45. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Rice Husk has been found from
Lothal & Rangpur.
(ii) Evidence of signage on wall has
been discovered from Dholavira.
(iii) A thirteen roomed house from the
overlap period has been discovered
from Bhagvanpura.
(iv) The steatite figure of a bearded
man has been recovered from
Mohanjodaro.
(a) All of the above
ii & iii
(c) none of the above
(d) i & iv
46. Match the following
Mohanjodaro
Absence of Mother
Goddess figurines
Chanhudaro
Assembly Hall &
Collegiate Building
(iii)
Rangpur
Bead Making factory
Harappa
Sandstone Make
Dancer
(iii)
(b) (iii)
(iii)
(iii)
47. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Broken Ivory were used as a scale
in Chanhudaro.
(ii) During Burial bodies were
extended in North-South Direction.
(iii) Ganerinkla site is situated in
Bahwalpur, Pakistan.
(iv) The ‘Great Bath’ of Mohanjodaro
Measures 12 × 7 × 3 mts.
Gist of NCERT (History)
(a) i, ii & iii
(b) ii & iii
(c) ii & iv
(d) all of the above
48. Which was the most frequently depicted
animal.
(a) Elephant
(b) Unicorn
(c) Rhino
Tiger.
49. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Pashupati Seal has been forund
from Lothal.
(ii) The Harappan bricks were made
in ratio of 1:2:4.
(iii) For small measurement binary
system and for big measurement
decimal system were used in
harappa.
(iv) Persian Gulf seals have been found
in Lothal.
(a) i, ii & iii
ii & iv
(c) ii, iii & iv
all of the above.
50. Match the following
Cemetrics
Daimabad
‘H’ & R 37’
Dockyard
Mohanjodaro
(iii)
Pashupati Mahadev C.
Harappa
Copper Chariot
Lothal
(iv) (iii)
(b) (iv) (iii)
(iii)
(iii)
51. Remains of Horse bones have been
found from.
(a) Lothal
Surkotada
(c) Kalibangan
(d) Dholavira
52. A Seal depicting Mother Goddess with
a plant growing form her womb has
been found from:—
(a) Harappa
Kalibangan
(c) Daimabad
Mohanjodara
53. There has been an absence of seal in
(a) Alamgirpur (b)
Mohanjodaro
(c) Harappa
Lothal
54. A stone cut water Reservoir has been
discovered from
(a) Surkotada
Kalibangan
(c) Dholavira
(d) Harappa.
55. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) The predominence of Mother
Goodess denotes people’s faith in
fertility cult.
(ii) Mainly offensive weapons were
found in Harappa.
(iii) Six types of pottery have been
discovered from Kalibangan.
(iv) Painting on a jar resembling the
story of the cunning for the
Panchtantra has been found from
Lothal.
(a) i, & iv
all of the above.
(c) none of the above
(d) iii only.
56. Match the following
Harappa
copper elephant
Daimabad
Bronze Dancing girl
(iii)
Mohanjodaro
Granary outside
citadel
Furrow Marks
Kalibangan
(iii)
(iii)
(iv) (iii)
(iii)
Multiple Choice Question
57. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) The first man made port was found
in Harappa.
(ii) The main crops of Indus Valley
civilization were wheat & Barley.
(iii) The Largest Harappan Settlemtn in
India is Rakhigarhi in Haryana.
(iv) The Largest number of settlements
are in Ghaggar-Hakar Valleys.
(a) i & ii
(b) all of the above
(c) ii, iii & iv
(d) none of the above.
58. Match the following
Mohanjodaro
Daya Ram Sahni
Chanhudaro
S.R. Rao
(iii)
Harappa
R.D. Banerjee
Lothal
M.G. Majumdar
(a) (iii)
(b) (iii) (iv)
(iii)
(iii)
59. Match the following
Ghaggat
Mohanjodaro
Kalibangan
(iii)
Indus
Lothal
Bhogava
Harappa
(iii)
(b) (iii) (iv)
(iii)
(d) (ii)
(iii)
60. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Rice Husk has been found from
Lothal & Rangpur.
(ii) Evidence of signage on wall has
been discovered from Dholavira.
(iii) A thirteen roomed house from the
overlap period has been discovered
from Bhagvanpura.
(iv) The steatite figure of a bearded
man has been recovered from
Mohanjodaro.
(a) All of the above
(b) ii & iii
(c) none of the above
(d) i & iv
61. Match the following
Mohanjodaro
Absence of Mother
Goddess figurines
Chanhudaro
Assembly Hall &
Collegiate Building
(iii)
Rangpur
Bead Making factory
Harappa
Sandstone Make
Dancer
(iii)
(b) (iii)
(iii)
(iii)
62. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Broken Ivory were used as a scale
in Chanhudaro.
(ii) During Burial bodies were
extended in North-South Direction.
(iii) Ganerinkla site is situated in
Bahwalpur, Pakistan.
(iv) The ‘Great Bath’ of Mohanjodaro
Measures 12 × 7 × 3 mts.
(a) i, ii & iii
ii & iii
(c) ii & iv
all of the above.
63. Assertion : Vedas are also known as
Shrutt
Reason : Vedas have bee passed on from
one generation to another through
verbal transmission.
(a) Assertion is correct, Reason is
incorrect
Gist of NCERT (History)
(b) Assertion is incorrect, Reason is
correct
(c) Assertion is correct, Reason is
correct
(d) Assertion is incorrect, Reason is
incorrect
64. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Origin of Indian Music has been
depicted from Sam Veda.
(ii) Sabha & Samiti are mentioned as
twin daughtrs of Prajapati in Rig
Veda.
(iii) Kshtriyas
precedence
Brahamanas is decpited from Ait.
(a) i, & iii
i & ii
(c) all of the above
(d) none of the above.
65. Which one of the folliwng is the
upanishad  of Rigveda.
(a) Katha Upanishad
(b) Chandogya Upanishad
(c) Mundka Upanishad
(d) Aitareya Upanishad
66. Which of the following Mandala is
completely devoted to the Vedic God
Soma.
(a) I
(c) IX
67. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) The Upveda of Rigveda is
Ajurveda.
(ii) Satpatha Brahmana related to
Yajurveda is lengthiest of all the
Brahmanas.
(iii) Sam Veda contains Hymns sung by
particular type of priests known as
udgatori.
(iv) The Upveda of Samveda is Adh
waryu.
(a) i, iii & iv
i, ii & iii
(c) all of the above
(d) none of the above.
68. Match the following
Rigveda
Dhanurveda
Yajurveda
Gandharveda
(iii)
Samveda
Shilpveda
Atharva veda
Ajurveda
(iii)
(iii)
(iii)
(iii)
69. In which Upanishad is mentioned
‘Satyamed Jayate?
(a) Chandogya Upanishad
(b) Prasana Upanishad
(c) Isa Upanishad
(d) Mundaka Upanishad
70. Match the following
(i) Satpath
deals
Brahman
with philosophy,
Meta-physies
(ii) Aryankas
called Apauru-
sheya Meaning
not created by
Humans but
divine.
(iii) Upanishads
describes the
story of Videh
Madahu and
agricultural
rituals.
(iv) Vedas
deals with
mysti-cism,
Moral values
and philo-
sophical
doctrines.
Multiple Choice Question
(iii)
(b) (iii) (iv)
(iii)
(d) (iv) (iii)
71. Consider the following statements and
mark the whichever is correct.
(i) Garbadharna is the ceremony to
casue onception.
(ii) Niskramana is the ceremony of
taking the child out of house and
showing the sun.
(iii) Diuksharaman ceremony refers to
learning of Alphabet.
(iv) Jatakarman
ceremony
performed for the new born child.
(a) i, ii & iv
(b) none of the above
(c) all of the above
(d) iii only
72. Match the following schools of
Philosophy with their chief expounders.
Sankhya
Gautam
Mimansa
Patanjali
(iii)
Nyaya
Kapil
Jaimini
(iii)
(b) (iii) (iv)
(iii)
(d) (iv)
(iii)
73. Which school of philosophy is also
known as Lokayat
(a) Jaimini
(b) Buddhism
(c) Charvak
(d) Bhagvatism
74. Match the following opponents of Lord
Buddha with their school of Philosophy
/ Beliefs.
Ajit Kesh Kamblin
Fatalism
Sanjay Vethali-
Atomist
putta
(iii)
Pakudh Katya-
Materialism
Puran Kashyap
Materialism
Synicism.
(iii) (iv)
(iii)
(iii)
75. Match the following symbols with their
events in Lord Buddha’s Life.
Birth
Stupa
First Sermon
Lotus and Bull
(iii)
Nirvana
Dharam Chakra
Paranirvana
Bodhi Tree
(iii)
(iii)
(iii)
(d) (iii)
76. Who was the founder Mahayan sect of
Buddhism.
(a) Vasumitra
(b) Nagarjuna
(c) Rahul Bhadra
(d) Asang
77. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is true.
(i) Lord Mahavira got Kaivalya at
Jrimbhakgram and his disciples
were called Ganadhara.
(ii) Gautami was the first woman who
joined the Sangha of Buddha.
(iii) Dhammapad is known as the
Bhagvatgita of Buddhism.
(a) all of the above
(b) ii & iii
(c) none of the above
(d) only i
Gist of NCERT (History)
78. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) The Sacred literature of Saivas is
known ast Saivagama.
(ii) The collection of the Songs of 63
Nayanars is known as Sangam.
(iii) Wema Kadphises, the Kushava
King adopted Saivism.
(a) all of the above
(b) none of the above
(c) 1 & iii
ii & iii
79. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Ashoka the great founded the
Mauryana Empire with help of his
Brahmin Minister Chankya.
(ii) Asthashastras is contains 15
chapters.
(iii) Magasthenes in his book Indika
gives reference to absence of usury.
(a) i, & iii
ii & iii
(c) i & ii
(d) none of the above.
80. Match the following
Junagarh Rock
Jaluka was the
inscription of
successor of
Rudradaman I
Ashoka in
Kashmir
Rajatarigini
Construction of
Sudarsana Lake
(iii)
Jatakas
Social & Economic
conditions
(iii)
(iii)
(iii)
(d) (iii)
81. Match the following
Amatyas
concerned with
econo-mic functions
& some military
duties.
Tirthas
Highest category of
officials & were
Eighteen in numbers.
(iii)
Adhyakshya
functioned in
administrative and
judicial capacity.
Mahamattas
The Arthashastra
uses this term in the
sense of a Minister.
(iii)
(iii)
(iii)
(d) (iv)
(iii)
82. Match the following
LakshanandhyokshaA. Mint
Sansthadhyasksha
commerce/ fixed
price
(iii)
Panyadhayaksha
Market
(iii)
(iii)
(iii)
83. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Pulisanj were the public relation
officers who reported public
opinion to the King.
(ii) Vyavharika Mahamatta were the
judicial officers.
(iii) Gudha - Purusha were the secret
agents mentioned in Arthashastra.
(a) all of the above
(b) only ii
(c) none of the above
i & iii
84. Which committee was entrusted with
the work related to Manufactured
goods?
(a) Fifth committee
(b) First committee
(c) Third committee
(d) Sixth committee.
Multiple Choice Question
85. Which among the following was a
voluntary offering?
(a) Sita
(c) Bali
Vivit
86. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) The Kaushambi Pillar was brought
to Allahabad by Jehangir.
(ii) The Topra & Merrut Pillars were
brought to Delhi by Firoz Shah
Tughlaq.
(iii) The Bairat Inscription was brought
to Calcutta by cunningham.
(a) ii
i & iii
(c) all of the above
(d) none of the above.
87. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) The Major Rock edicts at Mansheva
& Shahbazgarhi are in Kharoshthi
script.
(ii) Major rock edicts are fourteen in
number.
(iii) The Queen’s edict is on Allahbad
pillar.
(a) only i
(b) only iii
(c) all of the above
(d) none of the above.
88. In which of the Edicts is found the
mention of Ashoka’s conversion to
Buddhism and his reverence for his
religion.
(a) Kalinga Edicts
(b) Bhabru Edicts
(c) Major Pillar Edicts
(d) Minor Rock Edicts
89. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Chandragupta
defeated
Menander.
(ii) Wima Kadiphises assumed the title
Deva ______ which was inspired by
the title Swargpulra of the chinese
emperor.
(iii) Shake Rule was founded by Maso
or Moga.
(a) ii
(b) i & iii
(c) all of the above
(d) ii & iii
90. Which Greek King issued bilingual
coins?
(a) Allexander (b)
Demetrivs
(c) Manander
Antaaliokus
91. Match the following
Shakas
Parmbhagvat
Heliodorus
coins bear the
image of Buddha
& Shiva
(iii)
Wima Kadiphises
was defeated by
Pushyamitra
Shunga
Demetrivs
Capital was
Purushpur
(Peshwar)
(iii)
(iii)
(iii)
(d) (iv) (iii)
92. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Kanishka introduced the Saka era.
(ii) St. Thomas reached India during
the time of Pahalava King
Gondophernes.
(iii) The Junagarh / Girnar Inscription
of Rudraaman is the first
inscription in chaste Sanskrit.
Gist of NCERT (History)
(a) i & ii
all of the above
(c) iii
(d) none of the above
93. Who patronised Mathura Art & built a
stupa at Purushpur?
(a) Kijula Kadiphises
(b) Rudradaman
(c) Wima Kadiphises
(d) Moga
94. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is true.
(i) Hathigumpha Inscription of
Kharvela of Kalinga is also sources
of Sangam Age.
(ii) Wima Kadiplises, inspired by his
teacher Parva convened a buddhist
convict at Kandalvana in Kashmir.
(iii) Greeks introduced Hellinistic Art
into India, the impact of which can
be seen in the Gandhara Art.
(a) ii
(b) none of the above
(c) i & iii
all of the above
95. Match the following
First Sangam
Madurai
Second Sangam
Tenmadurai
(iii)
Vird Sangam
Kavatuparani
(iii)
(b) (iii)
(iv) (iii)
96. Match the following
First Sangam
August &
Tolkappiyar
Second Sangam
Nakkirar
(iii)
Vird Sangam
August
(iii)
(iii)
(iii)
97. Which of the following term was used
for Supreme Court in the Sangam Age?
(a) Puhar
Sangam
(c) Maharum
Korai
98. Match the following term of Sangam
Panchvaram
Spies
Enadi
Ministerial
Council
(iii)
Senapati
(iii)
(b) (iii)
(iii)
99. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is true.
(i) Devdana is a single plot of land of
village to an individual Brahmin or
group of Brahmins.
(ii) Apad Dharma implies what a man
may legitimately do when he
cannot earn a living by the normal
deeds performed by his class.
(iii) Niyoga was the practice of
allowing a widow to cohabit with
her husbands younger brother till
the birth of a male child.
(a) ii
(b) i & iii
(c) all of the above
(d) ii & iii
100. Match the following
Ghatiyantra
An imporant guild in
Kerala.
Manigraman
Irrigation Device
(iii)
Shrotriyas
Learned Brahmins
who had the know-
ledge of Vedas.
(iii)
(iii)
(iii)
Multiple Choice Question
101. Match the following
Sadbhaga
Customs & Tolls
Land Revenue
(iii)
Shulka
A petty cess besides
King’s normal share.
(a) (iii)
(iii)
(iii)
102. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is true.
(i) Nandeshi was a guild of teachers
having membership from different
regions and castes.
(ii) Dvija refers to three upper classes.
Brahmans,
Kshtriyas
Vaishayas.
(iii) Uparika came into vogue during
the Guptas.
(a) none of the above
(b) iii
(c) i & ii
(d) all of the above
103. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is true.
(i) Vishwarup wrote a commentary
known
Balasera
Yavjnavalkyas Smriti.
(ii) Pratipada Panchika a commentary
on Kautilya’s Arthashastra was
written by Bhattaswami.
(iii) Vijananeshwar
wrote
commentary on Manu Smriti.
(a) i & iii
all of the above
(c) i & ii
(d) none of the above.
104. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is true.
(i) Manu : Brahmin can lend to wicked
people at low interests.
(ii) Apasthamba: Sudras and women
have right to study the Puranas.
(iii) Yajnavalkya : Women has a right
to inheritence.
(a) i & ii
(b) ii & iii
(c) all of the above
(d) none of the above.
105. Match the following
(i) Fahien
Indians had no
sense of History.
(ii) Alberuni
There was no
provision of
death sentence.
(iii) Hieun Tsang C.
India yield more
than fairness
requires.
(iii)
(iii)
(iii)
106. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Patanjali wrote Mahabhashya on
the grammar of Panini.
(ii) Panchtantra is the earliest story
collection book of Gupta period.
(iii) Hitopadesh, the second famous
collection of Indian stories was
written by Vishnu Sharma.
(a) i & iii
(c) i & ii
all of the above.
107. Which of the following contains the
description of the King Dushyant of
Hastinapur?
(a) Mudra Rakshas
(b) Mrichchkatika
(c) Abhijanashakuntlam
(d) Hitopadesh
Gist of NCERT (History)
108. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is true.
(i) The
two famous
plays
Vishakhandutta are Mudrarakshas
and Devichandra Guptam
(ii) Mrichchhatika contains the love
story Brahman charudatta & the
famous courtesan Vasantsena.
(iii) The First text of Sanskrit Grammar
is Ashtadhyayi written by Panini.
(a) i & ii
(b) all of the above
(c) iii
(d) none of the above.
109. Arrange the following in their
chronological order.
(i) Bhoja of Gujar-Pratibara Dynasty
(ii) Hindushahis of Punjab & Kabul
(iii) Rashtra Kutas of Deccan.
(iv) Chalukya Dynasty of Kalyani
(iii)
(b) (iv)
(iii)
(iii)
(d) (iii)
110. Arrange the following in their
chronological order.
(i) Capture of Tanjore by Vijayalaya
(ii) Shankracharya & his philosophy of
Advaitavada
(iii) Construction of Khajuraho Temples
(iv) Establishment of Monastry at
Nalanda by King Balaputra of
Sumatra.
(iii)
(iii)
(iv) (iii)
(iii)
111. Arrange the following in their
chronological order.
(i) Chahamanas
(Chauhans) of
Sakambhari (Ajmer)
(ii) Reign of Rajaraja chola.
(iii) Reign of Rajendra chola.
(iv) Gahadvalas of Kannauj.
(iii)
(b) (iv)
(iii)
(iii)
(d) (iii) (iv)
112. Arrange the following in their
chronological order.
(i) Paramaras (Pamars) of Dhar
(Malw(a)
(ii) Kakatiyas of Warangal.
(iii) Senas of Bengal.
(iv) Solankis of Kathiawar.
(iii)
(b) (iv) (iii)
(iii)
(iii)
113. Arrange the following according to
their chronological order.
(i) Construction of Lingaraja Temple
and Jagannath Temple.
(ii) Construction
Khajuraho
Temples.
(iii) Construction of Sun Temple at
Konark.
(iii)
(b) (iii)
(iii)
114. Arrange the following according to
their chronological order.
(i) Mohhamad
Tughlaq’s
expedition to karachi.
(ii) First Battle of Panipat & defeat of
Ibrahim Lodhi.
(iii) Second Battle of Tarain & defeat
of Prithviraj.
(iv) Reign of Rana Kumbha in Mewar.
Multiple Choice Question
(a) (iii)
(iii)
(iii)
(d) (ii)
(iii)
115. Arrange the following according to
their chronological order.
1. Battle of Bilgram and Second &
final defeat of Humayun by Sher
Shah.
2. Battle of Ghagra and Babur’s
defeat of Afghans under Mohd.
Lodhi.
3. Battle of Dharmat in which Dara
was defeated by Aurangzeb.
4. Battle of Chausa & first defeat of
Humayun by Sher Shah.
116. Arrange the following according to
their chronological order.
1. Rebellion of Prince Khullan
2. Revolt of Jats under Gokla
3. Rebellion of Prince Khusrau
4. Revolt of Chatrasal Bundela.
117. Arrange the following according to
their chronological order.
1. Peshwaship of Balaji Baji Rao.
2. Death of Aurangzeb at Aurangzeb.
3. Third Battle of Panipat between
Marathas & Afghans.
4. Peshwaship of Balaji Vishvanath.
118. Match the following
Ajay Raj
Chandela
Rao Siha
Chauhan
Gopal
Rathore
Nanunka
(a) 2 - A 3 - D 1 - C 4 - B
(b) 1 - C 2 - D 3 - A 4 - B
(c) 4 - A 3 - B 2 - C 1 - D
119. Match the following
Kachhavaha
Rana Kumbha
Rashtra Kuta
Bhoja
(iii)
Parmar
Man Singh
Sisodia
Krishna I
(iii)
(iii)
(iii) (iv)
(d) (iv) (iii)
120. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) The four class dominated by early
Rajputs arose from the ruins of
older Pratihara Kingdom.
(ii) The Solankis established their
control in Malwa with their capital
at Dhar near Indore.
(iii) All the four classes of early Rajputs
claimed their descent from
Mythical figure who arose out of
vast sacrificial fire pit near Mt. Abu.
(a) i & iii
(c) all of the above
(d) none of the above.
121. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) The Temple Arthitecture or South
Indian style of Architecutre
reached the pinnacle of glory
during the cholas reign.
Gist of NCERT (History)
(ii) Brihadeshwar
temple
Gangaikonda Cholapuram was
built by Rajendra.
(iii) The system of canals in South is a
contribution of the cholas.
(a) i & iii
(b) all of the above
(c) none of the above
(d) ii
122. Match the following
Devdeya
were famous for
Bronze statue of
Nataraja.
Vijayalaya
the village granted to
(iii)
Cholas
built the Vijayalaya
choleswa temple at
Naritamalai.
(iii)
(iii)
(iii)
123. Match the following
its membership was
restricted to Brahman
of the village.
Nagarani
a general assem-bly
of village consisting
of tax paying
residents.
(iii)
Sabha
was found more
commonly in trade
centres such as citiex
& towns.
(iii)
(b) (iii)
(iii)
124. Match the following
Varium
Tank committee
Eri Varium
Executive
Committee of Sabha.
(iii)
Nayattar
Judicial committee.
(iii)
(iii)
(iii)
125. Who built the Rajarajjeshwar Temple at
Tanjore?
(a) Parantaka I (b)
Rajaraja
(c) Rajendra Chola
(d) Vijayalaya
126. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Tiruvasakam was the Master piece
of Tamil Literature produced
during chola period.
(ii) The Tanjore temples has Murals on
Puranas and Scutplunes of Rajaraja
and his Queen Lok Mahadevi.
(iii) The cholas continued the Pratiharas
architectural style.
(a) ii
ii & iii
(c) i & ii
(d) none of the above.
127. Who built the Korangnath Temple at
Srinivasnattur?
(a) Parantaka I (b)
Vijayalaya
(c) Rajendra
Rajaraja
128. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Qutubaddin Aibek was the
founder of Delhi Sultanate & was
the first independent ruler.
(ii) Qutubuddin Aibek built two
Mosques. Quwan-ul-Islam Mosque
at Delhi and Dhai Din Ka Jonpara
at Amer.
(iii) Qutubuddin Aibek laid foundation
of Qutub Minar after the name of
a Sufi Saint Khwaja Qutubuddin
Bakhtiyar Kaki.
Multiple Choice Question
(a) i & iii
(c) all of the above
(d) none of the above.
129. Who introduced the Silver Tankk & Jital
two principal coins.
(a) Ghaisuddin Balban
(b) Qutubuddin Aibek
(c) Shamsuddin Iltutmish
(d) Alauddin Khilji
130. Match the following
Ghaisuddin Balban A.
created Tukan-i-
chanhalgani a
selected body of
Turkish Nobles.
Shamsuddin
inscribed-zillah
Iltutmish
or coins
(iii)
Qutubuddin Aibek C.
was founder of the
slave Dynasty.
(iii)
(b) (iii)
(iii)
131. Who built the ‘Alai Darwaja’ and Siri
Fort?
(a) Ghiasuddin Tughlaq
(b) Firoz Shah Tughlaq
(c) Alauddin Khilji
(d) Mohd. Bin Tughlaq
132. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is true.
(i) Mohd. bin Tughlaq formulated the
famine code to provide relief to
famine affected people.
(ii) Firoz Shah Tughlaq made ‘Iqta
System’ Hereditary.
(iii) Mohd. bin Tughlaq was on bad
terms with the famous Sufi saint
Nizamuddin Auliya.
(a) i & iii
(b) all of the above
(c) none of the above
(d) iii
133. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Firoz Shah Tughlaq creaed Diwan-
i-khairat for helping poor Muslim
parents in the Marriage of their
dauther.
(ii) Mohd. bin Tughlaq was known as
a ‘Prince of Moneyers’.
(iii) Firoz Shah Tughlaq wrote in verses
in persian under the name of
Ghirlakhi
(a) i & iii
ii & iii
(c) i & ii
(d) none of the above
134. Match the following
(i) Wazir
Diwan-I-Arz
(ii) Azia-i-
Diwan-
Mumalik
i-Wazirat
(iii) Sarr-ur-
Diwan-i-Insha
sudur
(iv) Dabir-i-
Diwan-
Mumalik
i-Risalat
(iii)
(iii)
(iii)
(d) (iii) (iv)
135. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Sikandar Bahlol Ibrahim Lodhi was
founder of city of Agra.
(ii) Alauddin Khilji started the practice
of old-age pension.
(iii) Mohd. bin Tughlaq was the first
Sultan to advance Loans known as
sondhar to peasants for digging
wells to extend cultivation.
Gist of NCERT (History)
(a) ii
i & iii
(c) none of the above
(d) all of the above.
136. Match the following
Muftis
Intelligence Agents
Barid
Exponder of Law
(iii)
Kotwal
Minister incharge of
Army.
Arz-i-Mamalik
Head of city
administration
(iii)
(iv) (iii)
(iii)
137. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Dhai-din Ka Jhopsa was originally
a sanskrit college and temple built
by the great chauhan emperor
Vigrahraja Visaldeva.
(ii) Zakat was a religious tax, paid by
Muslims as a charity for the
Welfare of their co-religiones.
(iii) Amir Khusro’s real name was
Abdul Hasan.
(a)  All of the above
(b) i & ii
(d) none of the above
138. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Amir Khusro created a new literary
style in Persian which came to be
known as Sabaq-i-Hind.
(ii) Amir Khusro was disciple of
Nizammudin Auliya.
(iii) He introduced the perso-arobic
ragas etc.
(a) iii
i & ii
(c) none of the above
(d) all of the above.
Match the following
composed verses in
Hindavi using
persian
Amir Khusro
Literal meaning of
the word is Army or
camp.
(iii)
Sher Shah Suri
Built old Fort.
(iii)
(iii)
(iii)
140. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Babur founded a new capital city
of Fatehpur Sikri.
(ii) Babur was a skilled Musicians
played Naqqara.
(iii) The mode of caligraphy favourite
to Akbar was ‘Nastaliq’.
(a) i & iii
all of the above
(c) ii & iii
(d) none of the above.
141. Match the following
Jehangir
established royal
Karkhana for
painting.
Akbar
was antagonistic
towards miniature
paintings.
(iii)
Aurangzeb
sent Bisan Dara to
russia.
(iii)
(iii)
(iii)
142. Match the following
Zil-i-ilahi
Dara Shikoh
Alamgir
Akbar
(iii)
Shah-i-Buland Iqbal C.
Aurangzeb
(iii)
(b) (iii)
(iii)
Multiple Choice Question
143. Who introduced ‘Du-Aspah’ & ‘Site-
Aspah’ system?
(a) Shahjahan
(b) Aurangzeb
(c) Jehangir
(d) Akbar
144. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Aurangzeb confronted a number
of rebelluris including Jats under
Rajaram & Chauraman; Sikhs and
Rajputs.
(ii) Dara Shikoh was a devotee of
Qadiri order of Sufis.
(iii) Shahjahan executed Guru Arjun
Dev with charge of giving help of
the prince Khusrao after his Revolt
in 1606.
(a) i & iii
(b) i & ii
(c) all of the above
(d) none of the above.
145. Match the following:
Aurangzeb
built Magnificent
edifices like Red Fort,
Jama Masjid.
Babar
was ragarded as
‘Zind Pir’
(iii)
Shahjahan
introduced Gaz-i-ilahi
of 41 digits a new
yard for land
Measurement.
(iii)
(b) (iii)
(iii)
146. Who among the following is the Head
of Royal Household?
(a) Sarkar
Subah
(c) Mir Bakshi (d)
Khan-i-Saman.
147. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is true.
(i) The Revenue official at the level of
Pargana was Amil.
(ii) The village affairs were looked
after by the Panchayat whose head
was called Lambardar.
(iii) Atharva Veda was translated into
Persian by Haji Ibrahim Sirhindi.
(a) i & ii
(b) none of the above
(c) all of the above
(d) iii
148. Match the following:
Nal Damyanti
translated into
Persian by Mulla
Shah Mohd.
Ramayana
translated into
persian by Faizi.
(iii)
Rajtarangini
translated into
persian by Abdul
Qadir Badayuni.
(iii)
(iii)
(iii)
149. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Akbar established Royal Karhana
for painting.
(ii) Shalimar garden was laid out by
Shahjehan.
(iii) Jehangir was a painter himself and
loved paintings on animal & Birds.
(a) i & iii
(b) none of the above
(c) all of the above
(d) ii
150. Which one the following is the actual
collection from Land?
(a) Hasil
(b) Jama
(c) Khalisa
Dasturs
Gist of NCERT (History)
151. Match the following:
Al-Tamgha
efficient troops
not under the
control of
Emperor.
Jagirs given to
Muslim Nobles.
(iii)
Ahadis
Commander of
Hundred.
(iii)
(iii)
(iii)
152. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Sawar was a Mughal rank that
determined the number of cavalary
(ii) Watan Jagirs was an area where
there was objection made by the
Zamindars.
(iii) Waqf was the grants for religious
and educational institutions.
(a) i & iii
(b) ii
(c) all of the above
(d) none of the above
153. During whose tenure the practice
Revenue farming of ‘Ijara’ was started.
(a) Bahadur Shah
(b) Farruk Siyar
(c) Jahandar Shah
(d) Mohd. Shah
154. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Banda Bahadur, the sikh leader was
defeated and captured by Farrukh
Siyar.
(ii) Muhammad Shahs original name
was Raushan Akhtar.
(iii) Bahadur Shah II was deposed and
tried for waging war against the
British.
(a) ii & iii
(b) all of the above
(c) none of the above
(d) i only
155. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Guru Ramdas was the political
guru of Shivaji.
(ii) Shivaji adopted the title of
Chattarpati
Kshtriya
Kulavatamsa.
(iii) Sivaji belonged to Bhonsle Clan.
(a) all of the above
(b) ii
(c) none of the above
(d) ii & iii
156. Match the following
Peshwa
Baroda
Bhonsle
Indore
(iii)
Gackwad
Poona
Holkar
Nagpur
(iii)
(b) (iv)
(iii)
(iii) (iv)
157. Match the following
Peshwa
Prime Minister
Sar-i-Naubat
Royal Corres-
pondence
(iii)
Sachiv
Chief of Armed
forces
(iii)
(b) (iii)
(iii)
158. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is true.
(i) Shivaji’s Biography by Sabhasad is
known as Bakhar.
Multiple Choice Question
(ii) Watandars were the local lnaded
elements in Maratha Kingdom.
(iii) The lowest unit of the country was
termed as Prants in the Maratha
Kingdom.
(a) i & ii
(c) all of the above
(d) none of the above.
159. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is true.
(i) Balaji Vishwanath introduced
Saranjami System.
(ii) Baji Rao I campaigned against the
Sidis of Janjira.
(iii) Deshmukhs were equivalent to
Chandharib of North and Desais
of Gujarat.
(a) none of the above
(b) ii & iii
all of the above
(d) only i
160. Match the following:
Barbosa
Achyutdevaraya
Nicolo
Krishnadeva
(iii)
Nuniz
Devaraya I
(iii)
(b) (iii)
(iii)
161. Match the following
Balaji Visvanath
Greatest exponent of
Guerilla tacties after
Shivaji.
Madhav Rao
Introduced
Saran-jami
system.
(iii)
Baji Rao I
defeated Haider
(a) (iii)
(iii)
(iii)
162. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is true.
(i) The first Anglo Maratha war fought
due to conflict for power betwen
narayan Rao and Raghunath Rao.
(ii) Mamlatdar was the subedar of
bigger provinces under the
Peshwas.
(iii) During the invasion of Ahmad Shah
Addali nominal Head of the
Maratha Army was Viswas Rao.
(a) i & ii
(b) i & iii
(c) all of the above
(d) none of the above.
163. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is true.
(i) Baji Rao I propounded concept of
Hindu Pad Padshahi and was also
the real architect of Marath Empire.
(ii) Moksha Mahal were the Land
grants given during the time of
Marathas.
(iii) During the reign of Baji Rao I the
Maratha Capital shifted from
Satara to Poona.
(a) all of the above
(b) i & ii
(c) ii & iii
(d) none of the above.
164. Arrange the following according to
their charonological order.
(i) Baji Rao I
(ii) Narayan Rao
(iii) Madhav Rao
(iv) Balaji Vishwanath
(iii)
(b) (iv)
(iii)
(iii)
Gist of NCERT (History)
165. Match the following
Harihar II
won Orissa for Vijay
Nagar
Devraya II
was defeated by
Firoz Shah Bah-mani
also built dam on
Tunga-bhadra.
(iii)
Krishna Deva Raya C.
inducted a large
number of Mus-lims
in his Army.
Dev Ray I
sent an expedi-tion to
Sri Lanka.
(iii) (iv)
(b) (iii)
(iii)
(d) (iv) (iii)
166. Who among the following assumed the
title of Abhinav Bhoj.
(a) Harihar II
Rama Raja
(c) Devraya II
(d) Krishna deva Singh
3. Who was responsible for the defeat
of Vijaynagar in the Battle of
Talikotta in 1565?
(a) Krishna deva Singh
(b) Rama Raja
(c) Harihar II
(d) Devraya I
167. Which was the most common animal
found in the pillars of the architecture
of Vijaynagar Empire?
(a) Bull
Unicorn
(c) Horse
Elephant
168. Which of the following temples is an
example of Wall inscriptions on which
stories of Ramayana & the Mahabharata
are inscribed?
(a) Tadapatri
Varadraja
(c) Parvati
Vithalswami
169. The
Political
Treatise
Amuktamalyamada in Telugu was
written by:—
(a) Harihar II
(b) Dev Raja II
(c) Krishna Devraya
(d) Rama Raja
170. Who entered into a treaty with the
Portuguese to obtain the Monopoly of
Horses?
(a) Rama Raja
(b) Krishna Devaraya
(c) Harihar II
Devraya I
171. Who allied with the Reddy Kingdom to
defeat Firoz Shah Bahmani?
(a) Devraya II
(b) Harihar II
(c) Krishna Devaraya
(d) Devraya I
172. Match the following
Shanksacharya
His commentary on
Vedanta is com-piled
in Sribhashya and
Gita bhashya.
Kabir
admitted to his sect
disciples from all
castes, _____ and
even among the
Muslims.
(iii)
Ramanuja
gave birth to the
philosophy of
Ektavad of Vedanta.
Ramananda
Representative poet-
saint of Nirguna
Bhakti sect.
(iii)
(b) (iii) (iv)
(iv) (iii)
(d) (iii)
173. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Dadu Dayal was a devotee of
Nirankar Brahma & Staumeh
supporter of Nirguna school of
Bhakti cult.
(ii) Guru Nanak started Langar & has
Multiple Choice Question
work was compiled in the Adi
Granth.
(iii) Chaitanya was the most radical
disciple of Ramananda.
(a) ii & iii
(c) 1 & 2
174. Who among the following said, “God
is the breath of all Breaths”
(a) Shankracharya
(b) Kabir
Guru Nanak
(d) Chaitanya
175. Who among the following is also known
as crypto - Buddhist?
(a) Ramanuja
(b) Ramananda
(c) Shankarcharya
(d) Chaitanya
176. Match the following
Dadu Dayal
declared that Allah &
Ram were names of
the same God.
Shankaracharya
devotee of Nirankar
Brahma & ______
supported of
Nirguna School of
Bhakti cult.
(iii)
Kabir
emphasized True
Education
(iii)
(b) (iii)
(iii)
177. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Shankar dev is also famous as
Chaitanya of Assam.
(ii) Tulsidas depicted Rama as the
incarnaton of Vishnu.
(iii) Nimbarkacharya published the
Theory of Dwaith Advaitvad
(Dualism - non dualism).
(a) ii & iii
i & ii
(c) all of the above
(d) none of the above
178. Who among the following is also known
as “Kabir of the Deccan”
(a) Basava
(b) Nimbarkacharya
(c) Madhvacharya
(d) Tukaram
179. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Narsi Mehta was exponder of
Lingayat Sect and wrote Vachanas.
(ii) Madhvacharya expounded the
theory of Dwaitvad (Dualism) &
was a devotee of Vishnu.
(iii) Eknath
saint
Maharashtra Dharma.
(a) none of the above
(b) i & ii only
all of the above
(d) ii & iii
180. Match the following
Mirabai
author of Ramcharit
Manas
Tulsidas
follower of Krishna
cult of Vaishnavism.
(iii)
Basava
composed Marathi
commentary of
Bhagvat Gita.
Jnanadeva
expounder of
Liagayat Sect.
(iii) (iv)
(iii)
(iii)
(iii)
181. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is true.
(i) Mimbarkacharya
identified
Brahmana with Krishna. He was a
Telugu Brahmin of Andhra
Gist of NCERT (History)
Pradesh who spent most of his
time in Vrindavan.
(ii) The first great theme of the poetry
of Surdas constiutes Krishna’s Bal
Lila.
(iii) Namdev Said, “Hindu is Blind,
then Muslim squint who knows it,
is wiser than both, he is the servant
of that name”.
(a) all of the above
(b) i & iii
(c) none of the above
(d) ii & iii
182. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is correct.
(i) Guru Nanak believed in the
doctrine of Karma and the theory
of transmigration of souls.
(ii) Ramanand was representative of
Sagun Bhakti sect.
(iii) Kabir defeated Buddhist scholastic
Teachers.
(a) i & iii
(b) all of the above
(c) i & ii
(d) none of the above
183. Match the following
Nizamuddin Auliya A.
Firdausi
Order
Sheikh Bahauddin
Chisti Order
Zakaria
(iii)
Sheikh Abdulla
Sushra Wardi
order
Badruddin
Shattariya
Samarqandi
order
(iii)
(b) (iv)
(iii)
(iii) (iv)
(iii)
184. Match the following
Sheikh Nuruddin
Qadiriya
order
Sheikh Abdul Qadir B.
Rishi
Movement
(iii)
Sajid Mohd. bin
Chisti order
Yusuf-al Hussaini
Baba Farid
Gesu Daraz
(iii)
(b) (iii)
(iii)
(d) (iv)
(iii)
185. Who among the following was also
known as ‘Sidh’ or perfect for his
Mastery over jogic practices.
(a) Nizammuddin Auliya
(b) Khwaja Moinuddin Chisti
(c) Baba Farid
(d) Qutubuddin Bakhtiyar Kaki
186. Which of the following, literally means
‘Wondering Dervishes’?
(a) Kubrawiyya order
(b) Qalandariya order
(c) Chisti order
(d) Shattariya order
187. Consider the following statements and
mark the option which is true.
(i) Sheikh Nuruddin started Rishi
Movement and incorporated
teachings of Yogi Lalla also called
Lal Ded in Kashmir.
(ii) The founder of Shattariya order in
India & his disciples marched
wearing soldiers uniform beating
drums.
(iii) Iltutmish was a devotee of
Qutubuddin Bakhtiyar Kak and
dedicated the Qutub Minar to him.
(a) i & ii
Multiple Choice Question
(b) none of the above
(c) all of the above
(d) ii & iii
188. Match the following
Kanqah
those who followed
sharia.
Be-shara
Monastic organisa-
tion of the sufi.
(iii)
Ba-shara
those who did not
strictly follow Sharia
Furrow Marks
Kalibangan
(iii)
(iii)
(iv) (iii)
(d) (iii)
189. Consider the following statements.
(1) Haider Ali was the founder of
Mysore.
(2) In the first Anglo Mysore war
British defeated Haider Ali.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
1 only
(c) 2 only
Neither 1 nor 2
190. Consider the following statements.
(1) Srirangapatnam treaty signed after
the Second-Anglo Mysore War.
(2) Tipu Sultan died in 1799.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
2 only
(c) 1 only
Neither 1 nor 2
191. Consider the following statements.
(1) Wallesely was the Governor at the
time of the fourth Anglo-Mysore.
(2) Tipu assumed the title of Sultan in
1786.
(3) Devaraja & Nanaraja was related
to Hyderabad.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 2
(b) 2 & 3
(c) 1 & 3
(d) All of the above
192. Consider the following statements.
(1) Martanda Verma was the founder
of Travancore.
(2) During Mysorean invasions on
Travancore Rama Varma was the
Ruler.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
(b) 1 only
(c) 2 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
193. Consider the following statements.
(1) Treaty of Salabai was the outcome
of Second Anglo-Maratha War.
(2) Arthur Wellesley was the main
Architect of Second Anglo-Maratha
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) 2 only
194. Match the following
Place
Ruler
Nagpur
(a) Bhosle
Baroda
(b) Sindia
Indore
(c) Gaikwad
Gwalior
(d) Holkar
(a) 1 - a 2 - b 3 - c 4 - d
(b) 1 - a 2 - c 3 - d 4 - a
(c) 1 - b 2 - d 3 - a 4 - c
(d) 1 - c 2 - a 3 - b 4 - d
195. Consider the following statements.
(1) Treaty of Rajpurghat with Lord
Lake (British) signed with Bhosle.
Gist of NCERT (History)
(2) Dalhousie was the Architect of
Third Anglo-Maratha War.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Neither 1 nor 2
(b) 1 only
(c) 2 only
Both 1 & 2
196. Consider the following statements.
(1) Guru Gobind Singh was the
contemporary to Bahadur Shah I.
(2) Banda Bahadur’s revolt was
suppressed by Aurangzeb.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
(b) 2 only
(c) 1 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
197. Consider the following statements.
(1) Jats Revolt against the Mughal
authority started from the time of
Aurengzeb.
(2) Churaman & Bodan Singh founded
the Jat State of Bharatpur.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
(b) 1 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) 2 only
198. In the Later Mughal period there are
some states were established by the
Mughal provincial governors, which
state is not in that list.
(a) Awadh
Bengal
(c) Hyderabad
(d) None of these
199. Consider the following statements.
(1) Ahmad Shah to grant the title of
Burhan-ul-mulk to Saadat Khan.
(2) Chin Qulich Khan took the title of
Nizam-ul-mulk Asaf Khan.
(3) Chin Qulich Khan was the leader
of the Turani Party.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 2 & 3
(b) 1 & 3
(c) All of the above
(d) 1 & 2
200. Consider the following statements.
(1) British supported Nasir Jung in a
war of succession against Muzaffar
Jung.
(2) Nizam of Hyderabad was neutral
in the second Anglo-Mysore War.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 2
(b) 2 & 3
(c) All of the above
(d) 1 & 3
201. Consider the following statements.
(1) Murshid
contemporary to Jahadar Shah.
(2) Anwar-ud-din as the Nawab of
Carnatic murdered by Chanda
Sahib with the help of French.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
(b) 2 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) 1 only
202. According to their Ruling period
Arrange the following Bengal Success.
(1) Shuja-ud-din
(2) Murshid Kuli Khan
(3) Alivardi Khan
(4) Siraj-ud-daula.
(a) 1, 2, 3, 4
(b) 2, 1, 4, 3
(c) 2, 1, 3, 4
4, 3, 1, 2
203. Under the tenure of Siraj-ul-daula a
alliance made by some people to
dethrone him who was not in that
alliance.
Multiple Choice Question
(a) Jagat Seth
Raja Janki Ram
(c) Manik Chand
(d) None of these
204. Consider the following statements
about Black hole tragedy.
(1) During Black hole tragedy
Murshid Kuli Khan was the
Nawab of Bengal.
(2) Holwell was one of the Survivor
of this tragedy.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 2only
(b) 1 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) Both 1 & 2
205. Consider the following statements
about Battle of Plassey.
(1) The English continued fortification
of Fort Willium dissegarding the
orders of Nawab was one of the
main reasons of Battle.
(2) Mir Jafar dethroned Sir-ud-daula
with the help of Clive.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
Both 1 & 2
(c) 2 only
Neither 1 nor 2
206. Consider the following statements.
(1) British
granted
Zamindari
Burdwan,
Midnapore & Chittagon by Mir
Jafar.
(2) As an Nawab of Bengal Mir Kasim
was the replacement of Mir Jafar.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 2 only
(b) 1 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
207. Consider the following statements
about Battle of Buxar.
(1) Mir Kasim formed in alliance with
Shah Alam II & Shuja-ud-daula of
Awadh.
(2) The combined forces defeated
Britishers.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
(b) 2 only
(c) 1 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
208. Consider the following statements
about Treaty of Allahabad.
(1) Treaty of Allahabad was signed in
1765.
(2) Mir Kasim granted the diwani of
Bengal, Bihar & Orissa to the
company.
(3) Treaty of Allahabad gave the
diwani rights from Nawab to the
company.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 2
(c) 1 & 2
(d) 2 & 3 only
209. Consider the following statements
about the Regulating Act of 1773.
(1) Act established the office of
Governor-General at Fort William.
(2) Warren Hastings was appointed as
the Governor of Bengal in 1773.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) Both 1 & 2
Gist of NCERT (History)
210. Match the following
Incidents
Farrukhsiyar
granted duty free
trading rights to East
India Company
Dutch Company
received exemption
from paying tolls
Britishers got
Zamindari rights in
Kolikata, Sultanutia
& Gobindapur.
East India Company
granted exemption
for paying toll tax.
(a) 1 - c 2 - b 3 - a 4 - d
(b) 1 - c 2 - a 3 - b 4 - d
(c) 1 - c 2 - d 3 - b 4 - a
(d) 1 - d 2 - c 3 - a 4 - b
211. Consider the following statements.
(1) Till the first half of the eighteenth
century in terms of trade. India
was superior to any European
Country.
(2) The Economic Hisotry of India
written  by Dadabhai Naoroji.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
1 only
(c) 2 only
Neither 1 nor 2
212. Consider the following statements.
(1) The two most important forms of
drain of wealth were Home
Charges & Council Bills.
(2) Council Bills were the actual means
through which money was
transferred.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
2 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
Neither 1 nor 2
213. Consider the following statements
about permanent settlement.
(1) Warren Hastings known as the
father of permanent settlement.
(2) The land revenue under permanent
settlement was to be fixed.
(3) The Zamindars were to pay a fixed
amount of revenue by the sun-set
of a particular day.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 2
(c) 1 & 3
(d) 2 & 3
214. Consider the following statements
about Ryotwari Settlement.
(1) Thomas Munro give the shape to
Ryotwari settlement.
(2) The
Ryotwari
Settlement
technically created individual
proprietary rights in land which
were vested in peasants.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
1 only
(c) 2 only
Neither 1 nor 2
215. Consider the following statements
about Mahalwari.
(1) Holt Mackenzie devised the
Mahalwari system.
(2) The settlement was to be made
village by village & estate (Mahal)
by estate.
(3) The state reserved to itself the right
of direct management of the
agricultural economy.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 2
All of the above
(c) 2 & 3
1 & 3
Multiple Choice Question
216. Consider the following statements.
(1) Ramakrishna
Mission
established by Swami Paramhansa
in 1896.
(2) Sir Sayaid Ahmed Khan founded
the Aligarh Scientific Society.
(3) M.G. Ranade started Vidhawa
Vivaha uttejaka Mandal Society for
Widow remarriage.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 2
2 & 3
(c) 1 & 3
All of the above
217. Consider the following statements.
(1) Arya Samaj was founded by
Dayanand Saraswati in 1885.
(2) Dayanand Saraswati established
Gaurakshini Sabhas.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 2 only
1 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
Neither 1 nor 2
218. Consider the following statements.
(1) ‘A nation in making’ written by
Dadabhai Naoroji.
(2) Hindu College was founded in
Calcutta with encouragement from
David Hare & Rammohan Roy.
(3) Asiatic Society of Bengal founded
by David Hare.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 3
2 & 3
(c) 1 & 2
All of the above
219. Consider the following statements
about Raja Ram Mohan Roy.
(1) Raja Saheb viewed British Rule as
beneficial.
(2) The three main influences inthe
Raja’s thought were Vedantic,
Islamic & Christianity.
(3) He was the founder of Brahma
Samaj.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 2
2 & 3
(c) 1 & 3
All of the above
220. Consider the following statements
about Brahmo Samaj.
(1) Tattvabodhini Patrika was the
mouth piece of Brahmo Samaj.
(2) In 1865 there ws asplit when
Keshav Chand Sen & his followers
broke away.
(3) The role of the Brahmo Samaj as
the first intellectual movement.
Which spread the ideas of rational
& enlightment in Modern India.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 2 only
(c) 2 & 3 only
(d) 1 & 3
221. Consider the following statements
about Arya Samaj.
(1) Arya Samaj was founded by
Dayanand Saraswati at Rajkot.
(2) The Samaj does not believe in caste
based on birth.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
Both 1 & 2
(c) 2 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
222. Consider the following statements
about Swami Vivekanand.
(1) Vivekanand represent Hinduism to
the parliament of Religious
convened at Chicago in 1893.
(2) He
founder
Ramakrishna Mission.
Gist of NCERT (History)
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 2 only
Both 1 & 2
(c) 1 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
223. Consider the following statements
about Theosophical society.
(1) Society was founded by Madame
Blavatsky & Colonel Olkott.
(2) Society’s headquarter was in Adyar
(Madras).
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) Both 1 & 2
224. Consider the following statements.
(1) M.G. Ranade widely accepted as
the ‘father of renaissance’ in
western India.
(2) Prarthana Samaj was founded in
1867.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
1 only
(c) 2 only
Neither 1 nor 2
225. Consider the following statements.
(1) Mahima movement was founded
in Orissa.
(2) Dev Samaj founded by Keshav
Chand Sen.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 2 only
1 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
Neither 1 nor 2
226. Consider the following statements.
(1) Bharat Dharma Mahamandala was
an orthodox organization of
educated Hindus.
(2) Madras Hindu Social reforms
Association was founded by
Viresalingam Pantulu.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
2 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
Neither 1 nor 2
227. Consider the following statements.
(1) Dharma Sabha was founded by
Radhakant Deb.
(2) Gopal Hari Deshmukh was
popularly known as Lokahi tawadi.
(3) Radhswami
movement
founded by Shiv Dayal Saheb.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 2
2 & 3
(c) 1 & 3
(d) All of the above
228. Consider the following statements.
(1) The Seva Sadan was founded by
Behram J. Malabari.
(2) The Servants of India Society was
founded by Tilak.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
2 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
Neither 1 nor 2
229. Consider the following statements.
(1) Indian National Social conference
was founded by M.G. Ranade.
(2) The Social Service league was
founded by Narayan Malhar Joshi.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
Both 1 & 2
(c) 2 only
Neither 1 nor 2
Multiple Choice Question
230. Consider the following statements.
(1) Rahanumai Mazdayan Sabha was
a social religious reform of the
Muslim in India.
(2) Syed Ahmed Khan was the first
Muslim President of congress.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) Both 1 & 2
231. Consider the following statements
about Sir Syed Ahmad Khan.
(1) At the time of the Rebellion of 1857
Syed Ahmad was the Amin of
Bijnor.
(2) He founded Muhammandan
Anglo-Oriental College at Aligarh.
(3) He was the founding member of
India National Congress.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 2 & 3
(c) 1 & 2
(d) 1 & 2
232. Consider the following statements.
(1) Faraidi Movement spread in East
Bengal.
(2) Syed Ahmad Barelwi was the
founder of Wahabi movement.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 2 only
1 only
(c) 2 only
Neither 1 nor 2
233. Consider the following statements.
(1) Mirza Ghulam Ahmad known as
father
Ahamadiya
movement.
(2) This movement was based on the
principles of a universal religion of
all humanity.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
Both 1 & 2
(c) 2 only
Neither 1 nor 2
234. Consider the following statements
about movement.
(1) The movement was founded by
Qasim Nahautavi & Rashid Ahmad
Gangohi.
(2) To coperated with the congress in
its activites was the main objective
of this movement.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
2 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
235. Consider the following statements.
(1) Jyotiba Phule was the founder of
Satya Shodhak Samaj.
(2) Aravippuram movement launched
by Ramaswami Naikar.
(3) Self Respect movement launched
by Narain Guru.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 2 & 3
(c) 1 only
(d) 1 & 3
236. Consider the following statements.
(1) Widow Marriage Act passed in
1856.
(2) D.K. Karve founded India’s first
Women’s University in Bombay.
(3) The Child Marriage restrint Act
popularly known as Sarda Act.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 2
2 & 3
(c) 1 & 3
All of the above
Gist of NCERT (History)
237. Consider the following statements
about Illbert Bill.
(1) Illbert Bill was introduced in
Legislative Council during the era
of Lord Ripon.
(2) Bill arrested that the Indian Judges
were not fit to administer Justice
of a white offender.
(3) The Anglo Indian Community was
in favour to this Bill.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 3
(c) 1 & 2
(d) 2 & 3
238. Which Governor General once said that
Indians are cheats.
(a) Lord Curzon
(b) Lyutton
(c) Dalhousie
(d) Minto
239. Consider the following statements.
(1) British Indian Association Founded
in 1851.
(2) The Indian League was founded by
Surendranath Banerjee.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
(b) Both 1 & 2
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) 2 only
240. Consider the following statements.
(1) Prarthna Samaj founded in 1867 by
Ranade.
(2) Madras Mahajan Sabha was
founded in 1884.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
2 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
Neither 1 nor 2
241. Consider the following statements.
(1) Saligram idol eare is related to
Lokmanya Tilak.
(2) Vernacular Press Act passed during
Lord Lytton’s tenure.
(3) W.C. Banerjee was the first
president of Indian National
Congress.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 2 only
(c) 1 & 3 only
(d) 2 & 3
242. Consider the following statements.
(1) Lord Curzon known as the father
of Indian Nationalism.
(2) Muslim League came into existence
in 1906.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
1 only
(c) 2 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
243. Consider the following statements
about the provisions of Indian council
Act of 1861.
(1) Indians could be nominated to the
Supreme Legislative Council.
(2) The
members
nominated by Governor-General.
(3) Local Legislations to be set up in
Mumbai.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 2 only
(c) 2 & 3 only
(d) 1 & 3
244. Consider the following statements
about Indian Council Act of 1892.
(1) The number of members of councils
of Bengal & North-Western
Multiple Choice Question
provinces was to be raised to 20 &
15 respectively.
(2) The Act allowed the members to
discuss the budget & offer
suggestions for its improvement.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
2 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
Neither 1 nor 2
245. Consider the following statements.
(1) New Lamps for old (Book) written
by Aurbindo Ghosh.
(2) Tilak used the Ganpati Festival to
raise awareness Nationalism.
(3) Gaorakshini Sabha founded by
Tilak.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 2
(c) 2 & 3
(d) 1 & 3
246. Consider the following statements.
(1) Hindu mela or National Mela
founded by Nabagopal Mitra.
(2) The extremists made the demand
for Swaraj or Home Rule.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
1 only
(c) 2 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
247. Consider the following statements.
(1) The Swadeshi-cum Boy cott
movement was launched on
August 7, 1905 at a meeting in
Calcutta Town Hall.
(2) National College was formed by
Surendranath Banerjee in 1906.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
2 only
(c) 1 only
Neither 1 nor 2
248. Consider the following statements.
(1) During partition of Bengal (1905)
Gokhale
congress
president.
(2) In 1907 Surat Congress session the
extremist suggest Lajpat Rai’s
name for the presidentship.
(3) British
government
council
partition of Bengal in 1911.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 2
2 & 3
(c) 1 & 3
All of the above
249. Which Vice-Roy’s tenure in India known
as the full of missions, omissions &
commissions.
(a) Lord Lytton (b)
Lord Curzon
(c) Lord Irwin (d)
Lord Ripon
250. Consider the following statements.
(1) Bhupendra Datta edited Yugantar
during National movement.
(2) Aurbindo Ghosh was related to
Yugantar.
(3) Collector of Nasik Mr. Jackson was
assassinated in 1915.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 2
2 & 3
(c) 1 & 3
All of the above
251. Consider the following statements.
(1) Savarkar brothers started an
association which was called Mitra
Mela in 1904.
(2) India House founded by Shyam Ji
Krishna Verma.
(3) ‘Indian War of Independence’ was
originally written in English.
Gist of NCERT (History)
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 2 & 3
(c) 1 & 2 only
(d) 1 & 3
252. Consider the following statements.
(1) Curzon Willie was shot dead by
Madan Lal Dhingra.
(2) Ghadar Party was established in
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
2 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) Both 1 & 2
253. Consider the following statements
about Kamagata Maru incident.
(1) Kamagata Maru incident hapen in
1916.
(2) Baba Gurdit Singh was related to
this incident.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
(b) 2 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) 1 only
254. Consider the following statements
about Ghadar Party.
(1) Lala Har Dayal along with others
founded Ghadar party.
(2) The party established its branches
in Hong Kong, Manila, Bangkok,
Shanghai & Panama.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
(b) 1 only
(c) 2 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
255. Consider the following statements
about Morley-Minto reform.
(1) It increased the membership of
non officials in the imperial &
provincial legisltive councils.
(2) The Act provided for the
appointment of an Indian to the
Viceroy’s executive council.
(3) The members could introduce
legislative proposals but could not
enact laws.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 2
(b) 2 & 3
(c) All of the above
(d) 1 & 3
256. Consider the following statements.
(1) Delhi Darbar was held in 1911
during the viceroyalty of Lord
Hardinge.
(2) Amir Chand, Avadh Bihari,
Balmukund & Basanta Kumar
Biswas received capital punishment
in Lahore Bomb case.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
(b)  2 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) Both 1 & 2
257. Consider the following statements
about Lucknow pact (1916).
(1) In the Central Legislature one third
of the elected Indian members
should be muslims.
(2) Ras Bihari Bose the congress
president in 1916.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 2 only
1 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
Multiple Choice Question
258. Consider the following statements
about montague - Chelmsford reform.
(1) Set up dyarchy in provinces.
(2) The transferred department were
given to Indian Ministers.
(3) The Governor was to preside over
bothe wings of the executive.
(4) A Second Indian was to be added
to the Governor - General’s
executive council.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 2
(c) 2 & 3
(d) 3 & 4
259. Consider the following statements.
(1) Lord Irwin appointed the sedition
committee or Rowlatt commission.
(2) Sir Sankaran Nair resigned his
membership of the Viceroys
executive council in the protest of
Jallianwala Massacre.
(3) Udham Singh shot ded Michael O’
Dywer.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 2 only
(c) 2 & 3
(d) 1 & 3
260. Consider the following statements.
(1) October 17, 1919 was observed as
the Khilafat day at an all India
scale.
(2) At a special session of the Indian
national congress at Calcutta
(September 1920) passed the
resolution to launch the non-
cooperation movement.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
1 only
(c) 2 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
261. Consider the following statements
about
programme
cooperation movement.
(1) Surrender of titles & honorary
offices.
(2) Withdrawal of children from
schools & colleges
(3) Boycott of foreign goods.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 2
All of the above
(c) 2 & 3
1 & 3
262. Consider the following statements.
(1) The non cooperation movement
were suspended after the Chauri
Chaura Incident.
(2) Gandhi Ji faced trial (March 192(2)
in Mumbai.
(3) Gandhi took full responsibility of
Chauri Chaura.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 2
(c) 2 & 3
(d) 1 & 3
263. Consider the following statements.
(1) The founder of the Indian
Communism was M.N. Roy.
(2) M.N. Roy founded communist
party of India in Kanpur.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
2 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
Neither 1 nor 2
264. Match the following
Party
State
Labur Swaraj party(A)
Madras
Kirti Kishan party
Bengal
Gist of NCERT (History)
Congress Labour
Punjab
Party
Labour Kisan Party(D)
Mumbai
(a) 1 - a 2 - b 3 - c 4 - d
(b) 1 - b 2 - c 3 - d 4 - a
(c) 1 - c 2 - d 3 - b 4 - a
(d) 1 - d 2 - a 3 - c 4 - b
265. Consider the following statements.
(1) All India trade Union Congress
held its first session in Kanpur.
(2) Meerut conspiracy case’s accused
were defended by J.L. Nehru, M.A.
Ansari & M.C. Chagla.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
Both 1 & 2
(c) 2 only
Neither 1 nor 2
266. Consider the following statements
about CSP.
(1) Congress socialist party was
formed in 1934.
(2) J.L.Nehru & base did not support
(3) The Cabinet Mission plan was
rejected by CSP.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 2
(c) 2 & 3
(d) 1 & 3
267. Consider the following statements.
(1) Under the presidentship of C.R.
Das, Swaraj party formed in 1922.
(2) Swaraj party win 42 out of 101
elective seats in the central
legislative assembly.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
1 only
(c) 2 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
268. Consider the following statements.
(1) Hindu Mahasabha founded in 1918
under the presidentship of Madan
Mohan Malviya.
(2) Fazl-i-Husain was related to
unionist party of Punjab.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
2 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
Neither 1 nor 2
269. Consider the following statements.
(1) The Nagpur Flag satyagraha was
started in mid-1923.
(2) Vaikom Satyagraha was fought for
temple entry.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
Both 1 & 2
(c) 2 only
Neither 1 nor 2
270. Consider the following statements.
(1) Simon Commission enumerated
two features of Indian states,
British territory & not British
subjects.
(2) The Government of India Act of
1935 proposed a system of
federation.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) Both 1 & 2
271. Consider the following statements.
(1) The Butler Committees report
(1929) rankly said that the princes
had no sovereign authority.
(2) Gandhi start Salt Satyagraha in
August 1929.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
Multiple Choice Question
(a) 1 only
2 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
Neither 1 nor 2
272. Consider the following statements
about All India states people’s
conference.
(1) It took shape in 1927.
(2) Balwant Rai Mehta, Manilal
Kothari & G.R. Abhayankar was
the leader.
(3) Its headquarter was based in Delhi.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 3 only
(c) 1 & 2 only
(d) 2 & 3
273. Consider the following statements
about Simon Commission.
(1) Indian statutory commission
known as Simon Commission.
(2) Commission consisted 9 members.
(3) Sir John-Simon was the Chief of
Simon Commission.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 2
(b) 1 & 3
(c) All of the above
(d) 2 & 3
274. Consider the following statements.
(1) Indian National Congress meet in
Calcutta
boycott
Simon
Commission.
(2) Muslim League supported Simon
Commission.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
2 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
Neither 1 nor 2
275. Of the 29, four revolutionaries were
sentenced to death in Kakori case. Which
is not in the list.
(a) Chandra Shekhar Azad.
(b) Roshan Lal
(c) Rajender Lahiri
(d) Asfaqullah Khan
276. Consider the following statements.
(1) Bhagat Singh & Batu Keshwar Dutt
threw two crude bombs in central
legislative Assembly.
(2) Bhagat Singh, Sukhdev & Rajguru
were hanged on March 23, 1931.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
2 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
Neither 1 nor 2
277. Consider the following statements.
(1) Subhas Chandra Bose was related
to the Anushilan group.
(2) Indian Republican Army was
founded by Surya Sen.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) Both 1 & 2
278. Consider the following statements
about Nehru report.
(1) Nehru report was headed by
Motilal Nehru.
(2) The list of central & provincial
subjects shall be provided in the
schedule.
(3) Universal adult franchise for all
those who have attained the age
of 18.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 3
(c) 2 & 3
(d) 1 & 2
Gist of NCERT (History)
279. Consider the following statements
about the main points of Jinnah’s 14
points Charter.
(1) In the central legislature muslim
reporesentation shall be 1/3rd of
the total seats.
(2) The residuary powers should vert
in the provinces.
(3) Separation of Sindh should be
postponed.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 2
1 & 3
(c) 2 & 3
All of the above
280. Consider the following statements
about the Lahore session of congress
(1929).
(1) Lahore session held under the
presidentship of J.L. Nehru.
(2) The congress issues a call to the
countrymen to celebrate 26 January
1930 as poorna Swarajya day.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
2 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
Neither 1 nor 2
281. Consider the following statements
about the programmes of civil
disobedience movement.
(1) Picketing of shops dealing in liquor.
(2) Ban fire of foreign cloth.
(3) Boy cott of law courts.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 2
All of the above
(c) 1 only
2 only
282. Consider the following statements.
(1) Abdul Ghaffar Khan formed
Khudai Khidmatgar.
(2) The Hindu Muslim Unity was
totally
missing
Civil
disobedience movement.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
2 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) Both 1 & 2
283. Consider the following statements.
(1) Muslim League did not participate
First
Round
Table
Conference.
(2) Ambedkar participate in all the
round table conference.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 2 only
1 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
284. Consider the following statements
about Gandhi-Irwin pact features.
(1) Return of confiscated lands not yet
sold to third parties.
(2) Immediate release of all political
prisoners.
(3) Pact was concluded on 5 March
1931.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 2 only
(b) 2 & 3
(c) All of the above
(d) 1 & 3
285. Consider the following statements.
(1) Gandhi attended the Second
Round Table Conference.
(2) The 2nd Round table conference
was meeting in the context of world
economic crisis.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
Multiple Choice Question
(a) 1 only
(b) Both 1 & 2
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) 2 only
286. Consider the following statements.
(1) Communal award announced on 10
August 1932.
(2) The Award gave recognition to the
Harijans as a minority.
(3) Award accepted the demand of
Muslims, Sikhs, Indian for separate
electorate.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 2 only
(c) 2 & 3
(d) 1 & 3
287. Consider the following statements
about pund pact.
(1) Agreement was sign on 26
September 1932.
(2) 148 seats were reserved against 71
in the award.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
2 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
Neither 1 nor 2
288. Consider the following statements
about 3rd round table conference.
(1) The invitation for the conference
was sent only to those perons who
were loyal to the government.
(2) The Biggest outcome of this
conference was Government of
India Act 1935.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) Both 1 & 2
289. Consider the following statements
about the provincial elections of 1937.
(1) In the Punjab, the Unionist party
& the Muslim League formed a
coalition government int he
provincial election of 1937.
(2) H.S. Suhrawardy became premier
of Sindh.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) Both 1 & 2
290. “I would like to see the Punjab, NWFP,
Sindh & Baluchistan” amalgamated into
a single state”.
Who had given this statement
during national movement.
(a) Jinnah
Mohammad Ali
(c) Md. Iqbal
Khali Kujamma
291. Consider the following statements.
(1) Muslim League appointed a
committee heaed by Raja of Pirpur
to investigate Muslim complaints
against the congress governments
& submit a report.
(2) Asbab-e-Bagawat written by Md.
Ali Jinnah.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
(b) 1 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) 2 only
292. Consider the following statements.
(1) Muslim League celebrated the day
December 22, 1939 as the
deliverance day.
(2) Muslim League at Karachi Session
(1940) passed the in famous
Pakistan Resolution.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
2 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
Gist of NCERT (History)
293. Consider the following statements.
(1) Muslim League supported the
August Offer (1940).
(2) August offer came in the form of a
statement by the Viceroy on 8
August 1940.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) Both 1 & 2
294. Consider the following statements.
(1) Gandhi termed Cripps proposal as
a post-dated cheque on a crashing
bank.
(2) In Satara a parallel government
was set up during Quit India
movement.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
2 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
Neither 1 nor 2
295. Consider the following statements.
(1) Rash Behari Bose was the chairman
of Indian Independence league.
(2) Subhash Chandra Bose founded
Azad Hind Fauz.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 2 only
Both 1 & 2
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) 1 only
296. Consider the following statements.
(1) Subhash Chandra Bose established
a provisional Government of Free
India at Germany.
(2) Bose acclaimed as Netaja by
German Women.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 2 only
(b) 1 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) Both 1 & 2
297. Consider the following statements
about Raja Gopalachari Formula.
(1) Any transfer of population shall
only be an abslutely voluntary
basis.
(2) In the event of separation mutual
agreement shall be entered.
(3) Jinnah Supported Formula.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 2 only
(c) 2 & 3
(d) 1 & 3
298. Consider the following statements
about Wavell plan.
(1) The executive council would work
under the Government of India Act
1935.
(2) Hindus & Muslims would have
equal representation in the
executive council.
(3) New Government would work like
a provisional national government.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 2 only
(b) 2 & 3
(c) All of the above
(d) 1 only
299. Consider the following statements
about Simla Conference.
(1) Assembled at Simla on 25th June
1945.
(2) Abul Kalam Azad participate as
Congress President.
(3) Gandhi did not attend the
conference.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
Multiple Choice Question
(a) 1 & 2 only
2 & 3 only
(c) 1 & 3
(d) All of the above
300. Consider the following statements
about Royal Indian Navy Mutiny.
(1) Royal Indian navy rose in rebellion
on 18 February 1946.
(2) Talwar (Ship) went on hunger
strike.
(3) B.C. Dutt was the leader of this
mutiny.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 2 only
(c) 2 & 3
(d) 1 & 3
301. There was three members in the Cabinet
Mission. Which is not in the list.
(a) Pethick Lawrence
(b) Sir John Simon
(c) A.V. Alexander
(d) Stafford Cripps.
302. Consider the following statements.
(1) Appointment of the cabinet mission
was a virtual declaration of India’s
independence.
(2) Cabinet Mission plan consisted of
a federal government with a
limited number of subjects
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
2 only
(c) Both 1 & 2
Neither 1 nor 2
303. Consider the following statements
about recommendations of Cabinet
Mission Plan.
(1) The Unity of India had to be
retained.
(2) The princely states would retain all
subjects.
(3) The constituent assembly was to
consist of 209.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 3
(b) 2 & 3
(c) All of the above
(d) 1 & 2
304. Consider the following statements
about the elections to the constituent
Assembly.
(1) Congress Captured 199 seats.
(2) Out of 78 Muslim seats League got
(3) 210 general seats alloted to the
British Indian provision.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 2
(c) 2 & 3
(d) 1 & 3
305. Consider the following statements.
(1) Direct Action day (Muslim league)
fixed for August 16, 1946.
(2) Initially League supported the
Cabinet Mission Plan.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
(b) Both 1 & 2
(c) 2 only
Neither 1 nor 2
306. Consider the following statements
about the Interim Government.
(1) The Interim Government was
sworn in on September 2, 1946.
(2) It was composed of 14 members.
(3) Jawahar Lal nehru was nominated
as its Vice President.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
Gist of NCERT (History)
(a) 1 & 2
(b) 2 & 3
(c) 1 & 3
(d) All of the above
307. Consider the following statements.
(1) Constituent assembly met for the
first time on December 6, 1946.
(2) Muslim League refused to Join
Constituent Assembly.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) Both 1 & 2
308. Consider the following statements
about Mountbatten plan.
(1) Punjab & Bengal Legislative
assembly would be divided into
two sections.
(2) The
existing
constituent assembly was not to be
interrupted.
(3) The district of Sylhet in Assam
would decide its choice by means
of a referendum.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 2
(c) 2 & 3
(d) 1 & 3
309. Consider the following statements
about partition council.
(1) Partititon committee consisting of
Vallabhai Patel & Rajendra Prasad
as congress representative.
(2) Md. Ali Jinnah represented Muslim
League.
(3) The council functioned through a
steering committee of two senior
officials H.M. Patel for India &
Chaudhri Md. Ali for Pakistan.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 2
(b) 2 & 3
(c) All of the above
(d) 1 & 3
310. Consider the following statements
about Indian Independence Act 1947.
(1) Passed by British Parliament in July
1947.
(2) Congress refused this proposal.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 & 2
(b) 1 only
(c) 2 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
311. Consider the following statements.
(1) The
states
reorganisation
commission came into effect in
November 1953.
(2) Dar Committee was appointed to
examine the demands for the
creation of linguistic states.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
1 only
(c) 2 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
312. Consider the following statements.
(1) A Shuddi campaign in the Punjab
& United province started by Arya
Samaj.
(2) The Lahore session of the League
in 1940 proclaimed muslims as a
nation & talked about independent
states.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) 1 only
Both 1 & 2
(c) 2 only
Neither 1 nor 2
Multiple Choice Question
313. (1) Annexation of Awadh
(2) Role of Christian Missionaries
(3) Military Grievances
(4) Administrative Cause
Which of the above causes are the reason
for revolt of 1857.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 2
(c) 2 & 3
(d) 2, 3 & 4
314. Consider the following statements.
(1) Lord Canning was the Governor -
General during Revolt of 1857.
(2) The British adopted the policy of
no prisioners in revolt of 1857.
(3) Maulvi Ahmad-ullah was the
leader of Lucknow during 1857
revolt.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 2 only
(c) 2 & 3 only
(d) 1 & 3
315. Consider the following statements
about changes of port 1857 revolt.
(1) English East India Company rule
came to end by the Act of 1858.
(2) The Board of Directors & the
Board of Control were abolished.
(3) Lord Canning held a Darbar at
New Delhi.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) All of the above
(b) 1 & 3
(c) 1 & 2
(d) 2 & 3
316. Consider the following statements.
(1) Book the Indian Musalmans
written by Sir Benjamin Dissaeli.
(2) Indian Councils Act passed in 1861.
Which of the above statements is /
are true.
(a) Both 1 & 2
(b) 1 only
(c) Neither 1 nor 2
(d) 2 only
317. “The whole insurrection is a great
Mohanedan conspiracy & the sepoys are
merely the tools of the Musalmans.”
Who had given this statement (in
the context of 1857).
(a) Alfred Lyall
(b) G.B. Malleson
(c) Disraeli
(d) All of the above
Gist of NCERT (History)
Answers
1. (c)
2. (a)
3. (d)
4. (c)
5. (d)
6. (d)
7. (a)
8. (c)
9. (c)
10. (d)
11. (c)
12. (a)
13. (d)
14. (d)
15. (b)
16. (d)
17. (c)
18. (c)
19. (d)
20. (b)
21. (d)
22. (d)
23. (d)
24. (b)
25. (c)
26. (c)
27. (d)
28. (a)
29. (d)
30. (b)
31. (c)
32. (a)
33. (b)
34. (c)
35. (a)
36. (b)
37. (d)
38. (a)
39. (c)
40. (b)
41. (d)
42. (c)
43. (b)
44. (c)
45. (a)
46. (b)
47. (d)
48. (b)
49. (c)
50. (a)
51. (b)
52. (d)
53. (a)
54. (c)
55. (b)
56. (d)
57. (c)
58. (b)
59. (c)
60. (a)
61. (b)
62. (d)
63. (c)
64. (a)
65. (d)
66. (c)
67. (b)
68. (a)
69. (d)
70. (b)
71. (c)
72. (b)
73. (c)
74. (a)
75. (c)
76. (a)
77. (a)
78. (c)
79. (b)
80. (a)
81. (c)
82. (b)
83. (a)
84. (a)
85. (c)
86. (c)
87. (c)
88. (b)
89. (d)
90. (b)
91. (c)
92. (b)
93. (c)
94. (d)
95. (b)
96. (a)
97. (c)
98. (b)
99. (d) 100. (b)
101. (a) 102. (d) 103. (c) 104. (c) 105. (a) 106. (c) 107. (c) 108. (b) 109. (d)
110. (b)
111. (a) 112. (c) 113. (c) 114. (a) 115. (c) 116. (b) 117. (a) 118. (b) 119. (d) 120. (a)
121. (d) 122. (a) 123. (b) 124. (c) 125. (d) 126. (a) 127. (a) 128. (c) 129. (c) 130. (c)
131. (c) 132. (d) 133. (c) 134. (a) 135. (b) 136. (d) 137. (a) 138. (d) 139. (a) 140. (c)
141. (a) 142. (b) 143. (c) 144. (b) 145. (b) 146. (d) 147. (c) 148. (a) 149. (c) 150. (a)
151. (c) 152. (a) 153. (c) 154. (b) 155. (a) 156. (c) 157. (a) 158. (a) 159. (c) 160. (b)
161. (a) 162. (c) 163. (b) 164. (c) 165. (a) 166. (c) 167. (b) 168. (c) 169. (d) 170. (c)
171. (a) 172. (b) 173. (c) 174. (b) 175. (c) 176. (b) 177. (c) 178. (d) 179. (d) 180. (c)
181. (a) 182. (c) 183. (b) 184. (c) 185. (a) 186. (b) 187. (c) 188. (d) 189. (d) 190. (b)
191. (a) 192. (c) 193. (d) 194. (b) 195. (a) 196. (c) 197. (d) 188. (d) 199. (a) 200. (c)
201. (b) 202. (c) 203. (d) 204. (a) 205. (b) 206. (a) 207. (c) 208. (b) 209. (d) 210. (a)
211. (b) 212. (c) 213. (d) 214. (a) 215. (b) 216. (a) 217. (b) 218. (c) 219. (d) 220. (a)
221. (b) 222. (c) 223. (d) 224. (a) 225. (b) 226. (c) 227. (d) 228. (a) 229. (b) 230. (c)
231. (d) 232. (a) 233. (b) 234. (c) 235. (c) 236. (d) 237. (d) 238. (a) 239. (b) 240. (c)
241. (d) 242. (a) 243. (b) 244. (c) 245. (b) 246. (a) 247. (c) 248. (d) 249. (b) 250. (a)
251. (c) 252. (d) 253. (b) 254. (a) 255. (c) 256. (d) 257. (b) 258. (a) 259. (c) 260. (a)
261. (b) 262. (d) 263. (a) 264. (b) 265. (c) 266. (d) 267. (a) 268. (c) 269. (b) 270. (d)
271. (a) 272. (c) 273. (b) 274. (d) 275. (a) 276. (c) 277. (b) 278. (d) 279. (a) 280. (c)
281. (b) 282. (d) 293. (a) 284. (c) 285. (b) 286. (a) 287. (c) 288. (d) 289. (a) 290. (c)
291. (b) 292. (a) 293. (b) 294. (c) 295. (d) 296. (a) 297. (b) 298. (c) 299. (d) 300. (a)
301. (b) 302. (c) 303. (d) 304. (a) 305. (b) 306. (c) 307. (d) 308. (a) 309. (c) 310. (a)
311. (a) 312. (b) 313. (a) 314. (b) 315. (c) 316. (d) 317. (a)
