SCIENCE
TEXTBOOK FOR CLASS VII
First Edition
January 2007  Magha 1928
Reprinted
November 2007  Kartika 1929
January 2009  Pausa 1930
January 2010  Magha 1931
January 2011  Magha 1932
January 2012 Magha 1933
December 2012 Agrahayana 1934
October 2013  Asvina 1935
PD 800T BS
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2007
` 50.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division by the
Secretary, National Council of Educational
Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016 and printed at Amit Printing
Press, D-12 & 13, Industrial Area, Site-A,
Mathura (UP) 281 004.
ISBN  81-7450-654-3
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,  re-
sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any form
of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
and should be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bangalore 560 085
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021
Phone :  0361-2674869
Publication Team
Head, Publication
: Ashok Srivastava
Division
Chief Production
: Shiv Kumar
Officer
Chief Business
: Gautam Ganguly
Manager
Chief Editor
: Naresh Yadav
(Contractual Service)
Editor
: Bijnan Sutar
Production Officer
: Arun Chitkara
Cover, Layout and Illustrations
Ashwani Tyagi
FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that children’s life
at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a
departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system
and causes a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and
textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic
idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp
boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures will take us
significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined
in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to
pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space,
time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the
information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the
sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites
of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we
perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed
body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of teaching days
are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and evaluation
will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making children’s life at
school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus
designers have tried to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring
and reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration for child
psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance
this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for
contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring
hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates
the hard work done by the Textbook Development Committee responsible for this
book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in Science and
Mathematics, Professor J.V. Narlikar and the Chief Advisor for this book,
Prof. V.B. Bhatia for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers contributed
to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for making
this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations which have
generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and personnel.
We are especially grateful to the members of the National Monitoring Committee,
appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of
Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri
and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. As an
organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the
quality of its products, the NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will
enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi
National Council of Educational
20 November 2006
Research and Training
PREFACE
This book is the outcome of the efforts of the Textbook Development Committee appointed
by the NCERT. The committee met a few times to interact with one another to improve the
draft. Then there was a review meeting in which many experts and practicing school
teachers were invited to review the draft and suggest improvements.
By and large we have stuck to the format of the Class VI book. By now, famous
characters, Boojho and Paheli, have been used to make the text interactive. Attempt has
been made to recall children’s own experiences and build concepts around them. This is
designed to connect science that they study in the school with their every-day life.
Many activities have been suggested to clarify concepts. Some of these activities are so
simple that children can perform them on their own. The requirement of the apparatus
required for the activities is minimal. We performed all the activities ourselves to ensure
that there was no difficulty in performing them in the school situation. The activities should
also help children in developing skills such as presentation of data in tabular and
graphical forms, reasoning and drawing inference from the given data.
The language of the book has been kept as simple as possible. A large number of
photographs, illustrations, cartoons, etc. have been included to make the book attractive.
To help teachers evaluate children effectively, a large number of exercises have been given
at the end of each chapter. The teachers are encouraged to frame additional exercises to
test children’s understanding. Some challenging exercises have also been devised for those
children who would like to appear for the National Talent Search Examination conducted
by the NCERT.
We are conscious of the fact that there is a paucity of additional reading material for
children. We have tried to address this problem by providing non-evaluative boxes. These
boxes, in blue, contain additional information, anecdotes, stories, strange facts and other
such interesting materials.
We all know that children are mischievous and playful by nature. Therefore, in order to
prevent any untoward incident during the performance of the activities in the school or
outside, necessary cautions, in red, have been inserted at various places in the book.
To prepare children to assume their roles as responsible citizens of tomorrow, attempt
has been made to sensitise them to the issues concerning gender, religion, environment,
health and hygiene, water scarcity and energy conservation. We have sought to weave into
the text the value of cooperation and the importance of peer learning.
An important feature of the book is what we call ‘Extended Learning’. These are totally
non-evaluative, and purely voluntary activities and projects. Some of the projects in this
section have been designed to enhance children’s interaction with the experts, teachers,
even parents, and society at large. The children are required to collect information of
various kind and draw conclusions of their own.
My request to teachers and parents is to use the book in the spirit in which it has been
written. Encourage children to perform activities and learn by doing, rather than by rote.
You can supplement, or even replace, the activities given here. If you feel that you have
better alternatives, especially with your local/regional flavour, please write to us so that
these activities could be used in the future editions of the book.
We have been able to include only a small subset of children’s experiences. You have a
better knowledge of their experiences because you are in touch with them. Use them to
illustrate the concepts being taught. Above all, please do not stifle children’s natural
curiosity. Encourage them to ask questions, even if sometimes you feel uncomfortable. If
you do not know the answer to a question on the spot, do not feel embarrassed. You can
promise them to find the answer and deal with it later. Make a genuine attempt to get the
answer from whatever resources are within your reach, such as senior school or college
teachers, experts, libraries, internet, etc. If, in spite of your efforts, you cannot get the
answer to some question, you could write to NCERT.
I must thank the NCERT for enabling us to talk to children through the medium of this
book. Every member of the NCERT has been courteous and helpful to us. If you find this
book useful and enjoy teaching/learning science through this book, the Editing Team and
I shall consider ourselves well-rewarded.
V.B. BHATIA
Chief Advisor
Textbook Development Committee
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SCIENCE AND MATHEMATICS
J.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor, Inter University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics
(IUCCA), Ganeshkhind, Pune University, Pune
CHIEF ADVISOR
V.B. Bhatia, Professor, Retd. (Physics),  Delhi University, Delhi
MEMBERS
Bharati Sarkar, Reader, Retd. (Zoology), Maitreyi College, Delhi University, Delhi
C.V. Shimray, Lecturer, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics (DESM), NCERT,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
D. Lahiry, Professor, Retd, DESM, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
G.P. Pande, Uttarakhand Seva Nidhi, Paryavaran Shiksha Sansthan, Jakhan Devi, Almora,
Uttaranchal
Harsh Kumari, Headmistress, CIE Experimental Basic School, Department of Education,
Delhi University, Delhi
J.S. Gill, Professor, DESM, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
Kamal Deep Peter, TGT (Science), Kendriya Vidyalaya, Bangalore
Kanhiya Lal, Principal, Retd., Directorate of Education, Delhi
Lalita S. Kumar, Reader (Chemistry), School of Sciences, Indira Gandhi National Open
University (IGNOU), Maidan Garhi, New Delhi
Mohd. Iftikhar Alam, TGT (Science), Sarvodaya Bal Vidyalaya (No.1), Jama Masjid, Delhi
P.S. Yadava, Professor, Department of Life Sciences, Manipur University, Imphal
R. Joshi, Lecturer (Selection Grade),  DESM, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
Rachna Garg, Lecturer, Central Institute of Educational Technology, NCERT,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
Ranjana Agrawal, Principal Scientist and Head, Division of Forecasting Techniques,
Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute, IARI Campus, Pusa, New Delhi
R.S. Sindhu, Professor, DESM, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
Ruchi Verma, Lecturer, PPMED, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
Sarita Kumar, Reader (Zoology), Acharya Narendra Dev College, Delhi University, Delhi
Sunila Masih, Teacher, Mitra GHS School, Suhagpur, P.O. Hoshangabad, Madhya Pradesh
V.K. Gupta, Reader (Chemistry), Hans Raj College, Delhi University, Delhi
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
R.K. Parashar, Lecturer, DESM, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
acknowledges the valuable contribution of the individuals and organisations
involved in the development of Science textbook for Class VII. The Council
acknowledges the valuable contribution of the following academics for reviewing
and refining the manuscripts of this book: Sushma Kiran Setia, Principal,
Sarvodaya Kanya Vidyalaya, Hari Nagar (Clock Tower), New Delhi; Mohini Bindra,
Principal, Ramjas School, Pusa Road, New Delhi; D.K. Bedi, Principal, Apeejay
Senior Secondary School, Pitampura, Road No. 42, Sainik Vihar, New Delhi;
Chand Vir Singh, Lecturer (Biology), GBSS School, Rajouri Garden (Main),
New Delhi; Renuka Madan, TGT (Physics), Air Force Golden Jubilee Institute,
Subroto Park, Delhi Cantt; Reena Jhani, TGT (Science), Darbari Lal DAV Model
School, Pitam Pura, New Delhi; Geeta Bajaj, TGT (Science), K. V. No. 3,
Delhi Cantt., New Delhi; Gagandeep Bajaj, Lecturer, Department of Education,
S.P.M. College, Delhi University, Delhi; Shashi Prabha, Lecturer, DESM, NCERT,
New Delhi; A.K. Bakhshi, Professor, Department of Chemistry, University of Delhi,
Delhi; N. Rathnasree, Director, Nehru Planetarium, Teen Murti Bhavan, New Delhi;
S.B. Singh, TGT (Science), J.N.V. Sonikpur, P.O. Trivediganj, Distt. Barabanki,
Uttar Pradesh; Madhur Mohan Ranga, Lecturer (Selection Scale), (Zoology),
Govt. College, Ajmer, Rajasthan; K.G. Ojha, Associate Professor, Department of
Chemistry, M.D.S. University, Ajmer, Rajasthan; Puneeta Sharma, TGT (Science),
L.D. Jain Girls Senior Secondary School, Pahari Dhiraj, Delhi; Manohar Lal Patel,
Teacher, Govt. R.N.A. Exc. H.S.S. Pipariya, Distt. Hoshangabad, Madhya Pradesh;
Bharat Bhushan Gupta, PGT (Biology), Sarvodaya Vidyalaya, No.1, Shakurpur,
Delhi; Sushma Jairath, Reader, Department of Women Studies (DWS), NCERT,
New Delhi; Mina Yadav, Lecturer, DWS, NCERT, New Delhi; Swadesh Taneja,
Ex-Reader (Life Sciences), IGNOU, New Delhi and M.M. Kapur, Professor, Retd.
(Chemistry), Delhi University, Delhi.
The council is highly thankful to the India Meteorological Department,
New Delhi, for providing some illustrations for the Chapter 8: Winds, Storms and
Cyclones. The Council gratefully acknowledges the valuable suggestions received
from the National Monitoring Committee in the development of the manuscript
of this textbook.
The dynamic leadership of Professor Hukum Singh, Head, DESM, for
providing guidance in the final editing of the manuscript and extending
infrastructure facilities is highly acknowledged. Special thanks are due to
Shveta Uppal, Chief Editor; and Bijnan Sutar, Assistant Editor, for  going through
the manuscript and suggesting relevant changes.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Council also acknowledges the efforts of Deepak Kapoor, Incharge,
Computer Station;  Purnendu Kumar Barik, Musarrat Parveen and Satish Kumar
Mishra, Copy Editors; Neelam Walecha and Muhammad Aiyub, DTP Operators;
and Randhir Thakur, Proof Reader.
The contribution of APC-office, administration of DESM, Publication
Department and Secretariat of NCERT is also acknowledged.
The team of Paheli and Boojho will
be with you as you journey through
this textbook. They love to ask
questions. All kind of questions come
to their minds and they collect them
in their sacks. Sometimes, they may
share some of these questions with
you, as you read through the
chapters.
Paheli and Boojho are also on the
lookout for answers to many
questions — sometimes the questions
seem answered after they discuss
them with each other, sometimes
through discussions with other
classmates, teachers or their parents.
Answers to some questions do not seem available even after all these. They might
need to experiment on their own, read books in the library, send questions to
scientists. Just dig and dig and dig into all possibilities and see if the questions
can be answered. Perhaps, they would carry some of the unanswered questions
in their sacks to higher classes.
What will really thrill them would be your adding questions to their sacks  or
answers to their questions. Sometimes, activities are suggested in the textbook,
results or findings of these by different groups of students would be of interest to
other students and teachers. You can complete the suggested activities and send
your results or findings to Paheli and Boojho. Do keep in mind that activities
that involve using blades, scissors or fire need to be done strictly under the care
of your teachers. Stick to the precautions given and then enjoy doing all the
suggested activities. Mind, the book will not be able to help you much, if the
activities are not completed!
We would like to advise you that you must make observations yourself and
record whatever results you get. Keen
and true observations are necessary for
exploring any subject of study. For some
reason your results may turn out to be
different from those of your classmates.
Do not worry. Try to find out the reason
for these results instead of disregarding
them. Do not ever copy results from your
classmate.
You can send your feedback for
Paheli and Boojho at:
A NOTE FOR THE STUDENTS
The Head
Department of Education in
Science and Mathematics,
NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg,
New Delhi 110 016
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Fundamental Duties
Fundamental Duties – It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National
Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for
freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people
of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities; to
renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers,
wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform;
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so
that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement;
(k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to his child or,
as the case may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen years.
Part  IV A (Article  51 A)
CONTENTS
FOREWORD
PREFACE
Chapter  1
Nutrition in Plants
Chapter  2
Nutrition in Animals
Chapter  3
Fibre to Fabric
Chapter  4
Chapter  5
Acids, Bases and Salts
Chapter  6
Physical and Chemical Changes
Chapter  7
Weather, Climate and Adaptations of Animals to Climate
Chapter  8
Winds, Storms and Cyclones
Chapter  9
Chapter  10
Respiration in Organisms
Chapter  11
Transportation in Animals and Plants
Chapter  12
Reproduction in Plants
Chapter  13
Motion and Time
Chapter  14
Electric Current and its Effects
Chapter  15
Light
Chapter  16
Water: A Precious Resource
Chapter  17
Forests: Our Lifeline
Chapter  18
Wastewater Story
INDEX
Nutrition in Plants
n Class VI you learnt that food is
essential for all living organisms.
You also learnt that carbohydrates,
proteins, fats, vitamins and minerals are
components of food. These components
of food are necessary for our body and
are called nutrients.
All living organisms require food.
Plants can make their food themselves
but animals including humans cannot.
They get it from plants or animals that
eat plants. Thus, humans and animals
are directly or indirectly dependent on
plants.
1.1 MODE OF NUTRITION IN PLANTS
Plants are the only organisms that can
prepare food for themselves by using
water, carbon dioxide and minerals. The
raw materials are present in their
surroundings.
nutrients
enable
living
organisms to build their bodies, to grow,
to repair damaged parts of their bodies
and provide the energy to carry out life
processes. Nutrition is the mode of
taking food by an organism and its
utilisation by the body. The mode of
nutrition in which organisms make food
themselves from simple substances is
called autotrophic (auto = self; trophos
= nourishment) nutrition. Therefore,
plants are called autotrophs. Animals
and most other organisms take in ready
made food prepared by the plants. They
are called heterotrophs (heteros =
other).
Boojho wants to know
how plants prepare
their own food.
Now we may ask where the food
factories of plants are located: whether
food is made in all parts of a plant or
only in certain parts? How do plants
obtain the raw materials from the
surroundings? How do they transport
them to the food factories of the plants?
1.2 PHOTOSYNTHESIS — FOOD
MAKING PROCESS IN PLANTS
Leaves are the food factories of plants.
The synthesis of food in plants occurs
in leaves. Therefore, all the raw
materials must reach there. Water and
minerals present in the soil are absorbed
by the roots and transported to the
Paheli wants to know why
our body cannot make food
from carbon dioxide, water
and minerals like plants do.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Paheli wants to know what is so
special about the leaves that they
can synthesise food but  other
parts of the plant cannot.
Boojho wants to know how water
and minerals absorbed by roots
reach the leaves.
Cells
leaves. Carbon dioxide from air is taken
in through the tiny pores present on the
surface of the leaves. These pores are
surrounded by ‘guard cells’. Such pores
are called stomata [Fig. 1.2 (c)].
Water and minerals are transported
to the leaves by the vessels which run
like pipes throughout the root, the stem,
the branches and the leaves. They form
a continuous path or passage for the
nutrients to reach the leaf. You will learn
about transport of materials in plants
in Chapter 11.
The leaves have a green pigment
called chlorophyll. It helps leaves to
capture the energy of the sunlight. This
energy is used to synthesise (prepare)
food from carbon dioxide and water.
Since the synthesis of food occurs in the
presence of sunlight, it is called
photosynthesis (Photo: light; synthesis :
to combine). So we find that chlorophyll,
sunlight, carbon dioxide and water are
necessary to carry out the process of
photosynthesis. It is a unique process
on the earth. The solar energy is
captured by the leaves and stored in the
plant in the form of food. Thus, sun is
the ultimate source of energy for all
living organisms.
Can you imagine life on earth in the
absence of photosynthesis!
In the absence of photosynthesis
there would not be any food. The
survival of almost all living organisms
directly or indirectly depends upon the
food made by the plants. Besides,
oxygen which is essential for the survival
You have seen that buildings are made of bricks.
Similarly, the bodies of living organisms are
made of tiny units called cells. Cells can be seen
only under the microscope. Some organisms
are made of only one cell. The cell is enclosed by
a thin outer boundary, called the cell membrane.
Most cells have a distinct, centrally located
spherical structure called the nucleus (Fig. 1.1).
The nucleus is surrounded by a jelly-like
substance called cytoplasm.
Cell membrane
Cytoplasm
Nucleus
Fig. 1.1 Cell
© NCERT
not to be republished
NUTRITION IN PLANTS
Besides leaves, photosynthesis also takes place in other green parts of the
plant — in green stems and green branches. The desert plants have scale- or
spine-like leaves to reduce loss of water by transpiration. These plants have
green stems which carry out photosynthesis.
of all living organisms is produced
during photosynthesis. In the absence
of photosynthesis, life would be
impossible on the earth.
During photosynthesis, chlorophyll
containing cells of leaves (Fig. 1.2), in
the presence of sunlight, use carbon
dioxide and water to synthesise
carbohydrates (Fig. 1.3). The process
can be represented as an equation:
During the process oxygen is
released. The carbohydrates ultimately
get converted into starch. The presence
of starch in leaves indicates the
occurrence of photosynthesis. The
starch is also a carbohydrate.
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
sunlight
chlorophyll
Carbon dioxide
water
Carbohydrate
oxygen
Boojho has observed some
plants with deep red, violet or
brown leaves. He wants to
know whether these leaves
also carry out photosynthesis.
Activity 1.1
Take two potted plants of the same kind.
Keep one in the dark (or in a black box)
for 72 hours and the other in the
Fig. 1.2
(a) Leaf
Guard cells
(c) Stomata
Stomatal opening
(b) A section through a leaf
Guard cells
Stoma
Chlorophyll
Fig. 1.3   Diagram showing
photosynthesis
Light energy
Carbon
dioxide
Oxygen
Chlorophyll
in leaf
Water and
minerals
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Fig. 1.4  Leaves of various colours
process of photosynthesis. The
carbohydrates are made of carbon,
hydrogen and oxygen. These are used
to synthesise other components of food
such as proteins and fats. But proteins
are nitrogenous substances which
contain nitrogen. From where do the
plants obtain nitrogen?
Recall that nitrogen is present in
abundance in gaseous form in the air.
However, plants cannot absorb nitrogen
in this form. Soil has certain bacteria that
convert gaseous nitrogen into a usable
form and release it into the soil. These
soluble forms are absorbed by the plants
along with water. Also, you might have
seen farmers adding fertilisers rich in
nitrogen to the soil. In this way the
plants fulfil their requirements of
nitrogen along with the other
constituents. Plants can then synthesise
components of food other than
carbohydrates such as proteins and fats.
1.3 OTHER MODES OF NUTRITION IN
PLANTS
There are some plants which do not have
chlorophyll. They cannot synthesise
their food. How do they survive and from
where do they derive nutrition? Like
humans and animals such plants
depend on the food produced by other
plants. They use the heterotrophic
mode of nutrition. Look at Fig. 1.5. Do
you see yellow tubular structures
twining around the stem and branches
of a tree? This is a plant called Cuscuta
(Amarbel). It does not have chlorophyll.
It takes readymade food from the plant
You often see slimy, green patches
in ponds or in other stagnant water
bodies. These are generally formed by
the growth of organisms called algae.
Can you guess why algae are green in
colour? They contain chlorophyll which
gives them the green colour. Algae can
also prepare their own food by
photosynthesis.
Synthesis of plant food other
than carbohydrates
You have just learnt that plants
synthesise carbohydrates through the
sunlight. Perform iodine test with the
leaves of both the plants as you did in
Class VI. Record your results. Now leave
the pot which was earlier kept in the
dark, in the sunlight for 3 – 4 days and
perform the iodine test again on its
leaves. Record your observations in your
notebook.
The leaves other than green also have
chlorophyll. The large amount of red,
brown and other pigments mask the
green colour (Fig. 1.4). Photosynthesis
takes place in these leaves also.
© NCERT
not to be republished
NUTRITION IN PLANTS
on which it is climbing. The plant on
which it climbs is called a host. Since it
deprives the host of valuable nutrients,
it is called a parasite. Are we and the
other animals also parasites on the
plants? You should think about it and
discuss with your teacher.
structure is the modified part of the leaf.
The apex of the leaf forms a lid which
can open and close the mouth of the
pitcher. Inside the pitcher there are hair
which are directed downwards. When
an insect lands in the pitcher, the lid
closes and the trapped insect gets
entangled into the hair. The insect is
digested by the digestive juices secreted
in the pitcher. Such insect-eating plants
are called insectivorous plants.
Is it possible that such plants do not
get all the required nutrients from the
soil in which they grow?
Fig. 1.5  Cuscuta (Amarbel) on host plant
Paheli wants to know whether
mosquitoes, bed bugs, lice and
leeches that suck our blood are
also parasites.
Fig. 1.6  Pitcher plant showing lid and pitcher
Leaf modified
into pitcher
Boojho is confused. If the
pitcher plant is green and
carries out photosynthesis, then
why does it feed on insects?
Have you seen or heard of plants that
can eat animals? There are a few plants
which can trap insects and digest them.
Is it not amazing? Such plants may be
green or of some other colour. Look at
the plant in Fig. 1.6. The pitcher-like
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
1.4 SAPROTROPHS
You might have seen packets of
mushrooms sold in the vegetable
market. You may have also seen fluffy
umbrella-like patches growing on rotting
wood during the rainy season (Fig. 1.7).
Let us find out what type of nutrients
they need to survive and from where
they get them.
Boojho wants to know how
these organisms acquire
nutrients. They do not have
mouths like animals do. They are
not like green plants as they lack
chlorophyll and cannot make food
by photosynthesis.
Activity 1.2
Take a piece of bread and moisten it with
water. Leave it in a moist warm place
for 2–3 days or until fluffy patches
appear on them (Fig. 1.8). These patches
may be white, green, brown or of any
other colour. Observe the patches under
a microscope or a magnifying glass.
Paheli is keen to know
whether her beautiful shoes,
which she wore on special
occasions, were spoiled by fungi
during the rainy season. She
wants to know how fungi appear
suddenly during the rainy
season.
Write down your observations in your
notebook. Most probably you will see
cotton-like threads spread on the piece
of bread.
These organisms are called fungi.
They have a different mode of nutrition.
They secrete digestive juices on the dead
and decaying matter and convert it into
a solution. Then they absorb the
nutrients from it. This mode of nutrition
in which organisms take in nutrients in
solution form from dead and decaying
matter is called saprotrophic nutrition.
Plants which use saprotrophic mode of
nutrition are called saprotrophs.
Fungi also grow on pickles, leather,
clothes and other articles that are left
in hot and humid weather for long time.
Fig. 1.8  Fungi
growing on bread
Fig. 1.7  Packet of mushrooms, a mushroom
growing on decayed material
© NCERT
not to be republished
NUTRITION IN PLANTS
fungus provides shelter, water and
minerals to the alga and, in return, the
alga provides food which it prepares by
photosynthesis.
1.5 HOW NUTRIENTS ARE
REPLENISHED IN THE SOIL
Have you seen farmers spreading
manure or fertilisers in the fields, or
gardeners using them in lawns or in
pots? Do you know why they are added
to the soil?
You learnt that plants absorb
mineral nutrients from the soil. So, their
amounts in the soil keep on declining.
Fertilisers and manures contain plant
nutrients such as nitrogen, potassium,
phosphorous, etc. These nutrients need
to be added from time to time to enrich
the soil. We can grow plants and keep
them healthy if we can fulfil the nutrient
requirement of plants.
Usually crops require a lot of nitrogen
to make proteins. After the harvest, the
soil becomes deficient in nitrogen. You
learnt that though nitrogen gas is available
in plenty in the air, plants cannot use it
in the manner they can use carbon
dioxide. They need nitrogen in a soluble
form. The bacterium called Rhizobium can
take atmospheric nitrogen and convert it
into a soluble form. But Rhizobium cannot
make its own food. So it lives in the roots
of gram, peas, moong, beans and other
legumes and provides them with
nitrogen. Most of the pulses (dals) are
obtained from leguminous plants. In
return, the plants provide food and
shelter to the bacteria. They, thus, have
Boojho says once his
grandfather told him that his
wheat fields were spoiled by a
fungus. He wants to know if
fungi cause diseases also.
Paheli told him that many fungi
like yeast and mushrooms are
useful, but some fungi
cause diseases in plants,
animals and humans.
Some fungi are also used
in medicines.
During the rainy season they spoil many
things. Ask your parents about the
menace of fungi in your house.
The fungal spores are generally
present  in the air. When they land on
wet and warm things they germinate
and grow. Now, can you figure out how
we can protect our things from getting
spoiled?
Some organisms live together and
share shelter and nutrients. This is
called symbiotic relationship. For
example, certain fungi live in the roots
of trees. The tree provides nutrients to
the fungus and, in return, receives help
from it to take up water and nutrients
from the soil. This association is very
important for the tree.
In organisms called lichens, a
chlorophyll-containing partner, which is
an alga, and a fungus live together. The
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
What you have learnt
All organisms take food and utilise it to get energy for the growth and
maintenance of their bodies.
Green plants synthesise their food themselves by the process of
photosynthesis. They are autotrophs.
Plants use simple chemical substances like carbon dioxide, water and
minerals for the synthesis of food.
Chlorophyll and sunlight are the essential requirements for
photosynthesis.
Complex chemical substances such as carbohydrates are the products
of photosynthesis.
Solar energy is stored in the form of food in the leaves with the help of
chlorophyll.
Oxygen is produced during photosynthesis.
Oxygen released in photosynthesis is utilised by living organisms for
their survival.
Fungi derive nutrition from dead, decaying matter. They are saprotrophs.
Plants like Cuscuta are parasites. They take food from the host plant.
A few plants and all animals are dependent on others for their nutrition
and are called heterotrophs.
a symbiotic relationship. This
association is of great significance for
the farmers. They do not need to add
nitrogen fertiliser to the soil in which
leguminous plants are grown.
In this chapter you learnt that
most of the plants are autotrophs.
Only a few plants adopt other modes
of nutrition like parasitic and
saprotrophic. They derive nutrition
from other organisms. All animals
are categorised as heterotrophs since
they depend on plants and other
animals for food. Can we say that
the insectivorous plants are partial
heterotrophs?
Keywords
Autotrophic
Chlorophyll
Heterotrophs
Insectivorous
Nutrient
Nutrition
Parasite
Photosynthesis
Saprotrophs
Saprotrophic
Stomata
© NCERT
not to be republished
NUTRITION IN PLANTS
Exercise
1. Why do organisms need to take food?
2. Distinguish between a parasite and a saprotroph.
3. How would you test the presence of starch in leaves?
4. Give a brief description of the process of synthesis of food in green plants.
5. Show with the help of a sketch that the plants are the ultimate source
of food.
6. Fill in the blanks:
Green plants are called _________________ since they synthesise
their own food.
The food synthesised by the plants is stored as _________________.
In photosynthesis solar energy is captured by the pigment called
___________.
During photosynthesis plants take in ______________________ and
release __________________.
7. Name the following:
A parasitic plant with yellow, slender and tubular stem.
A plant that has both autotrophic and heterotrophic mode of nutrition.
(iii)
The pores through which leaves exchange gases.
8. Tick the correct answer:
Amarbel is an example of:
(i) autotroph (ii) parasite (iii) saprotroph (iv) host
The plant which traps and feeds on insects is:
(i) Cuscuta (ii) china rose (iv) pitcher plant (iv) rose
9. Match the items given in Column I with those in Column II:
Column I
Column II
Chlorophyll
Bacteria
Nitrogen
Heterotrophs
Amarbel
Pitcher plant
Animals
Insects
Parasite
10. Mark ‘T’ if the statement is true and ‘F’ if it is false:
Carbon dioxide is released during photosynthesis. (T/F)
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Plants which synthesise their food themselves are called
saprotrophs. (T/F)
(iii)
The product of photosynthesis is not a protein. (T/F)
Solar energy is converted into chemical energy during
photosynthesis. (T/F)
11. Choose the correct option from the following:
Which part of the plant takes in carbon dioxide from the air for photosynthesis?
(i) Root hair (ii) Stomata (iii) Leaf veins (iv) Sepals
12. Choose the correct option from the following:
Plants take carbon dioxide from the atmosphere mainly through their:
(i) roots (ii) stem (iii) flowers (iv) leaves
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. Project
Take a potted plant with broad
leaves. Take two strips of black
paper and cut out a small square
in their centres. Cover a part of two
leaves with these papers and secure
them with paper clips (Fig. 1.9).
Keep the plant in the sunlight for
2–5 days. Observe the difference in
the colour of the covered and the
uncovered portions on the one leaf.
Perform iodine test on this leaf. Did
the two parts show any difference
in results? Now take second leaf.
Remove the strip and expose the
covered part to the sunlight for 2–3 days and do the iodine test again.
Describe your observations.
2. Visit a green house if there is one near your place. Observe how they
raise plants. Find out how they regulate the amount of light, water and
carbon dioxide to grow the plants.
3. Try growing a sweet potato just in water. Describe your experiment and
observations.
You can read more on the following website:
www.phschool.com/science/biology_place/biocoach/photosynth/
overview.htm
Fig. 1.9  Experiment to test the
occurrence of photosynthesis
Did you know?
Light is so important to plants that their leaves grow in many patterns so
as to catch the most sunlight.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Nutrition in Animals
ou have learnt in Chapter 1 that
plants can prepare their own food
by the process of photosynthesis
but animals cannot. Animals get their
food from plants, either directly by
eating plants or indirectly by eating
animals that eat plants. Some animals
eat both plants and animals. Recall that
all organisms including humans require
food for growth, repair and functioning
of the body. Animal nutrition includes
nutrient requirement, mode of intake
of food and its utilisation in the body.
You have studied in Class VI that food
consists of many components. Try to
recall and list them below:
1. ______________________
2. ______________________
3. ______________________
4. ______________________
5. ______________________
6. ______________________
The components of food such as
carbohydrates are complex substances.
These complex substances cannot be
utilised as such. So they are broken
down into simpler substances. The
breakdown of complex components of
Table 2.1 Various modes of feeding
Name of
Kind of
Mode of
animal
feeding
Snail
Eagle
Humming-bird
Mosquito
Butterfly
House fly
(Scraping, chewing, siphoning, capturing
and swallowing, sponging, sucking etc.)
food into simpler substances is called
digestion.
2.1 DIFFERENT WAYS OF TAKING FOOD
The mode of taking food into the body
varies in different organisms. Bees and
humming-birds suck the nectar of
plants, infants of human and many
other animals feed on motherís milk.
Snakes like the python swallow the
animals they prey upon. Some aquatic
animals filter tiny food particles floating
nearby and feed upon them.
Activity 2.1
What is the type of food and mode of
feeding of the following animals? Write
down your observations in the given
Table. You may find the list of modes of
feeding given below the Table helpful.
Complex substance
Simpler substances
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Fig. 2.1  Starfish
Amazing fact
Starfish feeds on animals covered by
hard shells of calcium carbonate.
After opening the shell, the starfish
pops out its stomach through its
mouth to eat the soft animal inside
the shell. The stomach then goes back
into the body and the food is slowly
digested.
2.2 DIGESTION IN HUMANS
We take in food through the mouth,
digest and utilise it. The unused parts
of the food are defecated. Have you ever
wondered what happens to the food
inside the body? The food passes
through a continuous canal (Fig. 2.2)
which begins at the buccal cavity and
ends at the anus. The canal can be
divided into various compartments:
(1) the buccal cavity, (2) foodpipe or
oesophagus, (3) stomach, (4) small
intestine, (5) large intestine ending in
the rectum and (6) the anus. Is it not a
very long path? These parts together
form the alimentary canal (digestive
tract). The food components gradually
get digested as food travels through the
various compartments. The inner walls
of the stomach and the small intestine,
and the various glands associated with the
canal such as salivary glands, the liver
and the pancreas secrete digestive juices.
The digestive juices convert complex
substances of food into simpler ones. The
digestive tract and the associated glands
together constitute the digestive system.
Now, let us know what happens to
the food in different parts of the digestive
tract.
The mouth and buccal cavity
Food is taken into the body through the
mouth. The process of taking food into
Fig. 2.2  Human digestive system
Buccal cavity
Salivary gland
Stomach
Pancreas
Small
intestine
Large
intestine
Rectum
Gall bladder
Liver
Oesophagus
© NCERT
not to be republished
NUTRITION IN ANIMALS
Fig. 2.3   Arrangement of teeth and different
type of teeth
Milk teeth and permanent teeth
Do you remember about falling of your teeth some years ago? The first set of
teeth grows during infancy and they fall off at the age between six to eight
years. These are termed milk teeth. The second set that replaces them are the
permanent teeth. The permanent teeth may last throughout life or fall off
during old age or due to some dental disease.
the body is called ingestion. We chew
the food with the teeth and break it
down mechanically into small pieces.
Each tooth is rooted in a separate socket
in the gums (Fig. 2.3). Our teeth vary in
appearance and perform different
functions. Accordingly they are given
different names (Fig. 2.3).
Activity 2.2
Wash your hands. Look into the
mirror and count your teeth. Use
your index finger to feel the teeth.
How many kinds of teeth could you
find? Take a piece of an apple or
bread and eat it. Which teeth do
you use for biting and cutting, and
which ones for piercing and tearing?
Also find out the ones that are used for
chewing and grinding?
Record your observations in Table 2.2
Boojho is fascinated by the
highly coiled small intestine seen
in Fig. 2.2. He wants to know its
length. Would you like to make a
wild guess? We have given its
approximate length on page 16.
Just imagine how such a long
structure is accommodated in a
small space within our body!
Type of teeth
Number of teeth
Total
Lower jaw
Upper jaw
Cutting and
biting teeth
Piercing and
tearing teeth
Chewing and
grinding teeth
Table 2.2
Molar
Canine
Premolar
Incisor
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Fig. 2.4  Effect of saliva on starch
Iodine solution
Water
Boiled rice
Boiled and chewed rice
Sweets and tooth decay
Normally bacteria are present in our mouth but they are not harmful
to us. However, if we do not clean our teeth and mouth after eating,
many harmful bacteria also begin to live and grow in it. These bacteria
break down the sugars present from the leftover food and release
acids (see Chapter 5 to know what an acid is). The acids gradually
damage the teeth (Fig. 2.5). This is called tooth decay. If it is not
treated in time, it causes severe toothache and in extreme cases
results in tooth loss. Chocolates, sweets, soft drinks and other sugar
products are the major culprits of tooth decay.
Therefore, one should clean the teeth with a brush or datun and
dental floss (a special strong thread which is moved between two
teeth to take out trapped food particles) at least twice a day and
rinse the mouth after every meal. Also, one should not put dirty
fingers or any unwashed object in the mouth.
Fig. 2.5  Gradual decay of tooth
Our mouth has the salivary glands
which secrete saliva. Do you know the
action of saliva on food? Let us find out.
Activity 2.3
Take two test tubes. Label them ëAí and
ëBí. In test tube ëAí put one teaspoonful
of boiled rice; in test tube ëBí keep one
teaspoonful of boiled rice after chewing
it for 3 to 5 minutes. Add 3ñ4 mL of
water in both the test tubes (Fig. 2.4).
Now pour 2ñ3 drops of iodine solution
in each test tube and observe. Why is
there a change in colour in the test
tubes? Discuss the results with your
classmates and your teacher. The saliva
breaks down the starch into sugars.
The tongue is a fleshy muscular
organ attached at the back to the floor
of the buccal cavity. It is free at the front
and can be moved in all directions. Do
you know the functions of the tongue?
We use our tongue for talking. Besides,
it mixes saliva with the food during
chewing and helps in swallowing food.
We also taste food with our tongue. It
has taste buds that detect different
tastes of food. We can find out the
© NCERT
not to be republished
NUTRITION IN ANIMALS
Paheli wants to know how
food moves in the opposite
direction during vomiting.
Fig. 2.6  Regions of the
tongue for different tastes
Fig. 2.7  Movement of the
food in the oesophagus
of the alimentary canal
position of taste buds by the following
activity.
Activity 2.4
1. Prepare a separate sample each of
(i) sugar solution, (ii) common salt
solution, (iii) lemon juice and (iv) juice
of crushed neem leaf or bitter gourd.
2. Blindfold one of your classmates and
ask her/him to take out the tongue
and keep it in straight and flat position.
3. Use a clean toothpick to put the
above samples one by one on
different areas of the tongue as
shown in Fig. 2.6. Use a new
toothpick for each sample.
4. Ask the classmate which areas of the
tongue could detect the sweet, salty,
sour and bitter substances.
5. Now write down your observations
and label Fig. 2.6.
Repeat this activity with other
classmates.
The foodpipe/oesophagus
The swallowed food passes into the
foodpipe or oesophagus. Look at Fig. 2.2.
The foodpipe runs along the neck
Sometimes when you eat in a hurry, talk or laugh while eating, you may cough,
get hiccups or a choking sensation. This happens when food particles enter the
windpipe. The windpipe carries air from the nostrils to the lungs. It runs adjacent
to the foodpipe. But inside the throat, air and food share a common passage.
Then how is food prevented from entering the windpipe? During the act of
swallowing a flap-like valve closes the passage of the windpipe and guides the
food into the foodpipe. If, by chance, food particles enter the windpipe, we feel
choked, get hiccups or cough.
Oesophagus
Stomach
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
The working of the stomach was discovered by a
strange accident. In 1822, a man named Alexis St.
Martin was badly hit by a shot gun. The bullet had
seriously damaged the chest wall and made a hole
in his stomach. He was brought to an American
army doctor William Beaumont. The doctor saved
the patient but he could not close the hole properly
and left it bandaged (Fig. 2.8). Beaumont took it as
a great opportunity to see the inside of the stomach
through the hole. He made some wonderful
observations.
Beaumont found that the stomach was churning
food. Its wall secreted a fluid which could digest
the food. He also observed that the end of the stomach opens into the intestine
only after the digestion of the food inside the stomach is completed.
and the chest. Food is pushed down by
movement of the wall of the foodpipe.
Actually this movement takes place
throughout the alimentary canal and
pushes the food downwards (Fig.  2.7).
At times the food is not accepted by our
stomach and is vomited out. Recall the
instances when you vomited after eating
and think of the reason for it. Discuss
with your parents and teacher.
The stomach
The stomach is a thick-walled bag. Its
shape is like a flattened U and it is the
widest part of the alimentary canal. It
receives food from the food pipe at one
end and opens into the small intestine
at the other.
The inner lining of the stomach
secretes mucous, hydrochloric acid and
digestive juices. The mucous protects
the lining of the stomach. The acid kills
many bacteria that enter along with the
food and makes the medium in the
stomach acidic and helps the digestive
juices to act. The digestive juices break
down the proteins into simpler
substances.
The small intestine
The small intestine is highly coiled and
is about 7.5 metres long. It receives
secretions from the liver and the pancreas.
Besides, its wall also secretes juices.
The liver is a reddish brown gland
situated in the upper part of the
abdomen on the right side. It is the
largest gland in the body. It secretes bile
juice that is stored in a sac called the
gall bladder (Fig. 2.2). The bile plays
an important role in the digestion of fats.
The pancreas is a large cream
coloured gland located just below the
stomach (Fig. 2.2). The pancreatic juice
acts on carbohydrates, fats and proteins
and changes them into simpler forms.
Fig. 2.8  Alexis St. Martin’s
shotgun wound
© NCERT
not to be republished
NUTRITION IN ANIMALS
Diarrhoea
Sometime you may have experienced the need to pass watery stool frequently.
This condition is known as diarrhoea. It may be caused by an infection, food
poisoning or indigestion. It is very common in India, particularly among children.
Under severe conditions it can be fatal. This is because of the excessive loss of
water and salts from the body. Diarrhoea should not be neglected. Even before a
doctor is consulted the patient should be given plenty of boiled and cooled water
with a pinch of salt and sugar dissolved in it. This is called Oral Rehydration
Solution (ORS).
The partly digested food now reaches the
lower part of the small intestine where
the intestinal juice completes the
digestion of all components of the food.
The carbohydrates get broken into
simple sugars such as glucose, fats into
fatty acids and glycerol, and proteins
into amino acids.
Absorption in the small
intestine
The digested food can now pass into the
blood vessels in the wall of the intestine.
This process is called absorption. The
inner walls of the small intestine have
thousands of finger-like outgrowths.
These are called villi (singular villus).
Can you guess what the role of villi could
be in the intestine? The villi increase
the surface area for absorption of the
digested food. Each villus has a network
of thin and small blood vessels close to
its surface. The surface of the villi
absorbs the digested food materials. The
absorbed substances are transported
via the blood vessels to different organs
of the body where they are used to build
complex substances such as the
proteins required by the body. This is
called assimilation. In the cells, glucose
breaks down with the help of oxygen
into carbon dioxide and water, and
energy is released. The food that
remains undigested and unabsorbed
enters into the large intestine.
Large intestine
The large intestine is wider and shorter
than small intestine. It is about 1.5 metre
in length. Its function is to absorb  water
and some salts from the undigested food
material. The remaining waste passes
into the rectum and remains there as
semi-solid faeces. The faecal matter is
removed through the anus from
time-to-time. This is called egestion.
2.3 DIGESTION IN GRASS-EATING
ANIMALS
Have you observed cows, buffaloes
and other grass-eating animals
chewing continuously even when
they are not eating? Actually, they
quickly swallow the grass and store
it in a part of the stomach called
rumen (Fig. 2.9). Here the food gets
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Fig. 2.9  Digestive system of ruminant
Boojho wants to know why
we cannot digest cellulose
like the cattle do.
Rumen
Ruminants have a large sac-like
structure called rumen between the
oesophagus and the small intestine
(Fig. 2.9). The cellulose of the food is
digested here by the action of certain
bacteria which are not present in humans.
So far you have learnt about animals
which possess the digestive system. But
there are many small organisms which
do not have a mouth and a digestive
system. Then, how do they acquire and
digest food? In the section below you will
learn another interesting way of food
intake.
2.4 FEEDING AND DIGESTION IN
AMOEBA
Amoeba is a microscopic single-celled
organism found in pond water. Amoeba
has a cell membrane, a rounded, dense
nucleus and many small bubble-like
vacuoles (Fig. 2.10) in its cytoplasm.
Amoeba constantly changes its shape
and position. It pushes out one, or
more finger-like projections, called
pseudopodia or false feet for movement
and capture of food.
Amoeba feeds on some microscopic
organisms. When it senses food, it
Paheli wants to know why
these animals cannot chew
food properly at the time they
take it in?
partially digested and is called cud.
But later the cud returns to the mouth
in small lumps and the animal chews
it. This process is called rumination and
these animals are called ruminants.
The grass is rich in cellulose, a type
of carbohydrate. Many animals,
including humans, cannot digest
cellulose.
Stomach
Oesophagus
Large Intestine
Small Intestine
Caecum
Fig. 2.10  Amoeba
Food particle
(ingestion)
Food vacuole
Pseudopodium
Egested waste
Nucleus
© NCERT
not to be republished
NUTRITION IN ANIMALS
pushes out pseudopodia around the
food particle and engulfs it. The food
becomes trapped in a food vacuole
[Fig. 2.10).
Digestive juices are secreted into the
food vacuole. They act on the food and
break it down into simpler substances.
Gradually the digested food is absorbed.
The absorbed substances are used for
growth, maintenance and multiplication.
The undigested residue of the food is
expelled outside by the vacuole.
The basic process of digestion of
food and release of energy is the same
in all animals. In a later chapter you
will learn about the transport of food
absorbed by the intestine to the various
parts of the body.
What you have learnt
Animal nutrition includes nutrient requirement, mode of intake of food
and its utilisation in the body.
The human digestive system consists of the alimentary canal and
secretory glands. It consists of the (i) buccal cavity, (ii) oesophagus,
(iii) stomach, (iv) small intestine, (v) large intestine ending in rectum
and (vi) anus. The main digestive glands which secrete digestive juices
are (i) the salivary glands, (ii) the liver and (iii) the pancreas. The stomach
wall and the wall of the small intestine also secrete digestive juices.
The modes of feeding vary in different organisms.
Nutrition is a complex process involving: (i) ingestion, (ii) digestion,
(iii) absorption, (iv) assimilation and  (v) egestion.
Keywords
Absorption
Amino acid
Amoeba
Assimilation
Buccal cavity
Canine
Cellulose
Digestion
Egestion
Fatty acid
Food vacuole
Gall bladder
Glycerol
Incisor
Ingestion
Liver
Milk teeth
Molar
Permanent teeth
Oesophagus
Pancreas
Premolar
Pseudopodia
Rumen
Ruminant
Rumination
Salivary glands
Villi
Saliva
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Digestion of carbohydrates, like starch, begins in the buccal cavity. The
digestion of protein starts in the stomach. The bile secreted from the
liver, the pancreatic juice from the pancreas and the digestive juice from
the intestinal wall complete the digestion of all components of food in
the small intestine. The digested food is absorbed in the blood vessels
from the small intestine.
The absorbed substances are transported to different parts of the body.
Water and some salts are absorbed from the undigested food in the
large intestine.
The undigested and unabsorbed residues are expelled out of the body
as faeces through the anus.
The grazing animals like cows, buffaloes and deer are known as
ruminants. They quickly ingest, swallow their leafy food and store it in
the rumen. Later, the food returns to the mouth and the animal chews
it peacefully.
Amoeba ingests its food with the help of its false feet or pseudopodia.
The food is digested in the food vacuole.
Exercises
1. Fill in the blanks:
(a) The main steps of nutrition in humans are __________, __________,
__________, _________ and __________.
(b) The largest gland in the human body is __________.
(c) The stomach releases hydrochloric acid and ___________ juices which
act on food.
(d) The inner wall of the small intestine has many finger-like outgrowths
called _________.
(e) Amoeba digests its food in the ____________ .
2. Mark ëTí if the statement is true and ëFí if it is false:
(a) Digestion of starch  starts in the stomach. (T/F)
(b) The tongue helps in mixing food with saliva. (T/F)
(c) The gall bladder temporarily stores bile. (T/F)
(d) The ruminants bring back swallowed grass into their mouth
and chew it for some time. (T/F)
3. Tick ()  mark the correct answer in each of the following:
(a) Fat is completely digested in the
stomach  (ii)  mouth  (iii)  small intestine  (iv)  large intestine
© NCERT
not to be republished
NUTRITION IN ANIMALS
(b) Water from the undigested food is absorbed mainly in the
(i) stomach (ii) foodpipe  (iii) small intestine
(iv) large intestine
4. Match the items of Column I with those given in Column II:
Column I
Column II
Food components
Product(s) of digestion
Carbohydrates
Fatty acids and glycerol
Proteins
Sugar
Amino acids
5. What are villi? What is their location and function?
6. Where is the bile produced? Which component of the food does it help to
digest?
7. Name the type of carbohydrate that can be digested by ruminants but
not by humans. Give the reason also.
8. Why do we get instant energy from glucose?
9. Which part of the digestive canal is involved in:
absorption of food ________________.
chewing of food ________________.
(iii)
killing of bacteria ________________.
complete digestion of food ________________.
formation of faeces ________________.
10. Write one similarity and one difference between the nutrition in amoeba
and human beings.
11. Match the items of Column I with suitable items in Column II
Column I
Column II
Salivary gland
Bile juice secretion
Stomach
Storage of undigested food
Liver
(iii)
Saliva secretion
Rectum
Acid release
Small intestine
Digestion is completed
Large intestine
Absorption of water
(vii)
Release of faeces
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
13. Can we survive only on raw, leafy vegetables/grass? Discuss.
Extended Learning — Activities and Project
1. Visit a doctor and find out:
Under what conditions does a patient need to be on a drip of
glucose?
Till when does a patient need to be given glucose?
(iii)
How does glucose help the patient recover?
Write the answers in your notebook.
2. Find out what vitamins are and get the following information.
Why are vitamins necessary in the diet?
Which fruits or vegetables should be eaten regularly to get
vitamins?
Write a one-page note on the information collected by you. You may take
help of a doctor, a dietician, your teacher or any other person, or from
any other source.
Fig. 2.11  A part of human digestive system
12. Label Fig. 2.11 of the digestive system.
© NCERT
not to be republished
NUTRITION IN ANIMALS
Collect data from your friends, neighbours and classmates to know more
about ìmilk teethî.
Tabulate your data. One way of doing it is given below:
S. No.
Age at which
Age at which
No. of teeth
No. of teeth
first tooth fell
last tooth fell
replaced
Find out from at least twenty children and find the average age at which
children lose the milk teeth. You may take help of your friends.
Did you know?
Fats in goatís milk are much simpler than those in cowís milk. Therefore,
the goatís milk is much easier to digest than the cowís milk.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Fibre to Fabric
n Class VI you have learnt about
some fibres obtained from plants.
You also learnt that wool and silk
fibres are obtained from animals. Wool
is obtained from the fleece  (hair) of
sheep or yak. Silk fibres come from
cocoons of the silk moth. Do you know
which part of the sheep’s body yields
fibres? Are you aware how these fibres
are converted into the woollen yarn that
we buy from the market to knit sweaters?
Do you have any idea how silk fibres are
made into silk, which is woven into saris?
In this Chapter we shall try to find
answers to these questions.
Animal fibres — wool and silk
3.1 WOOL
Wool comes from sheep, goat, yak and
some other animals. These wool-yielding
animals bear hair on their body. Do you
know why these animals have a thick
coat of hair? Hair trap a lot of air. Air is
a poor conductor of heat, as you would
learn in Chapter 4. So, hair keeps these
animals warm. Wool is derived from
these hairy fibres.
Activity 3.1
Feel the hair on your body and arms
and those on your head. Do you find
any difference? Which one seems coarse
and which one is soft?
Like us, the hairy skin of the sheep
has two types of fibres that form its
fleece: (i) the coarse beard hair, and
(ii) the fine soft under-hair close to the
skin. The fine hair provide the fibres for
making wool. Some breeds of sheep
possess only fine under-hair. Their
parents are specially chosen to give birth
to sheep which have only soft under-
hair. This process of selecting parents
for obtaining special characters in their
offspring, such as soft under hair in
sheep, is termed ‘selective breeding’.
Fig. 3.1  Sheep with thick growth of hair
Animals that yield wool
Several breeds of sheep are found in
different parts of our country (Table 3.1).
However, the fleece of sheep is not the
only source of wool, though wool
commonly available in the market is
© NCERT
not to be republished
FIBRE TO FABRIC
Fig. 3.6  Llama
sheep wool (Fig. 3.1). Yak (Fig. 3.2) wool
is common in Tibet and Ladakh. Angora
wool is obtained from angora goats,
(Fig. 3.3) found in hilly regions such as
Jammu and Kashmir.
Wool is also obtained from goat hair
(Fig. 3.4). The under fur of Kashmiri
goat is soft. It is woven into fine shawls
called Pashmina shawls.
The fur (hair) on the body of camels
is also used as wool (Fig. 3.5). Llama
and Alpaca, found in South America,
also yield wool (Fig. 3.6 and 3.7).
Activity 3.2
Collect pictures of animals whose hair
is used as wool. Stick them in your scrap
book. If you are unable to get pictures,
try and draw them from the ones given
in this book.
Find out words for sheep, goat, camel
and yak in your local language and also
in other languages of our country.
Fig. 3.7  Alpaca
Fig. 3.2  Yak
Fig. 3.3  Angora goat
Fig. 3.4  Goat
Fig. 3.5  Camel
Activity 3.3
Procure outline maps of India and the
world. Find out and mark the places on
the map where you find animals that
provide wool. Use different colours to
denote the location for different wool
yielding animals.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
From fibres to wool
For obtaining wool, sheep are reared.
Their hair is cut and processed into
wool. Let us learn about this process.
Rearing and breeding of sheep: If you
travel to the hills in Jammu & Kashmir,
Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal,
Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim, or the
plains of Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan
and Gujarat, you can see shepherds
taking their herds of sheep for grazing.
Sheep are herbivores and prefer grass
and leaves. Apart from grazing sheep,
rearers also feed them on a mixture of
pulses, corn, jowar, oil cakes (material
left after taking out oil from seeds) and
minerals. In winter, sheep are kept
indoors and fed on leaves, grain and dry
fodder.
Sheep are reared in many parts of
our country for wool. Table 3.1 gives the
names of some breeds of sheep reared
in our country for producing wool. The
quality and texture of the fibres obtained
from them is also indicated in the table.
Certain breeds of sheep have thick
coat of hair on their body which yields
good quality wool in large quantities. As
mentioned earlier, these sheep are
“selectively bred” with one parent being
a sheep of good breed.
Once the reared sheep have
developed a thick growth of hair, hair is
shaved off for getting wool.
Processing fibres into wool
The wool which is used for knitting
sweaters or for weaving shawls is the
finished product of a long process,
which involves the following steps:
Step I: The fleece of the sheep along with a
thin layer of skin is removed from its
body [Fig. 3.8 (a)]. This process is called
shearing. Machines similar to those used
by barbers are used to shave off hair.
Usually, hair are removed during the hot
weather. This enables sheep to survive
without their protective coat of hair. The
hair provide woollen fibres. Woollen
fibres are then processed to obtain
woollen yarn. Shearing does not hurt
the sheep just as it does not hurt when
you get a hair cut or your father shaves his
beard. Do you know why? The uppermost
layer of the skin is dead. Also, the hair of
sheep grow again just as your hair does.
Table 3.1 Some Indian breeds of sheep
S.No. Name of breed          Quality of wool
State where found
Good quality wool
Rajasthan, Punjab
Rampur bushair
Brown fleece
Uttar Pradesh,Himachal Pradesh
Carpet wool
Rajasthan, Haryana, Punjab
Bakharwal
For woollen shawls
Jammu and Kashmir
Marwari
Coarse wool
Gujarat
Patanwadi
For hosiery
Gujarat
© NCERT
not to be republished
FIBRE TO FABRIC
Fig. 3.8  (c) Scouring by machines
sometimes appear on your sweaters. The
fibres are scoured again and dried. This
is the wool ready to be drawn into fibres.
Step V: The fibres can be dyed in various
colours, as the natural fleece of sheep
and goats is black, brown or white.
Step VI: The fibres are straightened,
combed
rolled
[Fig. 3.8 (d)]. The longer fibres are
made into wool for sweaters and the
shorter fibres are spun and woven
into woollen cloth.
Fig. 3.8  (d) Rolling into yarn
Fig. 3.8  (b) Scouring in tanks
Fig. 3.8  (a) Shearing a sheep
Step II: The sheared skin with hair is
thoroughly washed in tanks to remove
grease, dust and dirt. This is called
scouring. Nowadays scouring is done
by machines [Fig. 3.8 (b) and (c)].
Step III: After scouring, sorting is done.
The hairy skin is sent to a factory where
hair of different textures are separated
or sorted.
Step IV: The small fluffy fibres, called
burrs, are picked out from the hair.
These are the same burrs which
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Activity 3.4
Debate amongst your classmates
whether it is fair on the part of humans
to rear sheep and then chop off their
hair for getting wool.
3.2 SILK
Silk fibres are also animal fibres.
Silkworms spin the ‘silk fibres’. The
rearing of silkworms for obtaining silk
is called sericulture. Find out from
your mother/aunt/grandmother the
kind of silk saris they have. List the
kinds of silk.
Before we discuss the process of
obtaining silk, it is necessary to know the
interesting life history of the silk moth.
Life history of silk moth
The female silk moth lays eggs, from
which hatch larvae which are called
caterpillars or silkworms. They grow in
size and when the caterpillar is ready to
enter the next stage of its life history
called pupa, it first weaves a net to hold
itself. Then it swings its head from side
to side in the form of the figure of eight (8).
During these movements of the head,
the caterpillar secretes fibre made of a
Occupational hazard
Wool industry is an important
means of livelihood for many people
in our country. But sorter’s job is
risky as sometimes they get infected
by a bacterium, anthrax, which
causes a fatal blood disease called
sorter’s disease. Such risks faced by
workers in any industry are called
occupational hazards.
Boojho is wondering why a
cotton garment cannot keep us
as warm in winter as a woollen
sweater does.
Boojho is wondering why it
hurts when someone pulls his
hair but not when he goes for a
haircut.
(a) Male
(b) Female
Adult silk moths
(c) Eggs on mulberry leaves             (d) Silkworm
(e) Cocoon
(f) Cocoon with developing moth
Fig. 3.9  (a to f) Life history of silk moth
© NCERT
not to be republished
FIBRE TO FABRIC
protein which hardens on exposure to
air and becomes silk fibre. Soon the
caterpillar completely covers itself by
silk fibres and turns into pupa. This
covering is known as cocoon. The further
development of the pupa into moth
continues inside the cocoon (Fig. 3.9). Silk
fibres are used for weaving silk cloth. Can
you imagine that the soft silk yarn is as
strong as a comparable thread of steel!
The silk yarn (thread) is obtained
from the cocoon of the silk moth. There
is a variety of silk moths which look very
different from one another and the silk
yarn they yield is different in texture
(coarse, smooth, shiny, etc.). Thus,
tassar silk, mooga silk, kosa silk, etc.,
are obtained from cocoons spun by
different types of moths. The most
common silk moth is the mulberry silk
moth. The silk fibre from the cocoon of
this moth is soft, lustrous and elastic
and can be dyed in beautiful colours.
Sericulture or culture of silkworms
is a very old occupation in India. India
produces plenty of silk on a commercial
scale.
Activity 3.5
Collect pieces of silk cloth of various
types and paste them in your scrap
book. You can find them in a tailor’s
shop among the heap of waste cut pieces.
Take help of your mother, aunt or
teacher and identify the types of silk
such as mulberry silk, tassar silk, eri
silk, mooga silk, etc. Compare the
texture of these silks with that of the
artificial silk pieces, which contain
synthetic fibres. Try and collect pictures
of different moths whose caterpillars
provide the various types of silk.
Activity 3.6
Take an artificial (synthetic) silk thread
and a pure silk thread. Burn these
threads carefully. Did you notice any
difference in the smell while burning?
Now, burn a woollen fibre carefully.
Did it smell like burning of artificial
silk or that of pure silk? Can you
explain why?
To remember when the cocoon stage
is reached in the life history of the silk
moth, try the following activity.
Activity 3.7
Photocopy Fig. 3.9. Cut out pictures of
the stages of the life history of the silk
moth, and paste them on pieces of
cardboard or chart paper. Jumble
them. Now try and arrange the stages
in the correct sequence in a cyclic form.
Whoever does it fastest wins.
You may also describe the life history
in your own words. Write it down in your
scrap book.
In India, women are significantly involved in various kinds of industries related
to silk production. These are rearing of silkworms, reeling of silk from cocoons
and processing of raw silk into fabrics. By their enterprise, they contribute to
the nation’s economy. China leads the world in silk production. India also ranks
among the leading silk producing countries.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
From cocoon to silk
For obtaining silk, moths are reared
and their cocoons are collected to get
silk threads.
Rearing silkworms: A female silk moth
lays hundreds of eggs at a time
[Fig. 3.10 (a)]. The eggs are stored
carefully on strips of cloth or paper and
sold to silkworm farmers. The farmers
Fig. 3.10  Rearing silkworms
(a) Female silkworm
moth with eggs
(b) Mulberry tree
keep eggs under hygienic conditions
and under suitable conditions of
temperature and humidity.
The eggs are warmed to a suitable
temperature for the larvae to hatch from
eggs. This is done when mulberry trees
[Fig. 3.10 (b)] bear a fresh crop of leaves.
The larvae, called caterpillars or
silkworms, eat day and night and
increase enormously in size [Fig. 3.10 (c)].
Discovery of silk
The exact time of discovery of silk is perhaps unknown. According to an old
Chinese legend, the empress Si-lung-Chi was asked by the emperor Huang-ti to
find the cause of the damaged leaves of mulberry trees growing in their garden.
The empress found white worms eating up mulberry leaves. She also noticed
that they were spinning shiny cocoons around them. Accidentally a cocoon
dropped into her cup of tea and a tangle of delicate threads separated from the
cocoon. Silk industry began in China and was kept a closely guarded secret for
hundreds of years. Later on, traders and travellers introduced silk to other
countries. The route they travelled is still called the ‘silk route’.
(d) Cocoons
(c) Larva (Caterpillar/
Silkworm) feeding on
mulberry leaves
Leaf of Mulberry
© NCERT
not to be republished
FIBRE TO FABRIC
What you have learnt
Silk comes from silkworms and wool is obtained from sheep, goat and
yak. Hence silk and wool are animal fibres.
The hairs of camel, llama and alpaca are also processed to yield wool.
In India, mostly sheep are reared for getting wool.
Sheep hair is sheared off from the body, scoured, sorted, dried, dyed,
spun and woven to yield wool.
Silkworms are caterpillars of silk moth.
During their life cycle, the worms spin cocoons of silk fibres.
Silk fibres are made of a protein.
Silk fibres from cocoons are separated out and reeled into silk threads.
Weavers weave silk threads into silk cloth.
The larvae are kept in clean bamboo
trays along with freshly chopped
mulberry leaves. After 25 to 30 days,
the caterpillars stop eating and
move to a tiny chamber of bamboo in
the tray to spin cocoons [Fig. 3.10 (d)].
Small racks or twigs may be provided
in the trays to which cocoons get
attached. The caterpillar or silkworm
spins the cocoon inside which develops
the silk moth.
Processing silk: A pile of cocoons is
used for obtaining silk fibres. The
cocoons are kept under the sun or boiled
or exposed to steam. The silk fibres
separate out. The process of taking out
threads from the cocoon for use as silk
is called reeling the silk. Reeling is done
in special machines, which unwind
the threads or fibres of silk from the
cocoon. Silk fibres are then spun into
silk threads, which are woven into silk
cloth by weavers.
Paheli wants to know if the
cotton thread and silk thread
are spun and woven in the
same manner.
Keywords
Cocoon
Fleece
Reeling
Silk moth
Silkworm
Sorting
Scouring
Sericulture
Shearing
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Exercises
You must be familiar with the following nursery rhymes:
‘Baa baa black sheep, have you any wool.’
‘Mary had a little lamb, whose fleece was white as snow.’
Answer the following:
Which parts of the black sheep have wool?
What is meant by the white fleece of the lamb?
The silkworm is (a) a caterpillar, (b) a larva. Choose the correct option.
(ii) b
(iii) both a and b
(iv) neither a nor b.
Which of the following does not yield wool?
(ii) Camel
(iii) Goat
(iv) Woolly dog
What is meant by the following terms?
(i) Rearing (ii) Shearing   (iii) Sericulture
Given below is a sequence of steps in the processing of wool. Which are
the missing steps? Add them.
Shearing, __________, sorting, __________,    __________,
_________.
Make sketches of the two stages in the life history of the silk moth which
are directly related to the production of silk.
Out of the following, which are the two terms related to silk production?
Sericulture, floriculture, moriculture, apiculture and silviculture.
Hints:
Silk production involves cultivation of mulberry leaves and
rearing silkworms.
Scientific name of mulberry is Morus alba.
Match the words of Column I with those given in Column II:
Column I
Column II
Scouring
Yields silk fibres
Mulberry leaves
Wool yielding animal
Food of silk worm
Cocoon
Reeling
Cleaning sheared skin
© NCERT
not to be republished
FIBRE TO FABRIC
Given below is a crossword puzzle based on this lesson. Use hints to fill
in the blank spaces with letters that complete the words.
Across
(D) 1 : Thorough washing
1 : Keeps warm
2 : Animal fibre
2 : Its leaves are eaten by silkworms
3 : Long thread like structure
3 : Hatches from egg of moth
Boojho wants to know why
caterpillars need to shed their skin
when they grow bigger but we
humans do not.
Paheli wants to know the
maximum length of
continuous silk thread that
can be obtained from a cocoon.
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
Find out for her.
Do you have any idea?
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Can you help him?
Paheli wanted to buy a silk frock and went to the market with her mother.
There they found that the artificial (synthetic) silk was much cheaper
and wanted to know why. Do you know why? Find out.
Someone told Paheli that an animal called ‘Vicuna’ also gives wool. Can
you tell her where this animal is found? Look for this in a dictionary or
an encyclopaedia.
When handloom and textile exhibitions are held, certain stalls display
real moths of various varieties of silk and their life histories. Try and
visit these stalls with elders or teachers and see these moths and stages
of their life history.
Look for eggs of any moth or butterfly in your garden or park or any
other place full of plants. They look like tiny specks (dots) laid in a
cluster on the leaves. Pull out the leaves containing eggs and place
them in a cardboard box. Take some leaves of the same plant or another
plant of the same variety, chop them and put them in the box. Eggs will
hatch into caterpillars, which are busy eating day and night. Add leaves
everyday for them to feed upon. Sometimes you may be able to collect
the caterpillars. But be careful. Use a paper napkin or a paper to hold
a caterpillar.
Observe everyday. Note the (i) number of days taken for eggs to hatch,
(ii) number of days taken to reach the cocoon stage, and (iii) number of
days to complete life cycle. Record your observations in your notebook.
You can read more on the following website:
www.indiansilk.kar.nic.in/
Boojho wants to know why
caterpillars should not be collected
with bare hands.
Did you know?
In terms of the number of sheep, India ranks third in the world, behind
China and Australia. However, the New Zealand sheep are known to yield
the best wool.
© NCERT
not to be republished
n Chapter 3 you learnt that woollen
clothes are made from animal fibres.
You also know that cotton clothes
are made from plant fibres. We wear
woollen clothes during winters when it
is cold outside. Woollen clothes keep us
warm. We prefer to wear light coloured
cotton clothes when it is hot. These give
us a feeling of coolness. You might have
wondered why particular types of
clothes are suitable for a particular
season.
In winter you feel cold inside the
house. If you come out in the sun, you
feel warm. In summer, you feel hot even
inside the house. How do we know
whether an object is hot or cold? How
do we find out how hot or cold an object
is? In this chapter we shall try to seek
answers to some of these questions.
4.1  HOT AND COLD
In our day-to-day life, we come across a
number of objects. Some of them are hot
We see that some objects are cold
while some are hot. You also know that
some objects are hotter than others
while some are colder than others.  How
do we decide which object is hotter than
the other? We often do it by touching
the objects. But is our sense of touch
reliable? Let us find out.
Activity 4.1
Take three large mugs. Label them as
A, B and C.  Put cold water in mug A
and hot water in mug B. Mix some cold
Table 4.1:  Hot and cold objects
Object
Cold/Cool
Warm/Hot
Ice cream
Spoon in a
tea cup
Fruit juice
Handle of a
frying pan
Fig. 4.1   Feeling water in three mugs
and some of them are cold.  Tea is hot
and ice is cold. List some objects you
use commonly in Table 4.1. Mark these
objects as hot or cold.
Do not touch objects which are too
hot. Be careful while handling a
candle flame or a stove.
Make sure that water is not so hot that
you burn your hand
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
your hand and examine it carefully. If
you do not have a thermometer, request
a friend to share it with you. A clinical
thermometer looks like the one shown
in Fig. 4.2.
A clinical thermometer consists of a
long, narrow, uniform glass tube. It has
a bulb at one end. This bulb contains
mercury. Outside the bulb, a small
shining thread of mercury can be seen.
If you do not see the mercury thread,
rotate the thermometer a bit till you see
it.  You will also find a scale on the
thermometer. The scale we use is the
celsius scale, indicated by °C.
Boojho’s confusion shows that we
cannot always rely on our sense of touch
to decide whether an object
is hot or cold. Sometimes
it may deceive us.
Then, how do we find
out how hot an object really
is? A reliable measure of the
hotness of an object is its
temperature. Temperature is
measured by a device called
thermometer.
4.2 MEASURING TEMPERATURE
Have you seen a thermometer? Recall
that when you or someone else in your
family had fever, the temperature was
measured by a thermometer. The
thermometer that measures our body
temperature is called a clinical
thermometer. Hold the thermometer in
Fig. 4.2  A clinical thermometer
A clinical thermometer reads
temperature from 35°C to 42°C.
Activity 4.2
Reading a thermometer
Let us learn how to read a thermometer.
First, note the temperature difference
indicated between the two bigger marks.
Also note down the number of divisions
Boojho says,“My left hand
tells me that the water in mug
C is hot and the right hand
tells me that the same water
is cold.  What should I
conclude?”
and hot water in mug C.  Now dip your
left hand in mug A and the right hand
in mug B. After keeping the hands in
the two mugs for 2–3 minutes, put both
the hands simultaneously in mug C
(Fig. 4.1).  Do both the hands get the
same feeling?
Boojho wondered which of the two scales
shown in Fig. 4.2 he should read.  Paheli told
him that India has adopted the celsius scale
and we should read that scale.  The other scale
with the range 94–108 degrees is the
Fahrenheit scale (°F). It was in use earlier.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Precautions to be observed while reading a clinical thermometer
 Thermometer should be washed before and after use, preferably with an
antiseptic solution.
 Ensure that before use the mercury level is below 35°C.
 Read the thermometer keeping the level of mercury along the line of sight.
(See Fig. 4.3).
 Handle the thermometer with care. If it hits against some hard object, it can
break.
 Don’t hold the thermometer by the bulb while reading it.
(shown by smaller marks) between these
marks.  Suppose the bigger marks read
one degree and there are five divisions
between them.  Then, one small division
can read 1
0.2 C
Wash the thermometer, preferably
with an antiseptic solution. Hold it
firmly and give it a few jerks. The jerks
will bring the level of mercury down.
Ensure that it falls below 35°C.  Now
place the bulb of the thermometer
Fig. 4.3  Correct method of reading a clinical
thermometer
under your tongue. After one minute,
take the thermometer out and note the
reading.  This is your body temperature.
The temperature should always be
stated with its unit, °C.
What did you record as your body
temperature?
The normal temperature of human
body is 37°C. Note that the temperature
is stated with its unit.
Let us try to assure Paheli that there
is nothing wrong with her.
Activity 4.3
Measure the body temperature of some
of your friends (at least 10) with a
Table 4.2: Body temperature of
some persons
Temperature (°C)
Paheli measured her body
temperature. She got worried as
it was not exactly 37°C.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
clinical thermometer. Record your
observations as in Table 4.2.
Is the body temperature of every
person 37°C?
The temperature of every person may
not be 37°C.  It could be slightly higher
or slightly lower.  Actually, what we call
normal temperature is the average body
temperature of a large number of healthy
persons.
The clinical thermometer is designed
to measure the temperature of human
body only.  The temperature of human
body normally does not go below 35oC
or above 42oC. That is the reason
that this thermometer has the range
35oC to 42oC.
Different types of thermometers
are used for different purposes.
The maximum and minimum
temperatures of the previous
day, reported in weather
reports, are measured by
a thermometer called the
m a x i m u m - m i n i m u m
thermometer.
CAUTION
Do not use a clinical thermometer for
measuring the temperature of any
object other than the human body.
Also avoid keeping the thermometer in
the sun or near a flame. It may break.
this thermometer.  Look at it
carefully and note the highest and
the lowest temperature it can
measure. The range of a
laboratory thermometer is
generally from –10°C to 110°C
(Fig. 4.4). Also, as you did in the
case of the clinical thermometer,
find out how much a small
division on this thermometer
reads.  You would need this
information
thermometer correctly.
Let us now learn how this
thermometer is used.
Activity 4.4
Take some tap water in a beaker
or a mug.  Dip the thermometer
in water so that the bulb is
immersed in water but does not
touch the bottom or the sides of
container.
thermometer vertically (Fig. 4.5).
Observe the movement of mercury
in the thermometer.  Wait till the
mercury thread becomes steady.
Fig. 4.4  A laboratory thermometer
4.3 LABORATORY THERMOMETER
How do we measure the temperature of
other objects? For this purpose, there
are other thermometers. One such
thermometer is known as the laboratory
thermometer.  The teacher will show you
Boojho got a naughty idea.  He
wanted to measure the temperature
of hot milk using a clinical
thermometer.  Paheli stopped him
from doing so.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Are there any variations in the
readings? Discuss the possible reasons.
Let us try to answer this question.
Activity 4.5
Take some hot water in a beaker or a
mug.  Dip the thermometer in water.
Wait till the mercury thread becomes
steady and note the temperature.  Now
take out the thermometer from water.
Observe carefully what happens now.
Do you notice that as soon as you take
the thermometer out of water, the level
of mercury begins to fall.  This means
that the temperature must be read while
the thermometer is in water.
You may recall that while taking your
own temperature, you have to take the
thermometer out of your mouth to note
the reading. Can you then use the
laboratory thermometer to measure your
In addition to the precautions needed while reading a clinical
thermometer, the laboratory thermometer
 should be kept upright not tilted. (Fig. 4.5)
 bulb should be surrounded from all sides by the substance of which the
temperature is to be measured. The bulb should not touch the surface of the
container.
Fig. 4.5  Measuring temperature of water with a
laboratory thermometer
Boojho now understand why
clinical thermometer cannot be
used to measure high
temperatures. But still wonders
whether a laboratory thermometer
can be used to measure his body
temperature.
Note the reading. This is the temperature
of water at that time.
Compare the temperature of water
recorded by each student in the class.
Boojho wonders why the level
of mercury should change at
all when the bulb of the
thermometer is brought in contact
with another object?
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
body temperature?  Obviously, it is not
convenient to use the laboratory
thermometer for this purpose.
Why does the mercury not fall or rise
in a clinical thermometer when taken
out of the mouth?
Observe a clinical thermometer
again. Do you see a kink near the bulb
(Fig. 4.6).
What is the use of the kink? It
prevents mercury level from falling on
its own.
in all cases heat flows from a hotter
object to a colder object.
How does heat flow?  Let us
investigate.
Activity 4.6
Take a rod or flat strip of a metal, say of
aluminium or iron.  Fix a few small wax
pieces on the rod.  These pieces should
be at nearly equal distances (Fig. 4.7).
Clamp the rod to a stand. If you do not
find a stand, you can   put one end of
the rod in between bricks.  Now, heat
the other end of the rod and observe.
What happens to the wax pieces?  Do
these pieces begin to fall? Which piece
falls the first? Do you think that heat is
Fig. 4.6  A clinical thermometer has a kink in it
4.4 TRANSFER OF HEAT
You might have observed that a frying
pan becomes hot when kept on a flame.
It is because the heat passes from the
flame to the utensil. When the pan is
removed from the fire, it slowly cools
down.  Why does it cool down?  The heat
is transferred from the pan to the
surroundings.  So you can understand
that in both cases, the heat flows from
a hotter object to a colder object. In fact,
Paheli asks: “Does it mean
that heat will not be
transferred if the temperature of
two objects is the same?”
transferred from the end nearest to the
flame to the other end?
The process by which heat is
transferred from the hotter end to the
colder end of an object is known as
conduction. In solids, generally, the
Fig. 4.7  Flow of heat through a metal strip
There is a lot of concern over
the use of mercury in
thermometers. Mercury is a
toxic substance and is very
difficult to dispose of if a
thermometer breaks. These
days, digital thermometers
are available which do not
use mercury.
© NCERT
not to be republished
heat is transferred by the process of
conduction.
Do all substances conduct heat
easily?   You must have observed that
the metallic pan for cooking has a plastic
or wooden handle.  Can you lift a hot
pan by holding it from the handle
without getting hurt?
Activity 4.7
Heat water in a small pan or a beaker.
Collect some articles such as a steel
spoon, plastic scale, pencil and divider.
Dip one end of each of these articles in
hot water (Fig. 4.8). Wait for a few
minutes. Touch the other end. Enter
your observation in Table 4.3.
The materials which allow heat to
pass through them easily are
conductors of heat. For examples,
aluminum, iron and copper. The
materials which do not allow heat to
pass through them easily are poor
conductors of heat such as plastic and
wood. Poor conductors are known as
insulators.
The water and air are poor
conductors of heat. Then, how does the
heat transfer take place in these
substances?  Let us find out.
Activity 4.8
Take a round bottom flask (if flask is
not available, a beaker can be used).  Fill
it two-thirds with water. Place it on a
tripod, or make some arrangement to
place the flask in such a way that you
can heat it by placing a candle below it.
Wait till the water in the flask is
still. Place a crystal of potassium
permanganate at the bottom of the flask
gently using a straw. Now, heat the water
by placing the candle just below the
crystal.
Write your observation in your
notebook and also draw a picture of
what you observe (Fig. 4.9).
When water is heated,
the water near the flame gets
hot.  Hot water rises up.
The cold water from the
sides moves down towards
the source of heat. This
water also gets hot and rises
Fig. 4.8  Conduction of heat by different
materials
Table 4.3
Article
Material with
Does the other
which the article
end get hot
is made of
Yes/No
Steel spoon
Metal
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Notice that towards the top, the air
gets heated by convection. Therefore, the
hand above the flame feels hot. On the
sides, however, there is no convection
and air does not feel as hot as at
the top.
The people living in the coastal areas
experience an interesting phenomenon.
During the day, the land gets heated
faster than the water. The air over the
land becomes hotter and rises up. The
cooler air from the sea rushes in towards
the land to take its place. The warm air
from the land moves towards the sea to
complete the cycle. The air from the sea
is called the sea breeze. To receive the
cooler sea breeze, the windows of the
houses in coastal areas are made to face
the sea.  At night it is exactly the reverse
(Fig. 4.11). The water cools down more
slowly than the land. So, the cool air
from the land moves towards the sea.
This is called the land breeze.  Fig. 4.11
shows this phenomenon.
When we come out in the sun, we
feel warm. How does the heat from the
sun reach us? It cannot reach us by
conduction or convection as there is no
medium such as air in most part of the
and water from the sides moves down.
This process continues till the whole
water gets heated. This mode of heat
transfer is known as convection.
How does the heat travel in air?  In
which direction does the smoke go?
The air near the heat source gets hot
and rises.  The air from the sides comes
in to take its place. In this way the air
gets heated. The following activity
confirms this idea.
Activity 4.9
Light a candle. Keep one hand above the
flame and one hand on the side of the
flame  (Fig. 4.10). Do your hands feel
equally hot?  If not which hand feels
hotter?  And why?
Fig. 4.10  Transfer of heat by convection in air
Fig. 4.9  Convection of heat in water
Be careful.  Keep your hands at a safe
distance from the flame so that they
do not get burnt.
© NCERT
not to be republished
space between the earth and the sun.
From the sun the heat comes to us by
another process known as radiation.
The transfer of heat by radiation does
not require any medium. It can take
place whether a medium is present or
not. When we sit in front of a room
heater, we get heat by this process. A
hot utensil kept away from the flame
cools down as it transfers heat to the
surroundings by radiation. Our body
too, gives heat to the surroundings and
receives heat from it by radiation.
All hot bodies radiate heat.  When
this heat falls on some object, a part of
it is reflected, a part is absorbed and a
part may be transmitted. The
temperature of the object increases due
to the absorbed part of the heat. Why
are you advised to use an umbrella when
you go out in the sun?
4.5 KINDS OF CLOTHES WE WEAR IN
SUMMER AND WINTER
You know that in summer we prefer
light-coloured clothes and in winter we
usually wear dark-coloured clothes. Why
is it so? Let us find out
Activity 4.10
Take two identical tin cans.  Paint the
outer surface of one black and of the
other white (Fig. 4.12). Pour equal
amounts of water in each and leave them
in the mid-day sun for about an hour.
Measure the temperature of water in
both the cans. Do you find any
difference in the temperatures?  In
Fig. 4.11  Land breeze and sea breeze
Day time
Night time
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
We often use electricity and fuels like coal and wood to keep our houses cool or
warm. Is it possible to construct buildings, that are not affected much by heat
and cold outside? This can be done by constructing outer walls of buildings so
that they have trapped layers of air. One way of doing this is to use hollow
bricks, which are available these days.
which can is the water warmer?  You
can feel the difference even by touching
water in the two cans.
Activity 4.11
Fill the two cans used in Activity 4.10
with the same amount of hot water at
the same temperature (say, at 60oC).
Leave the cans in a room or in a shade.
Note the temperature of water after
10–15 minutes.  Does the temperature
of water in both the cans fall by the same
amount?
Do these activities suggest to you the
reason why it is more comfortable to
wear white or light-coloured clothes in
the summer and dark-coloured clothes
in the winter? Dark surfaces absorb
more heat and, therefore, we feel
comfortable with dark coloured clothes
in the winter. Light coloured clothes
reflect most of the heat that falls on them
and, therefore, we feel more comfortable
wearing them in the summer.
Woollen clothes keep us warm
in winter
In the winter, we use woollen clothes.
Wool is a poor conductor of heat.
Moreover, there is air trapped in between
the wool fibres. This air prevents the flow
of heat from our body to the cold
surroundings. So, we feel warm.
Suppose you are given the choice in
winter of using either one thick blanket
or two thin blankets joined together.
What would you choose and why?
Remember that there would be a layer
of air in between the blankets.
Fig. 4.12  Containers with black and white
surface
Keywords
Celsius scale
Conduction
Conductor
Convection
Insulator
Land breeze
Radiation
Sea breeze
Temperature
Thermometer
© NCERT
not to be republished
What you have learnt
Our sense of touch is not always a reliable guide to the degree of hotness
of an object.
Temperature is a measure of the degree of hotness of an object.
Thermometer is a device used for measuring temperatures.
Clinical thermometer is used to measure our body temperature. The
range of this thermometer is from 35°C to 42°C.  For other purposes, we
use the laboratory thermometers. The range of these thermometers is
usually from –10°C to 110°C.
The normal temperature of the human body is 37°C.
The heat flows from a body at a higher temperature to a body at a lower
temperature. There are three ways in which heat can flow from one
object to another. These are conduction, convection and radiation.
In solids, generally, the heat is transferred by conduction. In liquids
and gases the heat is transferred by convection. No medium is required
for transfer of heat by radiation.
The materials which allow heat to pass through them easily are
conductors of heat.
The materials which do not allow heat to pass through them easily are
called insulators.
Dark-coloured objects absorb radiation better than the light-coloured
objects. That is the reason we feel more comfortable in light-coloured
clothes in the summer.
Woollen clothes keep us warm during winter. It is so because wool is a
poor conductor of heat and it has air trapped in between the fibres.
Exercises
1. State similarities and differences between the laboratory thermometer
and the clinical thermometer.
2. Give two examples each of conductors and insulators of heat.
3. Fill in the blanks :
The hotness of an object is determined by its __________.
Temperature of boiling water cannot be measured by a
_____________ thermometer.
Temperature is measured in degree ______________.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
No medium is required for transfer of heat by the process of
__________.
A cold steel spoon is dipped in a cup of hot milk. It transfers heat
to its other end by the process of ______________.
Clothes of ______________ colours absorb heat better than clothes
of light colours.
4. Match the following :
Land breeze blows during
(a) summer
Sea  breeze blows during
(b) winter
(iii)
Dark coloured clothes are preferred during
(c) day
Light coloured clothes are preferred during
(d) night
5. Discuss why wearing more layers of clothing during winter keeps us
warmer than wearing just one thick piece of clothing .
6. Look at Fig. 4.13. Mark where the  heat is being transferred by
conduction, by convection and by radiation.
Fig. 4.13
7. In places of hot climate it is advised that the outer walls of houses be
painted white. Explain.
8. One litre of water at 30°C is mixed with one litre of water at 50°C. The
temperature of the mixture will be
(b)   more than 50°C but less than 80°C
(d)   between 30°C and 50°C
© NCERT
not to be republished
9. An iron ball at 40°C is dropped in a mug containing water at 40°C.
The heat will
flow from iron ball to water.
not flow from iron ball to water or from water to iron ball.
flow from water to iron ball.
increase the temperature of both.
10. A wooden spoon is dipped in a cup of ice cream. Its other end
becomes cold by the process of conduction.
becomes cold by the process of convection.
becomes cold by the process of radiation.
does not become cold.
11. Stainless steel pans are usually provided with copper bottoms. The
reason for this could be that
copper bottom makes the pan more durable.
such pans appear colourful.
copper is a better conductor of heat than the stainless steel.
copper is easier to clean than the stainless steel.
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. Go to a doctor or your nearest health centre. Observe the doctor taking
temperature of patients. Enquire:
why she dips the thermometer in a liquid before use.
why the thermometer is kept under the tongue.
whether the body temperature can be measured by keeping the
thermometer at some place other than the mouth.
whether the temperature of different parts of the body is the same
or different.
You can add more questions which come to your mind.
2. Go to a veterinary doctor (a doctor who treats animals).  Discuss and
find out the normal temperature of domestic animals and birds.
3. Wrap a thin paper strip tightly around an iron rod.  Try to burn the
paper with candle while rotating the iron rod continuously. Does it burn?
Explain your observation.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
4. Take a sheet of paper. Draw a spiral on it as shown in the Fig. 4.14.  Cut out
the paper along the line. Suspend the paper as shown in Fig. 4.14 above
a lighted candle. Observe what happens. Think of an explanation.
Fig. 4.14
Did you know?
The celsius scale was devised by a Swedish astronomer, Anders Celsius
in 1742. Strangely, he fixed the temperature of the boiling water as 0°C
and of freezing water as 100°C. However, this order was reversed very
soon.
5. Take two similar transparent glass bottles having wide mouths. Put a
few crystals of potassium permanganate or pour a few drops of ink in
one bottle. Fill this bottle with hot water. Fill the other bottle with cold
water. Cover the cold water bottle with a thick piece of paper such as a
postcard. Press the postcard firmly with one hand and hold the bottle
with the other hand. Invert the bottle and place it on top of the hot
water bottle. Hold both the bottles firmly. Ask some other person to pull
the postcard. Observe what happens. Explain.
You can read more on the following website:
www.bbc.co.uk/schools/gcsebitesize/physics/energy/
energytransferrev6.shtml
© NCERT
not to be republished
Acids, Bases and Salts
e use in our daily life a large
number of substances such
as lemon, tamarind, common
salt, sugar and vinegar. Do they have
the same taste? Let us recall tastes of
some edible substances listed in
Table 5.1. If you have not tasted any of
these substances taste it now and enter
the result in Table 5.1.
You find that some of these
substances taste sour, some taste bitter,
some taste sweet and some taste salty.
5.1 ACIDS AND BASES
Curd, lemon juice, orange juice and
vinegar taste sour. These substances
taste sour because they contain acids.
The chemical nature of such
substances is acidic. The word acid
comes from the Latin word acere which
means sour. The acids in these
substances are natural acids.
What about baking soda? Does it also
taste sour? If not, what is its taste? Since,
it does not taste sour it means, that it
has no acids in it. It is bitter in taste. If
you rub its solution between fingers, it
feels soapy. Substances like these which
are bitter in taste and feel soapy on
touching are known as bases. The nature
of such substances is said to be basic.
If we cannot taste every substance,
how do we find its nature?
Special type of substances are used
to test whether a substance is acidic or
basic. These substances are known as
indicators. The indicators change their
colour when added to a solution
containing an acidic or a basic
substance. Turmeric, litmus, china rose
petals (Gudhal), etc., are some of the
naturally occurring indicators.
CAUTION
1. Do not taste anything unless asked
to do so.
2. Do not touch anything unless asked
to do so.
Table 5.1
Substance
Taste (sour/bitter/
any other)
Lemon juice
Orange juice
Vinegar
Tamarind (imli)
Sugar
Common salt
Baking soda
Grapes
Unripe mango
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Fig. 5.1  (a) Lichens, and (b) Red and blue
litmus paper
5.2 NATURAL INDICATORS
AROUND US
Litmus: A natural dye
The most commonly used natural
indicator is litmus. It is extracted
from lichens (Fig. 5.1). It has a
mauve (purple) colour in distilled
water. When added to an acidic
solution, it turns red and when
added to a basic solution, it turns
blue. It is available in the form of a
solution, or in the form of strips of
paper, known as litmus paper.
Generally, it is available as red and
blue litmus paper (Fig. 5.1).
Can I taste all substances to
find their taste?
No. Have you not read the
caution? We should not
taste unknown
substances. They could
harm us.
Do you know?
Name of acid
Found in
Acetic acid
Vinegar
Formic acid
Ant’s sting
Citric acid
Citrus fruits such
as oranges,
lemons, etc.
Lactic acid
Oxalic acid
Spinach
Ascorbic acid
Amla, Citrus fruits
(Vitamin C)
Tartaric acid
Tamarind, grapes,
unripe mangoes, etc.
All the acids mentioned
above occur in nature
Name of base
Found in
Calcium hydroxide
Lime water
Ammonium hydroxide Window cleaner
Sodium hydroxide/
Potassium hydroxide
Magnesium hydroxide Milk of magnesia
© NCERT
not to be republished
ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS
Turmeric is another natural
indicator
Activity 5.2
 Take a tablespoonful of turmeric
powder. Add a little water and make
a paste.
 Make turmeric paper by depositing
turmeric paste on blotting paper/filter
paper and drying it. Cut thin strips
of the yellow paper obtained.
 Put a drop of soap solution on the
strip of turmeric paper.
What do you observe?
Activity 5.1
 Mix some water with lemon juice in a
plastic cup/tumbler/test tube.
 Put a drop of the above solution on a
strip of the red litmus paper with the
help of a dropper.
Is there any change in colour?
 Repeat the same exercise with the
blue litmus paper.
Note down if there is any change in
colour.
Perform the same activity with the
following substances:
Tap water, detergent solution, aerated
drink, soap solution, shampoo, common
salt solution, sugar solution, vinegar,
baking soda solution, milk of magnesia,
washing soda solution, lime water. If
possible make solutions in distilled water.
Record your observations as in
Table. 5.2.
In your Table, are there any
substances on which litmus had no
effect? Name those substances.
The solutions which do not change
the colour of either red or blue litmus
are known as neutral solutions. These
substances are neither acidic nor basic.
To prepare limewater, dissolve some lime (chuna) in water in a bottle. Stir the
solution and keep it for some time. Pour a little from the top. This is lime water.
Fig. 5.2  Children performing litmus test
Table 5.2
S. No.
Test solution
Effect on red
Effect on blue
Inference
litmus paper
litmus paper
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Table 5.3
S. No.
Test solution
Effect on turmeric solution
Remarks
Lemon juice
Orange juice
Vinegar
Milk of magnesia
Baking soda
Lime water
Sugar
Common salt
You can prepare a card for your
mother on her birthday. Apply
turmeric paste on a sheet of plane
white paper and dry it. Draw a
beautiful flower with soap solution
with the help of a cotton bud. You will
get a beautiful greeting card.
Similarly test the solutions listed in
Table 5.3 and note down your
observations. You may try solutions of
other substances also.
China Rose as Indicator
Activity 5.3
Collect some China rose (Gudhal) petals
and place them in a beaker. Add some
Fig. 5.3  China rose flower and indicator
prepared from it
Indicator
China
Now I understand why a
turmeric stain on my white shirt
is turned to red when it is
washed with soap. It is because
the soap solution is basic.
Turmeric paste
solution
© NCERT
not to be republished
ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS
Table 5.4
S. No.
Test solution
Initial colour
Final colour
Shampoo (dilute solution)
Lemon juice
Soda water
Sodium hydrogencarbonate solution
Vinegar
Sugar solution
Common salt solution
warm water. Keep the mixture for some
time till water becomes coloured. Use
the coloured water as an indicator. Add
five drops of the indicator to each of the
solutions given in Table 5.4.
What is the effect of the indicator on
acidic, basic and neutral solutions?
China rose indicator (Fig. 5.3) turns
acidic solutions to dark pink (magenta)
and basic solutions to green.
Coffee is brown
And bitter in taste.
Is it an acid?
Or a base?
Don’t give the answer
Without any test,
You are in the dark
With its taste.
Paheli brought the following paheli
(riddle) for you.
I am not getting the same result
when using solid baking soda
on dry litmus paper. Why?
Make a solution of baking
soda and then try.
Activity 5.4
The teacher is requested to get the
following dilute chemicals from his/her
school laboratory or from a nearby
school: hydrochloric acid, sulphuric
acid, nitric acid, acetic acid, sodium
hydroxide, ammonium  hydroxide,
calcium hydroxide (lime water).
Table 5.5
Name of acid
Effect on
Effect on
Effect on
litmus paper
turmeric paper
China rose
solution
Dilute hydrochloric acid
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Stir the tube gently. Is there any change
in the colour of the solution? Continue
adding the sodium hydroxide solution
drop by drop while stirring till the pink
colour just appears.
Now add one more drop of dilute
hydrochloric acid. What do you observe?
The solution again becomes colourless.
Again add one drop of sodium
hydroxide solution. Is there any change
in colour? The solution again becomes
pink in colour.
It is evident that when the solution
is basic, phenolphthalein gives a pink
colour. On the other hand, when the
solution is acidic, it remains colourless.
Fig. 5.4  Process of neutralisation
Demonstrate the effect of the three
indicators on each of these solutions.
Record your observations in Table 5.5.
5.3 NEUTRALISATION
We have learnt that acids turn blue
litmus red and bases turn red litmus
blue. Let us see what happens when an
acid is mixed with a base.
We are going to use an indicator you
have not used so far. It is called
phenolphthalein.
Activity 5.5
To be demonstrated by the teacher in
the class
Fill one fourth of a test tube with dilute
hydrochloric acid. Note down its colour.
Note down the colour of phenolphthalein
solution also. Add 2–3 drops of the
indicator to the acid. Now shake the test
tube gently. Do you observe any change
in colour of the acid?
Add to the acidic solution a drop of
sodium hydroxide solution by a dropper.
Are you familiar with the term acid rain? Have you ever heard about damaging
effect of acid rain? As the name indicates the rain containing excess of acids is
called an acid rain. Where do these acids come from? The rain becomes acidic
because carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide (which are released
into the air as pollutants) dissolve in rain drops to form carbonic acid, sulphuric
acid and nitric acid respectively. Acid rain can cause damage to buildings,
historical monuments, plants and animals.
CAUTION
Great care should be taken while
handling laboratory acids and bases
because these are corrosive in nature,
irritating and harmful to skin.
Acid + Indicator
© NCERT
not to be republished
ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS
When an acidic solution is mixed
with a basic solution, both the solutions
neutralise the effect of each other. When
an acid solution and a base solution are
mixed in suitable amounts, both the
acidic nature of the acid and the basic
nature of the base are destroyed. The
resulting solution is neither acidic nor
basic. Touch the test tube immediately
after neutralisation. What do you
observe? In neutralisation reaction, heat
is always produced, or evolved. The
evolved heat raises the temperature of
the reaction mixture.
In neutralisation reaction a new
substance is formed. This is called salt.
Salt may be acidic, basic or neutral in
nature. Thus, neutralisation can be
defined as follows:
The reaction between an acid and
a base is known as neutralisation. Salt
and water are produced in this process
with the evolution of heat.
Acid+Base
Salt+Water
(Heat is evolved)
The following reaction is an example:
Hydrochloric acid (HCl) + Sodium
hydroxide (NaOH)
Sodium chloride (NaCl) + Water (H2O)
Boojho added dilute sulphuric acid
to lime water. Will the reaction mixture
become hot or cool?
5.4 NEUTRALISATIONS IN EVERYDAY
Indigestion
Our stomach contains hydrochloric
acid. It helps us to digest food, as you
have learnt in Chapter 2. But too
much of acid in the stomach causes
indigestion. Sometimes indigestion
is painful. To relieve indigestion, we
take an antacid such as milk of
magnesia, which contains magnesium
hydroxide. It neutralises the effect of
excessive acid.
Ant bite
When an ant bites, it injects
the acidic liquid (formic acid) into the
skin. The effect of the acid can be
neutralised by rubbing moist baking
soda (sodium hydrogen carbonate) or
calamine solution, which contains zinc
carbonate.
Soil treatment
Excessive use of chemical fertilisers
makes the soil acidic. Plants do not
grow well when the soil is either too
acidic or too basic. When the soil is
too acidic, it is treated with bases like
quick lime (calcium oxide) or slaked
lime (calcium hydroxide). If the soil
is basic, organic matter is added to
it. Organic matter releases acids
which neutralises the basic nature of
the soil.
Factory wastes
The wastes of many factories
contain acids. If they are allowed to
flow into the water bodies, the acids
will kill fish and other organisms.
The factory wastes are, therefore,
neutralised
adding
basic
substances.
Salt+Water
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
What you have learnt
Acids are sour in taste. Bases are bitter in taste and soapy to touch.
Acid turns blue litmus red. Bases turn red litmus blue.
Substances which are neither acidic nor basic are called neutral.
Solutions of substances that show different colour in acidic, basic and
neutral solutions are called indicators.
An acid and a base neutralise each other and form a salt. A salt may be
acidic, basic or neutral in nature.
Exercises
State differences between acids and bases.
Ammonia is found in many household products, such as window
cleaners. It turns red litmus blue. What is its nature?
Name the source from which litmus solution is obtained. What is the
use of this solution?
Is the distilled water acidic/basic/neutral? How would you verify it?
Describe the process of neutralisation with the help of an example.
Mark ‘T’ if the statement is true and ‘F’ if it is false:
Nitric acid turn red litmus blue. (T/F)
Sodium hydroxide turns blue litmus red. (T/F)
(iii)
Sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid neutralise each other and
form salt and water. (T/F)
Indicator is a substance which shows different colours in acidic
and basic solutions. (T/F)
Tooth decay is caused by the presence of a base. (T/F)
Dorji has a few bottles of soft drink in his restaurant. But, unfortu-
nately, these are not labelled. He has to serve the drinks on the demand
of customers. One customer wants acidic drink, another wants basic
and third one wants neutral drink. How will Dorji decide which drink is
to be served to whom?
Explain why:
An antacid tablet is taken when you suffer from acidity.
Keywords
Acidic
Basic
Indicator
Neutral
Neutralisation
© NCERT
not to be republished
ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS
Calamine solution is applied on the skin when an ant bites.
Factory waste is neutralised before disposing it into the water
bodies.
9. Three liquids are given to you. One is hydrochloric acid, another is
sodium hydroxide and third is a sugar solution. How will you identify
them? You have only turmeric indicator.
10. Blue litmus paper is dipped in a solution. It remains blue. What is the
nature of the solution? Explain.
11. Consider the following statements:
Both acids and bases change colour of all indicators.
If an indicator gives a colour change with an acid, it does not give a
change with a base.
If an indicator changes colour with a base, it does not change colour
with an acid.
Change of colour in an acid and a base depends on the type of the
indicator.
Which of these statements are correct?
(i) All four   (ii) a and d   (iii) b and c    (iv) only d
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. Using the knowledge of acids and bases, write a secret message with
the help of baking soda and beet root. Explain how it works.
(Hint: Prepare baking soda solution in water. Use this solution to write
the message on a sheet of white paper with a cotton bud. Rub a slice of
fresh beet root over the message.)
2. Prepare red cabbage juice by boiling a piece of red cabbage in water.
Use it as an indicator and test the acidic and basic solutions with it.
Present your observations in the form of a table.
3. Bring the soil sample of your area, find out if it is acidic, basic or
neutral. Discuss with farmers if they treat the soil in any manner.
4. Visit a doctor. Find out the medicines, he prescribes to treat acidity.
Ask him how acidity can be prevented.
Did you know?
Each cell in our body contains an acid, the deoxyribonucleic acid or
DNA. It controls every feature of the body such as our looks, colour of
our eyes, our height etc. Proteins that build part of our cells are also
made of amino acids. The fats in our body contain fatty acids.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Physical and Chemical
Changes
very day you come across many
changes in your surroundings.
These changes may involve one
or more substances.  For example, your
mother may ask you to dissolve sugar
in water to make a cold drink. Making a
sugar solution is a change. Similarly,
setting curd from milk is a change.
Sometimes milk becomes sour.  Souring
of milk is a change. Stretched rubber
band also represents a change.
Make a list of ten changes you have
noticed around you.
In this chapter we shall perform some
activities and study the nature of these
changes.  Broadly, these changes are of
two kinds, physical and chemical.
Fig. 6.1   Paper pieces
6.1  PHYSICAL CHANGES
Activity 6.1
Cut a piece of paper in four square
pieces. Cut each square piece further
into four square pieces.  Lay these pieces
on the floor or a table so that the pieces
acquire the shape of the original piece
of paper (Fig. 6.1).
Obviously, you cannot join the pieces
back to make the original piece, but is
there a change in the property of the
paper?
Activity 6.2
Collect the chalk dust lying on the floor
near the blackboard in your classroom.
Or, crush a small piece of chalk into
dust. Add a little water to the dust to
make a paste. Roll it into the shape of a
piece of chalk. Let it dry.
Did you recover chalk from the
dust?
Activity 6.3
Take some ice in a glass or plastic
tumbler. Melt a small portion of ice by
placing the tumbler in the sun. You have
now a mixture of ice and water. Now
place the tumbler in a freezing mixture
(ice plus common salt).
Does the water become solid ice once
again?
© NCERT
not to be republished
PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL CHANGES
6.3 and 6.4, water changed its state (from
solid to liquid, or from gas to liquid). In
Activity 6.5, the hack-saw blade
changed colour on heating.
Properties such as shape, size, colour
and state of a substance are called its
physical properties. A change in which
a substance undergoes a change in its
physical properties is called a physical
change. A physical change is generally
reversible. In such a change no new
substance is formed.
Let us now consider the other kind
of change.
6.2  CHEMICAL CHANGE
A change with which you are quite
familiar is the rusting of iron.  If you
leave a piece of iron in the open for some
time, it acquires a film of brownish
substance.  This substance is called rust
and the process is called rusting
(Fig. 6.2). Iron gates of parks or
farmlands, iron benches kept in lawns
and gardens, almost every article of iron,
kept in the open gets rusted. At home
you must have seen shovels and spades
getting rusted when exposed to the
Activity 6.4
Boil some water in a container. Do you
see the steam rising from the surface of
water? Hold an inverted pan by its
handle over the steam at some distance
from the boiling water.  Observe the
inner surface of the pan.
Do you see any droplet of water
there?
Activity 6.5
Fig. 6.2   Rusting iron
CAUTION
Be careful while handling a flame.
Hold a used hack-saw blade with a
pair of tongs. Keep the tip of the free
end on the flame of a gas stove. Wait for
a few minutes.
Does the colour of the tip of the blade
change?
Remove the blade from the flame.
Observe the tip once again after some
time.
Does it get back its original colour?
In Activities 6.1 and 6.2 above, you
saw that paper and a piece of chalk
underwent changes in size. In Activities
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
light (Fig. 6.3). When it is completely
burnt it leaves behind a powdery ash.
Does the ash look like the
magnesium ribbon?
The change can be represented by
the following equation:
Magnesium (Mg) + Oxygen (O2) →
Magnesium oxide (MgO)
Fig. 6.3  Magnesium ribbon burning
atmosphere for some time. In the
kitchen, a wet iron pan (tawa) often gets
rusted if left in that state for some time.
Rust is not iron.  It is different from iron
on which it gets deposited.
Let us consider a few more changes
where new substances are formed.
Activity 6.6
(To be demonstrated by the teacher)
CAUTION
It is dangerous to look for long at the
burning magnesium ribbon.  The
teachers should advise children not
to stare at the burning ribbon.
Get a small piece of a thin strip or
ribbon of magnesium.  Clean its tip with
sandpaper.  Bring the tip near a candle
flame.  It burns with a brilliant white
Collect the ash and mix it with a
small amount of water. Stir the mixture
(aqueous solution) well. Test the mixture
with blue and red litmus papers.
Does the mixture turn red litmus
blue?
Does the mixture turn blue litmus
On the basis of this test, how do you
classify the aqueous solution — acidic
or basic?
On dissolving the ash in water it
forms a new substance. This change can
be written in the form of the following
equation:
Magnesium oxide (MgO) + Water
(H2O) → Magnesium hydroxide [Mg(OH)2]
As you have already learnt in
Chapter 5, magnesium hydroxide is a base.
So, magnesium oxide is a new substance
formed on burning of magnesium.
Magnesium hydroxide is another new
The equations here are different from
those in mathematics. In equations
of this kind, the arrow implies
‘becomes’. No attempt should be made
to balance chemical equations at this
stage.
© NCERT
not to be republished
PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL CHANGES
substance formed by mixing magnesium
oxide with water.
Activity 6.7
(To be demonstrated by the teacher)
Dissolve about a teaspoonful of copper
sulphate (blue vitriol or neela thotha) in
about half a cup of water in a glass
tumbler or a beaker. Add a few drops of
dilute sulphuric acid to the solution.
You should get a blue coloured solution.
Save a small sample of the solution in a
test tube or a small glass bottle. Drop a
nail or a used shaving blade into the
remaining solution. Wait for half an
hour or so. Observe the colour of the
solution. Compare it with the colour of
the sample solution saved separately
(Fig. 6.4).
colour of the solution from blue to
green is due to the formation of iron
sulphate, a new substance. The brown
deposit on the iron nail is copper,
another new substance. We can write
the reaction as:
Copper sulphate solution (blue) + Iron
→ Iron sulphate solution (green)
+ Copper (brown deposit)
Activity 6.8
Take about a teaspoonful of vinegar in
a test tube. Add a pinch of baking soda
to it. You would hear a hissing sound
and see bubbles of a gas coming out.
Pass this gas through freshly prepared
lime water as shown in Fig. 6.5.
What happens to the lime water?
Do you see any change in the colour
of the solution?
Take out the nail or the blade.
Has it changed in any way?
The changes that you notice are
due to a reaction between copper
sulphate and iron. The change of
The change in the test tube is as
follows:
Vinegar (Acetic acid) + Baking soda
(Sodium hydrogencarbonate) →
Carbon dioxide + other substances
The reaction between carbon dioxide
and lime water is as follows:
Fig. 6.4   Change in colour of the copper sulphate
solution due to reaction with iron
Copper sulphate
Iron sulphate
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Carbon dioxide (CO2) + Lime water
[Ca(OH)2] → Calcium Carbonate
(CaCO3) + Water (H2O)
When carbon dioxide is passed
through lime water, calcium carbonate
is formed, which makes lime water milky.
The turning of lime water into milky is a
standard test of carbon dioxide. You will
use it in Chapter 10 to show that the air
we breathe out is rich in carbon dioxide.
In Activities 6.6–6.8, you saw that
in each change one or more new
substances were formed. In Activity 6.6,
the ash was the new substance formed
when magnesium was burnt. In Activity 6.7,
the reaction of copper sulphate with iron
produced iron sulphate and copper.
Both of these are new substances.
Copper was deposited on the shaving
blade of iron. In Activity 6.8, vinegar and
baking soda together produced carbon
dioxide, which turned lime water milky.
Can you name the new substance
formed in this reaction?
A change in which one or more
new substances are formed is called a
chemical change. A chemical change
is also called a chemical reaction.
Chemical changes are very important
in our lives.  All new substances are
formed as a result of chemical changes.
For example, if a metal is to be extracted
from an ore, such as iron from iron ore,
we need to carry out a series of chemical
changes.  A medicine is the end product
of a chain of chemical reactions.  Useful
new materials, such as plastics and
detergents, are produced by chemical
reactions.  Indeed, every new material
is discovered by studying chemical
changes.
We have seen that one or more new
substances are produced in a chemical
change.  In addition to new products,
the following may accompany a chemical
change:
 Heat, light or any other radiation
(ultraviolet, for example) may be given
off or absorbed.
 Sound may be produced.
 A change in smell may take place or
a new smell may be given off.
 A colour change may take place .
 A gas may be formed.
Let us look at some examples.
You saw that burning of magnesium
ribbon is a chemical change.  Burning
of coal, wood or leaves is also a chemical
change. In fact, burning of any
substance is a chemical change.
Burning is always accompanied by
production of heat.
Fig. 6.5  Set up to pass gas through lime water
Vinegar +
Baking soda
Carbon
dioxide
water
© NCERT
not to be republished
PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL CHANGES
Explosion of a firework is a chemical
change. You know that such an
explosion produces heat, light, sound
and unpleasant gases that pollute the
atmosphere. That is why you are advised
not to play with fireworks.
When food gets spoiled, it produces
a foul smell. Shall we call this change a
chemical change?
You must have noticed that a slice of
an apple acquires a brown colour if it is
not consumed immediately. If you have
not seen this change in colour, cut a
fresh slice of apple and keep it away for
some time. Repeat the same activity with
a slice of potato or brinjal. The change
of colour in these cases is due to the
formation of new substances. Are not
these changes chemical changes?
In Chapter 5, you neutralised an acid
with a base.  Is neutralisation a chemical
change?
6.3 RUSTING OF IRON
Let us get back to rusting. This is one
change that affects iron articles and
slowly destroys them. Since iron is used
in making bridges, ships, cars, truck
bodies and many other articles, the
monetary loss due to rusting is huge.
The process of rusting can be
represented by the following equation:
Iron (Fe) + Oxygen (O2, from the air)
+ water (H2O) → rust (iron oxide Fe2O3)
For rusting, the presence of both
oxygen and water (or water vapour)
is essential.
In fact, if the content of moisture in
air is high, which means if it is more
humid, rusting becomes faster.
So, how do we prevent rusting?
Prevent iron articles from coming in
contact with oxygen, or water, or both.
One simple way is to apply a coat of
paint or grease. In fact, these coats
should be applied regularly to prevent
rusting. Another way is to deposit a layer
of a metal like chromium or zinc on iron.
A protective shield
You must have heard of the ozone layer
in our atmosphere. It protects us from
the harmful ultraviolet radiation which
come from the sun. Ozone absorbs this
radiation and breaks down to oxygen.
Oxygen is different from ozone. Can
we call the breaking down of ozone a
chemical change?
If ultraviolet radiation were not
absorbed by ozone, it would reach the
earth’s surface and cause harm to us
and other life forms. Ozone acts as a
natural shield against this radiation.
We learnt in Chapter 1 that
plants produce their food by
a process called photosynthesis.
Can we call photosynthesis
a chemical change?
Paheli said that even digestion
is a chemical change.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Copper sulphate
Crystals
This process of depositing a layer of zinc
on iron is called galvanisation. The iron
pipes we use in our homes to carry water
are galvanised to prevent rusting.
You know that ships are made of iron
and a part of them remains under water.
On the part above water also, water
drops keep clinging to the ship’s outer
surface. Moreover, the water of the sea
contains many salts. The salt water
makes the process of rust formation
faster. Therefore, ships suffer a lot of
damage from rusting in spite of being
solutions.  The process is called
crystallisation.  It is an example of a
physical change.
Activity 6.9
(To be performed in the presence of
the teacher)
Stainless steel is made by mixing iron
with carbon and metals like
chromium, nickel and manganese.  It
does not rust.
Oh, that is why my friend
Rita is always complaining
about iron articles rusting so
fast.  She lives near the coast.
CAUTION
Use only dilute sulphuric acid. Be
careful while boiling water.
painted. So much so, that a fraction of
ship’s iron has to be replaced every year.
Can you imagine the monetary loss to
the world?
6.4 CRYSTALLISATION
In Class VI you have learnt that salt can
be obtained by the evaporation of sea
water. The  salt obtained in this manner
is not pure and its crystals are small.
The shape of the crystals cannot be seen
clearly. However, large crystals of pure
substances can be formed from their
Take a cupful of water in a beaker
and add a few drops of dilute sulphuric
acid.  Heat the water. When it starts
boiling add copper sulphate powder
slowly while stirring continuously
(Fig. 6.6). Continue adding copper
sulphate powder till no more powder can
be dissolved. Filter the solution.  Allow
it to cool. Do not disturb the solution
when it is cooling. Look at the solution
after some time. Can you see the crystals
of copper sulphate?  If not, wait for some
more time.
Fig. 6.6  Crystals of copper sulphate
© NCERT
not to be republished
PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL CHANGES
You have learnt about physical and
chemical changes. Try to identify
changes that you observe around you
as physical or chemical changes.
What you have learnt
Changes can be of two types, physical and chemical.
Physical changes are changes in the physical properties of substances.
No new substances are formed in these changes.  These changes may
be reversible.
In chemical changes new substances are produced.
Some substances can be obtained in pure state from their solutions by
crystallisation.
Exercises
1. Classify the changes involved in the following processes as physical or
chemical changes:
Photosynthesis
Dissolving sugar in water
Burning of coal
Melting of wax
Beating aluminium to make aluminium foil
Digestion of food
2. State whether the following statements are true or false.  In case a
statement is false, write the corrected statement in your notebook.
Cutting a log of wood into pieces is a chemical change.  (True/False)
Formation of manure from leaves is a physical change.  (True/False)
Keywords
Chemical change
Chemical reaction
Crystallisation
Galvanisation
Physical change
Rusting
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Iron pipes coated with zinc do not get rusted easily.  (True/False)
Iron and rust are the same substances.  (True/False)
Condensation of steam is not a chemical change.  (True/False)
3. Fill in the blanks in the following statements:
When carbon dioxide is passed through lime water, it turns milky
due to the formation of _________.
The chemical name of baking soda is  _________.
Two methods by which rusting of iron can be prevented are
_________ and  _________.
Changes in which only  _________ properties of a substance change
are called physical changes.
Changes in which new substances are formed are called  _________
changes.
4. When baking soda is mixed with lemon juice, bubbles are formed with
the evolution of a gas. What type of change is it?  Explain.
5. When a candle burns, both physical and chemical changes take place.
Identify these changes.  Give another example of a familiar process in
which both the chemical and physical changes take place.
6. How would you show that setting of curd is a chemical change?
7. Explain why burning of wood and cutting it into small pieces are
considered as two different types of changes.
8. Describe how crystals of copper sulphate are prepared.
9. Explain how painting of an iron gate prevents it from rusting.
10. Explain why rusting of iron objects is faster in coastal areas than in
deserts.
11. The gas we use in the kitchen is called liquified petroleum gas (LPG). In
the cylinder it exist as a liquid. When it comes out from the cylinder it
becomes a gas (Change – A) then it burns (Change – B). The following
statements pertain to these changes. Choose the correct one.
Process – A is a chemical change.
Process – B is a chemical change.
(iii)
Both processes A and B are chemical changes.
None of these processes is a chemical change.
12. Anaerobic bacteria digest animal waste and produce biogas (Change – A).
The biogas is then burnt as fuel (Change – B). The following
statements pertain to these changes. Choose the correct one.
Process – A is a chemical change.
Process – B is a chemical change.
© NCERT
not to be republished
PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL CHANGES
(iii)
Both processes A and B are chemical changes.
None of these processes is a chemical change.
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. Describe two changes that are harmful.  Explain why you consider them
harmful.  How can you prevent them?
2. Take three glass bottles with wide mouths.  Label them A, B and C.  Fill
about half of bottle A with ordinary tap water.  Fill bottle B with water
which has been boiled for several minutes, to the same level as in A.  In
bottle C, take the same boiled water and of the same amount as in other
bottles. In each bottle put a few similar iron nails so that they are com-
pletely under water.  Add a teaspoonful of cooking oil to the water in
bottle C so that it forms a film on its surface. Put the bottles away for a
few days. Take out nails from each bottle and observe them. Explain
your observations.
3. Prepare crystals of alum.
4. Collect information about the types of fuels used for cooking in your
area.  Discuss with your teachers/parents/others which fuels are less
polluting and why.
Did you know?
Near the Qutub Minar in Delhi
stands an iron pillar (Fig. 6.7)
which is more than 7 metres
high. It weighs more than 6000 kg.
It was built more than 1600 years
ago.  After such a long period it has
not rusted. For its quality of rust
resistance it has been examined
by scientists from all parts of the
world. It tells something about the
advances India had made in
metal technology as back as
1600 years ago.
Fig. 6.7   Iron pillar
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Weather, Climate and
Adaptations of Animals to
Climate
o you remember the things that
you were asked to pack when
you were heading for a hill
station? When the sky is cloudy, your
parents insist that you carry an
umbrella. Have you heard elders in your
family discuss the weather before
planning a family function? You must
have also heard the experts discussing
the weather before the start of a game.
Have you ever wondered why? The
weather may have a profound effect on
the game. It has a profound effect on
our lives. Many of our daily activities are
planned based on the weather predicted
for that day. There are daily reports of
the weather on the television and
radio and in the newspapers. But do you
know what this weather really is?
In this chapter, we will study about
the weather and climate. We will also
see how different forms of life are
adapted to the climate of their habitat.
7.1  WEATHER
In Fig. 7.1 a sample of weather report
from a newspaper is given.
We find that the daily weather report
carries
information
about
temperature, humidity and rainfall
during the past 24 hours.  It also
predicts the weather for the day.
Humidity, as you might know, is a
measure of the moisture in air.
Activity 7.1
Cut out the weather reports of the last
week from any newspaper. If you do not
get a newspaper at home borrow from
your neighbours or friends and copy
these reports in your notebook. You can
also collect weather reports from a
library. Paste all the cut-outs on a white
sheet or on a chart paper.
Now record the information from the
weather reports collected by you in
Table 7.1. The first row is just a sample.
Fill all the columns according to the data
in the chart that you have prepared.
Fig. 7.1  A sample of a weather report from a
newspaper
The weather reports are prepared by
the Meteorological Department of the
Government. This department collects
data on temperature, wind, etc., and
makes the weather prediction.
I wonder who prepares
these reports!
© NCERT
not to be republished
WEATHER, CLIMATE AND ADAPTATIONS OF ANIMALS TO CLIMATE
Do all the seven days have the same
maximum and minimum temperatures,
humidity and rainfall? The maximum
and minimum temperatures recorded
may be the same for some of the days.
However, all the parameters are not the
same on any two days. Over a week there
may be considerable variation. The day-
to-day condition of the atmosphere
at a place with respect to the
temperature, humidity, rainfall, wind-
speed, etc., is called the weather at that
place. The temperature, humidity, and
other factors are called the elements of
the weather. The weather of a place
changes day after day and week after
week. That is why we often say, “today’s
weather is too humid”, or “the weather
was warm last week”.
The weather is such a complex
phenomenon that it can vary over very
short periods of time. It can happen
sometimes that it is sunny in the
morning, but suddenly clouds appear
from nowhere and it starts raining
heavily. Or, a heavy rain may vanish in
a matter of minutes and give way to
bright sunshine. You must have had
several such experiences. Try to recall
any such experience and share it with
your friends.  Since weather is such a
complex phenomenon, it is not easy to
predict.
Look at the graph given below which
shows the maximum temperature
recorded during 03 August 2006 to 09
August 2006 at Shillong, Meghalaya
(Fig. 7.2).
Rainfall is measured by an
instrument called the rain gauge. It
is basically a measuring cylinder with
a funnel on top to collect rainwater.
Table 7.1
Weather data of a week
Rainfall*
temp. (°C)
temp. (°C)
humidity (%)
humidity(%)
23-08-06
*(Rainfall may not be recorded for all the days since it may not rain everyday. Leave
the space for rainfall blank if the data is not available.)
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
As it is clear from any weather report,
maximum
minimum
temperatures are recorded every day. Do
you know how these temperatures are
recorded. In Chapter 4 you have learnt
Fig. 7.2  Graph showing the variation of maximum temperature during 03 to 09 August 2006
that there are special thermometers for
this purpose, called maximum and
minimum thermometers. Can you
guess when during the day we have the
maximum temperature and when the
minimum?
The maximum temperature of the day
occurs generally in the afternoon while
the minimum temperature occurs
generally in the early morning.  Can you
now understand why in summers we feel
so miserable in the afternoon and
comparatively comfortable early in the
morning?
Maximum
temperature
03-08-06
26.0°C
04-08-06
23.5°C
05-08-06
25.0°C
06-08-06
22.0°C
07-08-06
25.5°C
08-08-06
23.3°C
09-08-06
24.4°C
I wonder why weather
changes so frequently!
What is the source of weather
in the first place?
All changes in the weather are caused by the sun. The sun is a huge sphere of
hot gases at a very high temperature. The distance of the sun from us is very
large. Even then the energy sent out by the sun is so huge that it is the source of
all heat and light on the earth.  So, the sun is the primary source of energy that
causes changes in the weather. Energy absorbed and reflected by the earth’s
surface, oceans and the atmosphere play important roles in determining the
weather at any place. If you live near the sea, you would have realised that the
weather at your place is different from that of a place in a desert, or near a mountain.
© NCERT
not to be republished
WEATHER, CLIMATE AND ADAPTATIONS OF ANIMALS TO CLIMATE
What about the times of sunrise and
sunset? You know that in winters it
becomes dark early and you do not get
much time to play. Are the days shorter
in winter than in summer?  Try to find
it out yourself by completing the project
given at the end of the chapter.
7.2 CLIMATE
Meteorologists record the weather every
day. The records of the weather have
been preserved for the past several
decades. These help us to determine the
weather pattern at a place. The average
weather pattern taken over a long
time, say 25 years, is called the
climate of the place.  If we find that
the temperature at a place is high most
of the time, then we say that the climate
of that place is hot. If there is also heavy
rainfall on most of the days in the same
place, then we can say that the climate
of that place is hot and wet.
In Table 7.2 and 7.3, we have given
the climatic condition at two places in
India. The mean temperature for a given
month is found in two steps. First we
find the average of the temperatures
recorded during the month. Second, we
calculate the average of such average
temperatures over many years. That
gives the mean temperature. The two
places are: Srinagar in Jammu and
Kashmir, and Thiruvananthapuram in
Kerala.
Table 7.3  Thiruvananthapuram
(Kerala)
Information about climate
Month
Mean temperature
total
Daily
Daily
rainfall
minimum maximum
Table 7.2  Srinagar (Jammu &
Kashmir)
Information about climate
Month
Mean temperature
total
Daily
Daily
rainfall
minimum maximum
(Note: The numbers for the mean total rainfall have been rounded off)
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
By looking at Tables 7.2 and 7.3 we
can easily see the difference in the
climate of Jammu & Kashmir and
Kerala. We can see that Kerala is very
hot and wet in comparison to Jammu
& Kashmir, which has a moderately hot
and wet climate for a part of the year.
Similar data for the western region
of India, for example Rajasthan, will
show that the temperature is high
during most part of the year. But during
winter, which lasts only for a few
months, the temperature is quite low.
This region receives very little
rainfall. This is the typical desert
climate. It is hot and dry. The north-
eastern India receives rain for a major
part of the year. Therefore, we can say
that the climate of the north-east is wet.
7.3 CLIMATE AND ADAPTATION
Climate has a profound effect on all
living organisms.
Animals are adapted to survive in the
conditions in which they live. Animals
living in very cold and hot climate must
possess special features to protect
themselves against the extreme cold or
heat. Recall from Chapter 9 of your
Class VI science book the definition of
adaptation. Features and habits that
help animals to adapt to their
surroundings are a result of the process
of evolution.
In Chapter 9 you will learn about the
effect of weather and climate on soil. Here
we will study the effect of climate on
animals only. In Class VI, you have read
about adaptations of animals to certain
habitats. As examples of adaptation of
animals to climatic conditions, we
discuss only animals living in polar
regions and tropical rainforests.
As the name suggests, the polar
regions are situated near the poles, i.e.,
north pole and south pole.
Some well-known countries that
belong to the polar regions are Canada,
Greenland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden,
Finland, Alaska in U.S.A. and Siberian
region of Russia.
Examples of some countries where
the tropical rainforests are found are
India, Malaysia, Indonesia, Brazil,
Republic of Congo, Kenya, Uganda, and
Nigeria.
Activity 7.2
Take an outline map of the world. Mark
the polar regions in blue. Similarly,
mark the tropical regions in red.
(i) The polar regions
The polar regions present an extreme
climate. These regions are covered with
snow and it is very cold for most part of
the year. For six months the sun does
not set at the poles while for the other
six months the sun does not rise. In
winters, the temperature can be as low
as –37°C. Animals living there have
adapted to these severe conditions. Let
us see how they are adapted by
considering the examples of polar bears
and penguins.
Polar bears have white fur so that
they are not easily visible in the snowy
white background. It protects them from
© NCERT
not to be republished
WEATHER, CLIMATE AND ADAPTATIONS OF ANIMALS TO CLIMATE
their predators. It also helps them in
catching their prey. To protect them
from extreme cold, they have two thick
layers of fur. They also have a layer of
fat under their skin. In fact, they are so
well-insulated that they have to move
slowly and rest often to avoid getting
overheated.
Physical activities on warm days
necessitate cooling. So, the polar bear
goes for swimming. It is a good
swimmer. Its paws are wide and large,
which help it not only to swim well but
also walk with ease in the snow. While
swimming under water, it can close its
nostrils and can remain under water for
long durations. It has a strong sense of
smell so that it can catch its prey
for food. We can understand the
adaptations of polar bears with the help
of the flow chart shown in Fig. 7.3.
Another well-known animal living in
the polar regions is the penguin
(Fig. 7.4). It is also white and merges
well with the white background. It also
has a thick skin and a lot of fat to protect
it from cold. You may have seen pictures
of penguins huddled together. This they
do to keep warm. Recall how warm you
feel when you are in a hall full of people.
Fig. 7.3  Adaptations of polar bear
Fig. 7.4  Penguins huddled together
The white fur is not
easily visible in the snowy
white background
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Like polar bears, penguins are also good
swimmers. Their bodies are streamlined
and their feet have webs, making them
good swimmers (Fig. 7.5).
Other animals living in the polar
regions are many types of fishes, musk
oxen, reindeers, foxes, seals, whales,
and birds.  It is to be noted that while
fish can remain under cold water for
long, birds must remain warm to
survive. They migrate to warmer regions
when winter sets in. They come back
after the winter is over. You know
probably that India is one of the
destinations of many of these birds. You
must have seen or heard about the
Siberian crane that comes from Siberia
to places like Bharatpur in Rajasthan
and Sultanpur in Haryana, and some
Fig. 7.6  Migratory birds
in their habitat/ Migratory
birds in flight
Do fishes and butterflies
also migrate like birds?
Fig. 7.5  Feet of penguin
Did you know?
Some migratory birds travel as much as 15000 km to escape the extreme climatic
conditions at home. Generally they fly high where the wind flow is helpful and
the cold conditions allow them to disperse the heat generated by their flight
muscles. But how these birds travel to the same place year after year is still a
mystery. It seems that these birds have a built–in sense of direction and know in
which direction to travel. Some birds probably use landmarks to guide them. Many
birds may be guided by the sun during the day and stars at night. There is some
evidence that birds may use the magnetic field of the earth to find direction. And
it is not only birds that migrate; mammals, many types of fish and insects are
also known to migrate seasonally in search of more hospitable climates.
© NCERT
not to be republished
WEATHER, CLIMATE AND ADAPTATIONS OF ANIMALS TO CLIMATE
wetlands of north east and some other
parts of India (Fig. 7.6).
(ii) The tropical rainforests
The tropical region has generally a hot
climate because of its location around
the equator. Even in the coldest month
the temperature is generally higher than
about 15°C. During hot summers, the
temperature may cross 40°C. Days and
nights are almost equal in length
throughout the year. These regions get
plenty of rainfall. An important feature
of this region is the tropical rainforests.
Tropical rainforests are found in
Western Ghats and Assam in India,
Southeast Asia, Central America and
Central Africa. Because of continuous
warmth and rain, this region supports
wide variety of plants and animals. The
major types of animals living in the
rainforests are monkeys, apes, gorillas,
tigers, elephants, leopards, lizards,
snakes, birds and insects.
Let us read about the adaptations of
these animals to a hot, humid climate.
The climatic conditions in rainforests
are highly suitable for supporting an
enormous number and a variety of
animals.
Since the numbers are large, there
is intense competition for food and
shelter. Many animals are adapted to
living on the trees. Red-eyed frog
(Fig. 7.7) has developed sticky pads on
its feet to help it climb trees on which it
lives. To help them live on the trees,
monkeys (Fig. 7.8) have long tails for
grasping branches. Their hands and feet
are such that they can easily hold on to
the branches.
As there is competition for food, some
animals are adapted to get food not
easily reachable. A striking example is
that of the bird Toucan (Fig. 7.9), which
possesses a long, large beak. This helps
a toucan to reach the fruits on branches
which are otherwise too weak to support
its weight.
Many tropical animals have sensitive
hearing, sharp eyesight, thick skin and
a skin colour which helps them to
camouflage by blending with the
surroundings. This is to protect them
from predators. For example, big cats
Fig. 7.7  Red-eyed frog
Fig. 7.8  A new world monkey
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
(Fig. 7.11). It has adapted to the
conditions of rainforests in many
remarkable ways. Look at its trunk. It
uses it as a nose because of which it
has a strong sense of smell. The trunk
is also used by it for picking up food.
Moreover, its tusks are modified teeth.
These can tear the bark of trees that
elephant loves to eat. So, the elephant
is able to handle the competition for food
rather well. Large ears of the elephant
help it to hear even very soft sounds.
They also help the elephant to keep cool
in the hot and humid climate of the
rainforest.
(lions and tigers) have thick skins and
sensitive hearing.
The lion-tailed macaque (also called
Beard ape) lives in the rainforests of
Western Ghats (Fig. 7.10). Its most
outstanding feature is the silver-white
mane, which surrounds the head from
the cheeks down to its chin. It is a good
climber and spends a major part of its
life on the tree. It feeds mainly on fruits.
It also eats seeds, young leaves, stems,
flowers and buds. This beard ape also
searches for insects under the bark of
the trees. Since it is able to get sufficient
food on the trees, it rarely comes down
on the ground.
Another well-known animal of Indian
tropical rainforest is the elephant
Fig. 7.9  Toucan
Fig. 7.10  Lion-tailed
macaque
Fig. 7.11  An Indian elephant
Keywords
Adaptation
Climate
Elements of weather
Humidity
Tropical rainforest
Tropical region
Weather
Maximum temperature
Migration
Minimum temperature
Polar region
© NCERT
not to be republished
WEATHER, CLIMATE AND ADAPTATIONS OF ANIMALS TO CLIMATE
What you have learnt
The day-to-day condition of the atmosphere at a place with respect to
the temperature, humidity, rainfall, wind-speed, etc., is called the
weather at that place.
The weather is generally not the same on any two days and week after
week.
The maximum temperature of the day occurs generally in the afternoon
while the minimum temperature occurs in the early morning.
The times of sunrise and sunset also change during the year.
All the changes in the weather are driven by the sun.
The average weather pattern taken over a long time, say 25 years, is
called the climate of the place.
The tropical and the polar regions are the two regions of the earth,
which have severe climatic conditions.
Animals are adapted to the conditions in which they live.
The polar regions are very cold throughout the year. The sun does not
set for six months in a year and in the other six months it does not rise.
Animals in the polar region are adapted to the extremely cold climate by
having some special characteristics such as white fur, strong sense of
smell, a layer of fat under the skin, wide and large paws for swimming
and walking, etc.
Migration is another means to escape the harsh, cold conditions.
Because of the hospitable climatic conditions huge populations of plants
and animals are found in the tropical rainforests.
Animals in the tropical rainforests are adapted such that they eat
different kinds of food to overcome the competition for food and shelter.
Some adaptations of animals living in the tropical rainforests include
living on the trees, development of strong tails, long and large beaks,
bright colours, sharp patterns, loud voice, diet of fruits, sensitive hearing,
sharp eyesight, thick skin, ability to camouflage in order to protect
themselves from predators, etc.
Exercises
1. Name the elements that determine the weather of a place.
2. When are the maximum and minimum temperatures likely to occur
during the day?
3. Fill in the blanks:
The average weather taken over a long time is called ___________.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
A place receives very little rainfall and the temperature is
high throughout the year, the climate of that place will be
___________ and ___________ .
(iii)
The two regions of the earth with extreme climatic conditions are
___________ and __________.
4. Indicate the type of climate of the following areas:
Jammu and Kashmir:  _________________________________
Kerala:  ____________________________________________
Rajasthan:  __________________________________________
North-east India:  _____________________________________
5. Which of the two changes frequently, weather or climate?
6. Following are some of the characteristics of animals:
Diets heavy on fruits
White fur
(iii)
Need to migrate
Loud voice
Sticky pads on feet
Layer of fat under skin
(vii)
Wide and large paws
(viii)
Bright colours
Strong tails
Long and large beak
For each characteristic indicate whether it is adaptation for tropical
rainforests or polar regions. Do you think that some of these
characteristics can be adapted for both regions?
7. The tropical rainforest has a large population of animals. Explain why
it is so.
8. Explain, with examples, why we find animals of certain kind living in
particular climatic conditions.
9. How do elephant living in the tropical rainforest adapt itself?
Choose the correct option which answers the following question:
10. A carnivore with stripes on its body moves very fast while catching its
prey. It is likely to be found in
polar regions
deserts
(iii)
oceans
tropical rainforests
11. Which features adapt polar bears to live in extremely cold climate?
A white fur, fat below skin, keen sense of smell.
Thin skin, large eyes, a white fur.
(iii)
A long tail, strong claws, white large paws.
White body, paws for swimming, gills for respiration.
© NCERT
not to be republished
WEATHER, CLIMATE AND ADAPTATIONS OF ANIMALS TO CLIMATE
Did you know?
Rainforests cover about 6% of the earth’s surface, but they have more
than half of the animal life and about two-thirds of the flowering plants
of the planet. However, much of this life is still unknown to us.
12. Which option best describes a tropical region?
hot and humid
moderate temperature, heavy rainfall
(iii)
cold and humid
hot and dry
Extended Learning — Projects and Activities
1. Collect weather reports of seven successive days in the winter months
(preferably December). Collect similar reports for the summer months
(preferably June). Now prepare a table for sunrise and sunset times as
shown:
Table
December
Sunrise
Sunset
Sunrise
Sunset
Try to answer the following questions:
Is there any difference in the time of sunrise during summer and
winter?
When do you find that the sun rises earlier?
(iii)
Do you also find any difference in the time of sunset during the
month of June and December?
When are the days longer?
When are the nights longer?
Why are the days sometimes longer and sometimes shorter?
(vii)
Plot the length of the day against the days chosen in June and
December.
(Instructions for plotting graphs are given in Chapter 13.)
2. Collect information about the Indian Meteorological Department. If
possible visit its website: http//www.imd.gov.in.
Write a brief report about the things this department does.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Winds, Storms and Cyclones
rissa was hit by a cyclone with
wind speed of 200 km/h on
18 October 1999. The cyclone
smashed 45,000 houses making
7,00,000 people homeless. On
29 October the same year, a second
cyclone with wind speed of 260 km/h
hit Orissa again. It was accompanied by
water waves about 9 m high.  Thousands
of people lost their lives.  Property worth
crores of rupees was destroyed. The
cyclone affected agriculture, transport,
communication, and electricity supply.
But, what are cyclones?  How are
they formed? Why are they so
destructive? In this chapter we shall
seek answers to some of these questions.
We begin with some activities
involving air. These activities will clarify
some basic features concerning a
cyclone. Before we begin, remember that
the moving air is called the wind.
8.1 AIR EXERTS PRESSURE
Activity 8.1
Fig. 8.1   Image taken by a satellite of a cyclone
approaching the coast of Orissa
Courtesy: India Meteorological Department,
New Delhi
Whenever an activity involves heating,
be very careful.  It is advised that such
activities are performed in the
presence of an elderly person from
your family. Or, carry out these
activities in the presence of your
teacher.
You need to boil water in the following
activity.
Take a tin can with a lid. Fill it
approximately half with water. Heat the
can on a candle flame till the water boils.
Let the water boil for a few minutes. Blow
out the candle. Immediately put the lid
tightly on the can. Be careful in handling
the hot can. Put the can carefully in a
shallow metallic vessel or a washbasin.
Pour fresh water over the can.
What happens to the shape of the can?
© NCERT
not to be republished
WINDS, STORMS AND CYCLONES
Can you guess why the shape of the
can gets distorted?
If you cannot get a tin can, take a
soft plastic bottle. Fill it with hot water.
Empty the bottle and immediately cap
it tightly. Place the bottle under running
water.
Recall now some of your experiences.
When you fly a kite, does the wind
coming from your back help?
If you are in a boat, is it easier to
row it if there is wind coming from
behind you?
Do you find it difficult to ride a bicycle
against the direction of the wind.
You know that we have to fill air into
the bicycle tube to keep it tight. Also,
you know that a bicycle tube overfilled
with air may burst. What is the air doing
inside the tube?
Discuss with your friends how the
air in the bicycle tube keeps it in shape.
All these experiences show that the
air exerts pressure. It is due to this
pressure that the leaves of trees,
banners, or flags flutter when the wind
is blowing. You can list some more
experiences which show that the air has
pressure.
Let us now try to explain why the
can (or the bottle) gets distorted. As
water is poured over the can, some
steam in the can condenses into water,
reducing the amount of air inside. The
pressure of air inside the can decreases
than the pressure exerted by the air
from outside the can. As a result the
can gets compressed.
This activity again confirms that air
exerts pressure.
8.2 HIGH SPEED WINDS ARE
ACCOMPANIED BY REDUCED AIR
PRESSURE
Activity 8.2
Crumple a small piece of paper into
a ball of size smaller than the mouth of
an empty bottle. Hold the empty bottle
on its side and place the paper ball just
inside its mouth. Now try to blow on
the ball to force it into the bottle. Try
the activity with bottles of different sizes.
Challenge your friends if they can force
Fig. 8.3  Blowing into the bottle
Fig. 8.2   Can with hot water being cooled
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Paheli thinks that the strip will be
lifted up. Boojho thinks that the strip
will bend down.
Fig. 8.5   Blowing over a strip of paper
Fig. 8.4   Blowing between the balloons
the paper ball in by blowing into the
bottle.
Paheli and Boojho are thinking about
the following question:
Why is it difficult to force the paper
ball into the bottle?
Activity 8.3
Blow the balloons
Take two balloons of approximately
equal size. Put a little water into the
balloons. Blow up both the balloons and
tie each one to a string. Hang the
balloons 8–10 cm apart on a cycle spoke
or a stick. Blow in the space between
the balloons.
What did you expect? What
happens?
Try different ways of blowing on the
balloons to see what happens.
Activity 8.4
Can you blow and lift?
Hold a strip of paper, 20 cm long and
3 cm wide, between your thumb and
forefinger as shown in the Fig. 8.5. Now
blow over the paper.
What do you think will happen to
the paper?
Let us try to understand the
observations in Activities 8.2, 8.3 and 8.4.
Were the observations along the lines
you thought? Do you get the feeling
that the increased wind speed is
accompanied by a reduced air pressure?
When we blow into the mouth of the
bottle, the air near the mouth has higher
speed. This decreases the pressure
there. The air pressure inside the bottle
is higher than near the mouth. The air
inside the bottle pushes the ball out.
In Activity 8.3 you saw that when you
blew between the balloons, they moved
© NCERT
not to be republished
WINDS, STORMS AND CYCLONES
towards each other. How could this
happen? This could happen if the
pressure of air between the balloons
were somehow reduced. The pressure
outside the balloons would then push
them towards each other.
In Activity 8.4 you saw that when you
blew over the paper strip, it went
upwards. Again, this could happen if
blowing over the paper reduced the air
pressure above the strip.
We see that the  increased wind
speed is, indeed, accompanied by a
reduced air pressure.
Can you imagine what would happen
if high-speed winds blew over the roofs
of buildings? If the roofs were weak, they
could be lifted and blown away. If you
have any such experience, share it with
your friends.
Let us try to understand how winds
are produced, how they bring rain and
how they can be destructive sometimes.
You already know that when  air
moves, it is called wind.  Air moves from
the region where the air pressure is
high to the region where the pressure
is low. The greater the difference in
pressure, the faster the air moves. But
how are the pressure differences created
in nature? Is the difference in
temperature involved? The following
activities will help you to understand
this.
8.3 AIR EXPANDS ON HEATING
Activity 8.5
Take a boiling tube. Stretch a balloon
tightly over the neck of the tube. You
can use a tape to make it tight. Pour
some hot water in a beaker.  Insert the
boiling tube with the balloon in the hot
water. Observe for 2–3 minutes for any
change in shape of the balloon. Take the
tube out, let it cool down to the room
temperature. Take some ice-cold water
in another beaker and place the tube
with the balloon in cold water for 2–3
minutes. Observe the change in the
shape of the balloon.
Fig. 8.6  The shape of the balloon in hot and cold water
Think and try to answer:
What makes the balloon
inflated when the boiling tube
is placed in hot water?
Why is the same balloon
deflated when the tube is kept
in cold water?
Can we infer from the first
observation that air expands
on heating? Can you now state
what happens to the air in the
boiling tube when it cools
down?
Boiling tube
immersed in
hot water
Boiling tube
immersed in
ice-cold water
Balloon tied over
the neck of the
boiling tube
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
The next activity is very interesting.
This will make you understand more
about hot air.
Activity 8.6
Take two paper bags or empty paper cups
of the same size. Hang the two bags in
candle below one of the bags as shown
in the figure. Observe what happens.
Why is the balance of the bags
disturbed?
Does this activity indicate that warm
air rises up? As the warm air rises up,
it pushes the bag above the candle. Does
the disturbance of the balance suggest
that the warm air is lighter than the cold
Can you now explain why smoke
always rises up?
Also, it is important to remember that
on heating the air expands and occupies
more space. When  the same thing
occupies more space, it becomes lighter.
The warm air is, therefore, lighter than
the cold air. That is the reason that the
smoke goes up.
In nature there are several situations,
where warm air rises at a place. The air
pressure at that place is lowered. The
cold air from the surrounding areas
rushes in to fill its place. This sets up
convection in air, as you learnt in
Chapter 4.
8.4 WIND CURRENTS ARE GENERATED
DUE TO UNEVEN HEATING ON
THE EARTH
These situations are:
Uneven heating between
the equator and the poles
You might have learnt in Geography that
regions close to the equator get
maximum heat from the Sun. The air
in these regions gets warm.  The warm
air rises, and the cooler air from the
Fig. 8.7   Hot air rising up
CAUTION
Handle the burning candle carefully.
the inverted position on the two ends of
a metal or wooden stick.
Tie a piece of thread in the middle of
the stick. Hold the stick by the thread
(Fig. 8.7) as in a balance.  Put a burning
© NCERT
not to be republished
WINDS, STORMS AND CYCLONES
regions in the 0–30 degrees latitude belt
on either side of the equator moves in.
These winds blow from the north and
the south towards  the equator. At the
poles, the air is colder than that at
latitudes about 60 degrees. The warm
air at these latitudes rises up and the
cold wind from the polar regions rushes
in, to take its place. In this way, wind
circulation is set up from the poles to
the warmer latitudes, as shown in
Fig. 8.8.
The winds would have flown in the
north-south direction from north to
south, or from south to north. A change
in direction is however, caused by the
rotation of the earth.
Uneven heating of land
and water
You have read about the sea breeze and
the land breeze in Chapter 4.
In summer, near the equator the land
warms up faster and most of the time
the temperature of the land is higher
than that of water in the oceans. The
air over the land gets heated and rises.
This causes the winds to flow from the
oceans towards the land. These are
monsoon winds (Fig. 8.9).
Fig. 8.8   The wind flow pattern because of
uneven heating on the earth
I wonder why the winds shown
in the figure are not in the exact
north-south direction.
I want to know what these
winds do for us.
The winds from the oceans carry
water and bring rain. It is a part of the
water cycle.
The monsoon winds carry water
and it rains.
Clouds bring rain and give us
happiness. Farmers in our country
depend mainly on rains for their
harvests. There are many folk songs
associated with clouds and rain. Sing
and enjoy with your friends, if you know
such a song. Here is one for you.
The word monsoon is derived from the
Arabic word ‘mausam’, which means
‘season’.
In winter, the direction of the wind
flow gets reversed; it flows from the land
to the ocean (Fig. 8.10).
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
However, it is not always a happy
ending. Rains often create problems.
Can you list some of the problems?
You can discuss the causes and
solutions of the problems with your
teacher and parents.
In nature itself there are certain
situations that can sometimes create
disasters and pose threat to humans,
animals and plant life.
Let’s study two such situations —
thunderstorms and cyclones.
Fig. 8.9   Uneven heating of land especially the
Rajasthan desert generates monsoon winds from
southwest direction in summer. These winds
carry lots of water from the Indian Ocean.
Roaring clouds across the sky
Tell us that monsoon’s here
Dark and floating clouds then pour
Raindrops every where.
Clouds make lightning flash overhead
And irrigate fields with rain
Clouds make earth, its fragrance spread
When wet with drops of rain.
Rising from the ocean vast
Clouds fill up with rain
Rain to ocean, back at last
To mingle with ocean again!
Fig. 8.10   Uneven heating of land and water in
winter generate winds from the northwest
colder land. These colder winds carry little
water, hence bring small amount of rain in
winter.
Courtesy: India Meteorological Department, New Delhi
© NCERT
not to be republished
WINDS, STORMS AND CYCLONES
8.5 THUNDERSTORMS AND CYCLONES
Thunderstorms develop in hot, humid
tropical areas like India very frequently.
The rising temperatures produce strong
upward rising winds. These winds carry
water droplets upwards, where they
freeze, and fall down again. The swift
movement of the falling water droplets
along with the rising air create lightning
and sound. It is this event that we call a
thunderstorm. You will read about
lightning in higher classes.
Before cloud formation, water takes
up heat from the atmosphere to change
into vapour. When water vapour changes
back to liquid form as raindrops, this
heat is released to the atmosphere. The
heat released to the atmosphere warms
the air around. The air tends to rise and
causes a drop in pressure. More air
rushes to the centre of the storm. This
cycle is repeated. The chain of events
ends with the formation of a very
low-pressure system with very
high-speed winds revolving around it.
It is this weather condition that we call
a cyclone.  Factors like wind speed,
wind direction, temperature and
humidity contribute to the development
of cyclones.
If a storm is accompanied by
lightning, we must take the following
precautions:
Do not take shelter under an
isolated tree. If you are in a forest
take shelter under a small tree. Do
not lie on the ground.
Do not take shelter under an
umbrella with a metallic end.
Do not sit near a window. Open
garages, storage sheds, metal
sheds are not safe places to take
shelter.
A car or a bus is a safe place to
take shelter.
If you are in water, get out and go
inside a building.
How a thunderstorm becomes
a cyclone
You know that water requires heat when
it changes from liquid to vapour state.
Does the water give back heat when
vapour condenses into liquid? Can you
recall any experience to support this?
Structure of a cyclone
The centre of a cyclone is a calm area.
It is called the eye of the storm. A large
cyclone is a violently rotating mass of
air in the atmosphere, 10 to 15 km
high. The diameter of the eye varies
from 10 to 30 km (Fig. 8.11).  It is a
region free of clouds and has light
winds. Around this calm and clear eye
(Fig. 8.12), there is a cloud region of
about 150 km in size.  In this region
there are high-speed winds (150–250
km/h) and thick clouds with heavy
rain. Away from this region the wind
speed gradually decreases. The
formation of a cyclone is a very
complex process. A model is shown in
Fig. 8.11.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Fig. 8.12   The image of the
‘eye’ of a cyclone
Fig. 8.13  Rising water caused by
a cyclone.
Courtesy: India Meteorological Department, New Delhi
8.6 DESTRUCTION CAUSED BY
CYCLONES
Cyclones can be very destructive.
Strong winds push water towards the
shore even if the storm is hundreds of
kilometres away. These are the first
indications of an approaching cyclone.
The water waves produced by the wind
are so powerful that a person cannot
overcome them.
The low pressure in the eye lifts
water surface in the centre. The rising
water may be as high as 3–12 metres
Fig. 8.11  Formation of a cyclone
(Fig. 8.13). It appears like a water-wall
moving towards the shore. As a result,
the seawater enters the low-lying coastal
areas, causing severe loss of life and
property.  It also reduces the fertility of
the soil.
Continuous heavy rainfall may
further worsen the flood situation.
High-speed winds accompanying a
cyclone can damage houses, telephones
and other communication systems,
trees, etc., causing tremendous loss of
life and property.
© NCERT
not to be republished
WINDS, STORMS AND CYCLONES
Fig. 8.14  Regions near the
equator where cyclones form.
Cyclones are worldwide
phenomena.
A cyclone is known by
different names in different
parts of the world.  It is
called a ‘hurricane’ in the
American continent. In
Philippines and Japan it
is called a ‘typhoon’
(Fig. 8.14).
Tornadoes: In our country
they are not very frequent. A
tornado is a dark funnel
shaped cloud that reaches
from the sky to the ground
(Fig. 8.16). Most of the
tornadoes are weak. A violent
tornado can travel at speeds
about
km/h.
Tornadoes may form within
cyclones.
The whole coastline of
India is vulnerable to
cyclones, particularly the
east coast. The west coast of
India is less vulnerable to
cyclonic storms both in
terms of intensity and
frequency of the cyclones.
8.7 EFFECTIVE SAFETY
MEASURES
A cyclone forecast and
warning service.
Rapid communication
of warnings
The diameter of a
tornado can be as
small as a metre and as
large as a km, or even
wider. The funnel of a
tornado sucks dust,
debris and everything
near it at the base (due
to low pressure) and throws them out near the top.
Here are a few accounts of the survivors of tornados-
(from Discovery channel’s “Young Discovery
Series”).
“I saw the cloud coming and tried to take shelter
inside. But as soon as I reached for the doorknob,
the house took off into the sky. I was not hurt at
all.”
“After the storm we had to clean the debris from
the wheat fields. We picked up splintered boards
and tree branches as well as dead chickens with
their feathers blown off and rabbits looked like they
had been skinned.”
A tornado shelter is a room situated deep inside
or underground having no windows. Or otherwise
it is better to shut windows and take shelter under
a table, workbench, where debris cannot reach. One
has to bow down on knees protecting head and
neck using arms (Fig. 8.15).
Fig. 8.15   Protecting
from a tornado
North
Pacific Ocean
North
Atlantic Ocean
North
Atlantic Ocean
South
Pacific Ocean
Indian Ocean
Typhoon
Cyclone
Hurricane
Hurricane
Cyclone
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Construction of cyclone shelters in
the cyclone prone areas, and
Administrative arrangements for
moving people fast to safer places.
Action on the part of the
people
We should not ignore the warnings
issued by the meteorological
department through TV, radio, or
newspapers.
We should —
make necessary arrangements to
shift the essential household goods,
domestic animals and vehicles, etc.
to safer places;
avoid driving on roads through
standing water, as floods may have
damaged the roads; and
keep ready the phone numbers of all
emergency services like police, fire
brigade, and medical centres.
Some other precautions, if you are
staying in a cyclone hit area —
Do not drink water that could be
contaminated. Always store drinking
water for emergencies.
Do not touch wet switches and fallen
power lines.
Do not go out just for the sake of fun.
Do not pressurise the rescue force
by making undue demands.
Cooperate and help your neighbours
and friends.
8.8 ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY HAS
HELPED
These days we are better protected. In
the early part of the last century, coastal
Fig. 8.16   Image of a tornado
[National Severe Storm Laboratory (NSSL)]
Courtesy: India Meteorological Department,
New Delhi
Fig. 8.17   An anemometer for measuring the
speed of wind
Courtesy: India Meteorological Department,
New Delhi
We have learnt that all storms are low-
pressure systems. Wind speed plays
an important role in the formation of
storms. It is, therefore, important to
measure the wind speed. The
instrument that measures the wind
speed is called an anemometer.
Government agencies, the ports,
fishermen, ships and to the general
public.
© NCERT
not to be republished
WINDS, STORMS AND CYCLONES
residents may have had less than a
day to prepare or evacuate their
homes from an oncoming cyclone.
The world today is very different.
Thanks to satellites and radars, a
Cyclone alert or Cyclone watch is
issued 48 hours in advance of any
expected storm and a Cyclone warning
is issued 24 hrs in advance. The
message is broadcast every hour or half
hour when a cyclone is nearer the coast.
Several national and international
organisations cooperate to monitor the
cyclone-related disasters.
Keywords
Anemometer
Cyclone
Hurricane
Lightning
Tornado
Typhoon
Wind flow pattern
Low pressure
Monsoon winds
Pressure
Thunderstorms
What you have learnt
Air around us exerts pressure.
Air expands on heating and contracts on cooling.
Warm air rises up, whereas comparatively cooler air tends to sink towards
the earth’s surface.
As warm air rises, air pressure at that place is reduced and the cooler
air moves to that place.
The moving air is called wind.
Uneven heating on the earth is the main cause of wind movements.
Winds carrying water vapour bring rain.
High-speed winds and air pressure difference can cause cyclones.
It has become easier to monitor cyclones with the help of advance
technology like satellites and radars.
Self-help is the best help. Therefore it is better to plan in advance and
be ready with defence against any approaching cyclone.
The following flow chart will help you to understand the phenomena
that lead to the formation of clouds and falling of rain and creation of
storms and cyclones:
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Difference of temperature between two regions
Sets convection in air
Warm air rises, creating a low-pressure area
Cool air converges to the low-pressure area
Warm air rises, cools and the water vapour
condenses to form clouds
The bigger water drops in the cloud fall to the
ground as rain, hail or snow
Falling water droplets and rising air move vigorously
to produce thunderstorm
Under certain weather condition storms may
develop into cyclones
Exercises
1. Fill the missing word in the blank spaces in the following statements:
Wind is——————air.
Winds are generated due to——————heating on the earth.
Near the earth’s surface __________air rises up whereas
___________ air comes down.
Air moves from a region of ——— pressure to a region of———
pressure.
2. Suggest two methods to find out wind direction at a given place.
3. State two experiences that made you think that air exerts pressure
(other than those given in the text).
4. You want to buy a house. Would you like to buy a house having windows
but no ventilators? Explain your answer.
5. Explain why holes are made in hanging banners and hoardings.
6. How will you help your neighbours in case cyclone approaches your
village/town?
7. What planning is required in advance to deal with the situation created
by a cyclone?
8. Which one of the following place is unlikely to be affected by a cyclone.
Chennai
Mangaluru (Mangalore)
© NCERT
not to be republished
WINDS, STORMS AND CYCLONES
(iii)
Amritsar
9. Which of the statements given below is correct?
In winter the winds flow from the land to the ocean.
In summer the winds flow from the land towards the ocean.
(iii)
A cyclone is formed by a very high-pressure system with very
high-speed winds revolving around it.
The coastline of India is not vulnerable to cyclones.
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. You can perform the Activity 8.5 in the chapter slight
differently at home. Use two plastic bottles of the same size. Stretch one
balloon on the neck of each bottle. Keep one bottle in the sun and the
other in the shade. Record your observations. Compare these
observations and the result with those of Activity 8.5.
2. You can make your own anemometer.
Collect the following items:
4 small paper cups (used ice cream cups), 2 strips of cardboard (20cm
long and 2cm wide), gum, stapler, a sketch pen and a sharpened pencil
with eraser at one end.
Take a scale; draw crosses on the cardboard strips as shown in the
Fig. 8.18. This will give you the centres of the strips.
Fig. 8.18   Finding centre of the strips
Fig. 8.19   A model of an anemometer
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Fix the strips at the centre, putting one over the other so that they
make a plus (+) sign.  Now fix the cups at the ends of the strips. Colour
the outer surface of one cup with a marker or a sketch pen. All the 4
cups should face in the same direction.
Push a pin through the centre of the strips and attach the strips and
the cups to the eraser of the pencil. Check that the strips rotate freely
when you blow on the cups. Your anemometer is ready. Counting the
number of rotations per minute will give you an estimate of the speed of
the wind. To observe the changes in the wind speed, use it at different
places and different times of the day.
If you do not have a pencil with attached eraser you can use the tip of a
ball pen. The only condition is that the strips should rotate freely.
Remember that this anemometer will indicate only speed changes. It
will not give you the actual wind speed.
3. Collect articles and photographs from newspapers and magazines about
storms and cyclones. Make a story on the basis of what you learnt in
this chapter and the matter collected by you.
4. Suppose you are a member of a committee, which is responsible for
creating development plan of a coastal state. Prepare a short speech
indicating the measures to be taken to reduce the suffering of the people
caused by cyclones.
5. Interview eyewitness to collect the
actual experience of people affected by
a cyclone.
6. Take an aluminium tube about 15 cm
long and 1 to 1.5 cm in diameter. Cut
slice of a medium-sized potato about
2 cm thick. Insert the tube in the slice,
press it, and rotate it 2–3 times.
Remove the tube. You will find a piece
of potato fixed in the tube like a
piston head. Repeat the same process
with the other end of the tube. Now
you have the tube with both ends
closed by potato pieces with an air
column in between. Take a pencil with
one end unsharpened. Place this end
at one of the pieces of potato. Press it
suddenly to push the potato piece in
the tube. Observe what happens. The
activity shows rather dramatically
how increased air pressure can push things.
CAUTION: When you perform this activity, make sure that nobody is
standing in front of the tube.
Fig. 8.20
© NCERT
not to be republished
WINDS, STORMS AND CYCLONES
Did you know?
A bolt of lightning travels at a speed of more than 400,000 km/h. It can
heat the air around it to a temperature which is more than 4 times the
temperature of the surface of the sun. That is what makes lightning so
dangerous.
You can read more on the related topics on the following websites:
http://www.imd.gov.in/
http://library.thinkquest.org/10136/
www.bom.gov.au/lam/students_teachers/cycmod.shtml
www.chunder.com/ski/lightanim.html
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
oil is one of the most important
natural resources. It supports the
growth of plants by holding the
roots firmly and supplying water and
nutrients. It is the home for many
organisms. Soil is essential for
agriculture. Agriculture provides food,
clothing and shelter for all. Soil is thus
an inseparable part of our life. The
earthy fragrance of soil after the first rain
is always refreshing.
9.1 SOIL TEEMING WITH LIFE
One day during the rainy season Paheli
and Boojho observed an earthworm
coming out of the soil. Paheli wondered
whether there were other organisms also
in the soil. Let us find out.
Activity 9.1
Collect some soil samples and observe
them carefully. You can use a hand lens.
Examine each sample carefully and fill
in Table 9.1.
Discuss your observations
with your friends.
Are the soil samples
collected by your friends
similar to the ones collected by
Boojho and Paheli have
used soil in many ways. They
enjoy playing with it. It is a
great fun indeed.
Make a list of the uses of soil.
Fig. 9.1  Children playing with soil
Table 9.1
Soil source
Plants
Animals
Any other
observations
Garden soil
Grass, ……….
Ant, ……….
Soil from the roadside
………………
Soil from the area where
construction is going on
………………
………………
………………
………………
………………
© NCERT
not to be republished
9.2 SOIL PROFILE
Soil is composed of distinct layers.
Perform the following activity to find out
how these layers are arranged.
Activity 9.2
Take a little soil. Break the clumps with
your hand to powder it. Now take a glass
tumbler, three quarters filled with water,
and then add a handful of soil to it. Stir
it well with a stick to dissolve the soil.
Now let it stand undisturbed for some
time (Fig. 9.2). Afterwards, observe it and
answer the following questions:
Do you see layers of particles of
different sizes in the glass tumbler?
Draw a diagram showing these layers.
Are there some dead rotting leaves
or animal remains floating on water?
The rotting dead matter in the soil is
called humus.
You probably know that the soil is
formed by the breaking down of rocks
by the action of wind, water and climate.
This process is called weathering. The
nature of any soil depends upon the
rocks from which it has been formed and
the type of vegetation that grows in it.
A vertical section through different
layers of the soil is called the soil profile.
Each layer differs in feel (texture),
Polythene bags and plastics pollute
the soil. They also kill the organisms
living in the soil. That is why there is
a demand to ban the polythene bags
and plastics. Other substances which
pollute the soil are a number of waste
products, chemicals and pesticides.
Waste products and chemicals should
be treated before they are released
into the soil. The use of pesticides
should be minimised.
I want to know whether the
soil from a field can be used
to make toys?
Fig. 9.2  Layers of soil
I wonder why I found some
pieces of plastic articles and
polythene bags in the soil sample
collected from the roadside and
the garden.
humus
water
gravel
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
colour, depth and chemical composition.
These layers are referred to as horizons
(Fig. 9.3).
soil fertile and provides nutrients to
growing plants. This layer is generally
soft, porous and can retain more water.
It is called the topsoil or the A-horizon.
We usually see the top surface of
the soil, not the layers below it. If we
look at the sides of a recently dug ditch,
we can see the inner layers of the soil,
too. Such a view enables us to observe
the soil profile at that place. Soil profile
can also be seen while digging a well or
laying the foundation of a building. It
can also be seen at the sides of a road
on a hill or at a steep river bank.
The uppermost horizon is generally
dark in colour as it is rich in humus
and minerals. The humus makes the
This provides shelter for many living
organisms such as worms, rodents,
moles and beetles. The roots of small
plants are embedded entirely in the
topsoil.
The next layer has a lesser amount
of humus but more of minerals. This
layer is generally harder and more
compact and is called the B-horizon or
the middle layer.
The third layer is the C-horizon,
which is made up of small lumps of
rocks with cracks and crevices. Below
Fig. 9.3  Soil profile
A-horizon
B-horizon
C-horizon
Bedrock
© NCERT
not to be republished
this layer is the bedrock, which is hard
and difficult to dig with a spade.
9.3 SOIL TYPES
As you know, weathering of rocks
produces small particles of various
materials. These include sand and clay.
The relative amount of sand and clay
depends upon the rock from which the
particles were formed, that is the parent
rock. The mixture of rock particles
and humus is called the soil. Living
organisms, such as bacteria, plant roots
and earthworm are also important parts
of any soil.
The soil is classified on the basis of
the proportion of particles of various
sizes. If soil contains greater proportion
of big particles it is called sandy soil.
If the proportion of fine particles is
relatively higher, then it is called
clayey soil. If the amount of large and
fine particles is about the same, then
the soil is called loamy. Thus,  the soil
can be classified as sandy, clayey and
loamy.
The sizes of the particles in a soil
have a very important influence on its
properties. Sand particles are quite
large. They cannot fit closely together,
so there are large spaces between them.
These spaces are filled with air. We say
that the sand is well aerated. Water can
drain quickly through the spaces
between the sand particles. So, sandy
soils tend to be light, well aerated and
rather dry. Clay particles, being much
smaller, pack tightly together, leaving
little space for air. Unlike sandy soil,
I want to know:
What kind of soil should be
used for making matkas and
surahis?
water can be held in the tiny gaps
between the particles of clay. So clay
soils have little air. But they are heavy
as they hold more water than the sandy
soils.
The best topsoil for growing plants
is loam. Loamy soil is a mixture of sand,
clay and another type of soil particle
known as silt. Silt occurs as a deposit
in river beds. The size of the silt particles
is between those of sand and clay. The
loamy soil also has humus in it. It has
the right water holding capacity for the
growth of plants.
Activity 9.3
Collect samples of clayey, loamy and
sandy soils. Take a fistful of soil from
one of the samples. Remove any pebbles,
rocks or grass blades from it. Now add
water drop by drop and knead the soil
[Fig. 9.4 (a)]. Add just enough water so
that a ball [Fig. 9.4 (b)] can be made from
it, but at the same time it should not be
sticky. Try to make a ball [Fig. 9.4 (c)]
from this soil. On a flat surface, roll this
ball into a cylinder [Fig. 9.4 (d)]. Try to
make a ring from this cylinder [Fig. 9.4 (e)].
Repeat this activity with other samples
also. Does the extent to which a soil can
be shaped indicate its type?
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Can you suggest which type of soil
would be the best for making pots, toys
and statues?
9.4  PROPERTIES OF SOIL
You have listed some uses of soil. Let us
perform some activities to find the
characteristics of the soil.
Percolation rate of water in
Boojho and Paheli marked two different
squares of 50 cm × 50 cm each, one on
the floor of their house and the other
on the kutcha (unpaved) road. They filled
two bottles of the same size with water.
They emptied the water from the bottles,
one each, at the same time in the two
squares. They observed that the water
on the floor flowed down and was not
absorbed. On the kutcha road, on the
other hand, the water was absorbed.
Now let us perform an activity to
understand this.
Activity 9.4
For this activity divide yourself into
three teams. Name the teams A, B and
C. You will be finding out how fast the
water passes down the soil. You will
need a hollow cylinder or a pipe. Ensure
that each team uses pipes of the same
diameter. Some suggestions for
obtaining such a pipe are given below:
1. If possible, get a small tin can and
cut off its bottom.
2. If PVC pipe (approx. diameter 5 cm)
is available, cut it into 20 cm long
pieces and use them.
At the place where you collect the soil,
place the pipe about 2 cm deep in the
ground. Pour 200 mL water in the pipe
slowly. For measuring 200 mL water you
can use any empty 200 mL bottle. Note
Fig. 9.5 Measuring rate of percolation
Fig. 9.4  Working with the soil
Boojho wondered why there
was a difference in the
absorption of water in the
two squares.
© NCERT
not to be republished
the time when you start pouring water.
When all the water has percolated
leaving the pipe empty, note the time
again. Be careful not to let the water
spill over or run down on the outside of
the pipe while pouring. Calculate the
rate of percolation by using the
following formula:
amount of water (mL)
percolation rate (mL/min) = percolation time (min)
For example, suppose that for a
certain sample, it took 20 minutes for
200 mL to percolate. So,
rate of percolation = 200 mL
20 min
mL/min
Calculate the rate of percolation in
your soil sample. Compare your findings
with others and arrange the soil samples
in the increasing order of the rate of
percolation.
9.5 MOISTURE IN SOIL
Have you ever passed through a
farmland during a hot summer day?
Perhaps you noticed that the air above
the land is shimmering. Why is it so?
Try out this activity and find the answer.
Activity 9.5
Take a boiling tube. Put two spoonfulls
of a soil sample in it. Heat it on a flame
(Fig. 9.6) and observe it. Let us find out
what happens upon heating.
Do you see water drops any where?
If yes, where did you find them?
On heating, water in the soil
evaporates, moves up and condenses on
the cooler inner walls of the upper part
of the boiling tube.
Fig. 9.6 Removing moisture from the soil
Stand
Burner
Soil sample
Boiling tube
On a hot summer day, the vapour
coming out of the soil reflect the sunlight
and the air above the soil seems to
shimmer.
After heating the soil, take it out of
the tube. Compare it with the soil which
has not been heated. Note the difference
between the two.
9.6 ABSORPTION OF WATER BY SOIL
Do all the soils absorb water to the same
extent? Let us find out.
Activity 9.6
Take a plastic funnel. Take a filter paper
(or a piece of newspaper sheet), fold and
place it as shown in the figure. Weigh
50g of dry, powdered soil and pour it
into the funnel. Measure a certain
amount of water in a measuring cylinder
and pour it drop by drop on the soil.
You can use a dropper for this purpose.
Do not let all the water fall at one spot.
Drops
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Pour water all over the soil. Keep pouring
water till it starts dripping. Subtract the
amount of water left in the measuring
cylinder from the amount you started
with. This is the amount of water
retained by the soil. Record your results
in your notebook in the following
manner:
Weight of soil = 50g
Initial volume of water in the
measuring cylinder = U mL
Final volume of water in the
measuring cylinder = V mL
Volume of water absorbed by the soil
= (U – V) mL
Weight of water absorbed by the soil
= (U – V) g
(1 mL of water has weight equal to 1 g)
percentage of water absorbed
Repeat this activity with different soil
samples. Would you get the same results
for all the samples? Discuss the results
with your friends and answer the
following question:
Which  soil would have the highest
percolation rate?
Which  soil would have the lowest
percolation rate?
Boojho heard from his neighbourer
that 8–10 days after the rain, the level
of water in a pond or well rises. Which
type of soil will allow water to reach
a well faster and in greater amount?
Which type of soil retains the highest
amount of water and which retains
the least?
Can you suggest any method to let
more rain water percolate and reach
the water underground?
9.7 SOIL AND CROPS
Different types of soils are found in
different parts of India. In some parts
there is clayey soil, in some parts there
is loamy soil while in some other parts
there is sandy soil.
Soil is affected by wind, rainfall,
temperature, light and humidity. These
are some important climatic factors
which affect the soil profile and bring
changes in the soil structure. The
Fig. 9.7  Absorption of water in the soil
Dropper
Filter paper
Funnel
Beaker
Gram (g) and kilogram (kg) are actually units of mass. A mass of 1 gram weighs 1 gram weight,
and a mass of 1 kilogram weighs 1 kilogram weight. However, in daily life, and in commerce and
industry, the distinction between gram and gram weight is generally omitted.
(U - V)
© NCERT
not to be republished
climatic factors, as well as the
components of soil, determine the
various types of vegetation and crops
that might grow in any region.
Clayey and loamy soils are both
suitable for growing cereals like wheat,
and gram. Such soils are good at
A case study
John, Rashida and Radha went to Leeladhar Dada and Sontosh Malviya of
Sohagpur in Madhya Pradesh. Leeladhar Dada was preparing the soil to make
items like surahi, matki, kalla (earthen frying pan) etc. The following is the
conversation they all had with Leeladhar Dada:
Where was the soil obtained from?
Dada–We brought the black soil from a piece of barren land.
How is the soil prepared?
Dada–Dry soil will be placed in a large tank and would be cleaned of pebbles etc.
After removing these things the soil will be soaked for around 8 hours.
This soil would be kneaded after mixing horse dung. The kneaded soil
would be placed on the wheel and given appropriate shape. The final shape
is given with hands. The items are coloured after three days of drying. All
the items are baked at high temperature after drying in the air.
Why is the horse dung mixed in soil?
Dada–Burnt horse dung helps open up the pores in the soil. So that water could
percolate out of the matkas and surahis, evaporate and cools the water
inside. You know Sohagpuri surahis and matkas are famous in far off
places like Jabalpur, Nagpur, Allahabad, etc.
Fig. 9.8  Making pots
retaining water.  For paddy, soils rich
in clay and organic matter and
having a good capacity to retain water
are ideal.  For lentils (masoor) and other
pulses, loamy soils, which drain water
easily, are required.  For cotton, sandy-
loam or loam, which drain water easily
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Table 9.2
S. No.
Type of soil
Crop grown
Clayey
Wheat …………
What is the difference
between rate of percolation and
the amount of water retained?
Boojho, you seem to have
forgotten what you read
earlier.  Go and reread the
lesson again and you will find
the answer.
Soil erosion
The removal of land surface by water,
wind or ice is known as erosion. Plant
roots firmly bind the soil. In the
absence of plants, soil becomes loose.
So it can be moved by wind and flowing
water. Erosion of soil is more severe
in areas of little or no surface
vegetation, such as desert or bare
lands. So, cutting of trees and
deforestation should be prevented and
effort should be made to increase the
green areas.
and can hold plenty of air, are more
suitable.
Crops such as wheat are grown in
the fine clayey soils, because they are
rich in humus and are very fertile. Find
from your teachers, parents and farmers
the type of soils and crops grown in your
area. Enter the data in the following
Table 9.2:
Which kind of soil would be most
suitable for planting rice? Soil with a
higher or lower rate of percolation?
Keywords
What you have learnt
Soil is important for life on the earth.
Soil profile is a section through different layers of the soil, Various layers
are called horizons.
Soil is of different types: clayey, loamy and sandy.
Percolation rate of water is different in different types of soil.  It is highest
in the sandy soil and least in the clayey soil.
Different types of soils are used to cultivate different types of crops. Clay
and loam are suitable for growing wheat, gram and paddy. Cotton is
grown in sandy loam soil.
Clayey
Humus
Loamy
Percolation
Moisture
Sandy
Water retention
© NCERT
not to be republished
Soil holds water in it, which is called soil moisture.  The capacity of a soil
to hold water is important for various crops.
Clayey soil is used to make pots, toys and statues.
Exercises
Tick the most suitable answer in questions 1 and 2.
1. In addition to the rock particles, the soil contains
air and water
water and plants
(iii)
minerals, organic matter, air and water
water, air and plants
2. The water holding capacity is the highest in
sandy soil
clayey soil
(iii)
loamy soil
mixture of sand and loam
3. Match the items in Column I with those in Column II:
Column I
Column II
A home for living organisms
Large particles
Upper layer of the soil
All kinds of soil
(iii)
Sandy soil
Dark in colour
Middle layer of the soil
Small particles and
packed tight
Clayey soil
Lesser amount of humus
4. Explain how soil is formed.
5. How is clayey soil useful for crops?
6. List the differences between clayey soil and sandy soil.
7. Sketch the cross section of soil and label the various layers.
8. Razia conducted an experiment in the field related to the rate of
percolation. She observed that it took 40 min for 200 mL of water to
percolate through the soil sample. Calculate the rate of percolation.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
9. Explain how soil pollution and soil erosion could be prevented.
10. Solve the following crossword puzzle with the clues given:
Across
2. Plantation prevents it.
5. Use should be banned to avoid soil pollution.
6. Type of soil used for making pottery.
7. Living organism in the soil.
1. In desert soil erosion occurs through.
3. Clay and loam are suitable for cereals like.
4. This type of soil can hold very little water.
5. Collective name for layers of soil.
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. Boojho would like to know the difference between raw and baked soil?
Investigate how the soil from which matkas are made is different from
the soil used to make statues.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Did you know?
Rivers of north India, which flow from Himalayas, bring a variety of
materials including silt, clay, sand and gravel. They deposit their
materials called alluvial soil, in the planes of north India. This soil is very
fertile and supports nearby half the population of India.
2. Paheli is worried. She could see a brick kiln from her house. Bricks
were being made there. There was so much smoke coming out of the
kiln. She was told that the best quality of clay is required for making
pottery, statues and bricks. She has seen truck loads of bricks being
taken away for construction of buildings. At this rate, she fears, no soil
will be left. Are her fears justified? Discuss this problem with your
parents, teachers and other experts of your area and prepare a report.
3. Try to find out the moisture content of a soil sample. One method is
given here.
Activity: Take 100g soil. (Take help from any shopkeepers to weigh
the soil.) Place it on a newspaper in the sun and allow it to dry for two
hours. This activity is best done in the afternoon. Take care that the
soil does not spill outside the newspaper. After drying it, weigh the soil
again.  The difference in the weight of the soil before and after drying
gives you the amount of moisture contained in 100 g of soil. This is
called the percentage moisture content.
Suppose your sample of soil loses 10 g on drying. Then
In this example
Per cent of moisture in
Per cent of moisture in soil =
wt. of moisture (g)
Original wt. of soil sample (g) ×100
10×100
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Respiration in Organisms
ne day Boojho was eagerly
waiting
grandparents who were coming
to the town after a year. He was in a real
hurry as he wanted to receive them at the
bus-stop. He ran fast and reached the
bus-stop in a few minutes. He was
breathing rapidly. His grandmother asked
him why he was breathing so fast. Boojho
told her that he came running all the way.
But the question got stuck in his mind.
He wondered why running makes a
person breathe faster. The answer to
Boojhoís question lies in understanding
why we breathe. Breathing is a part of
respiration. Let us learn about respiration.
10.1 WHY DO WE RESPIRE?
In Chapter 2 you learnt that all
organisms
small
microscopic units called cells. A cell is
the smallest structural and functional
unit of an organism. Each cell of an
organism performs certain functions
such as nutrition, transport, excretion
and reproduction. To perform these
functions, the cell needs energy. Even
when we are eating, sleeping or reading
we require energy. But, where does this
energy come from? Can you say why
your parents insist that you should eat
regularly? The food has stored energy,
which is released during respiration.
Therefore, all living organisms respire
to get energy from food. During
breathing, we breathe in air. You know
that air contains oxygen. We breathe out
air which is rich in carbon dioxide. The
air we breathe in is transported to all
parts of the body and ultimately to each
cell. In  the cells, oxygen in the air helps
in the breakdown of food. The process
of breakdown of food in the cell with the
release of energy is called cellular
respiration. Cellular respiration takes
place in the cells of all organisms.
In the cell, the food (glucose) is broken
down into carbon dioxide and water using
oxygen. When breakdown of glucose
occurs with the use of oxygen it is called
aerobic respiration. Food can also be
broken down, without using oxygen. This
is called anaerobic respiration.
Breakdown of food releases energy.
With the use of oxygen
Glucose 
carbon dioxide + water + energy
You should know that there are some
organisms such as yeast that can survive
in the absence of air. They are called
anaerobes. They get energy through
anaerobic respiration. In the absence of
oxygen, glucose breaks down into alcohol
and carbon dioxide, as given below:
→
Without the use of oxygen
Glucose
alcohol + carbon dioxide + energy
RESPIRATION IN ORGANISMS
Our muscle cells can also respire
anaerobically, but only for a short time,
when there is a temporary deficiency of
oxygen. During heavy exercise, fast
running (Fig. 10.1), cycling, walking for
many hours or heavy weight lifting, the
demand for energy is high. But the
supply of oxygen to produce the energy
is limited. Then anaerobic respiration
takes places in the muscle cells to fulfil
the demand of energy:
→
(in muscle)
in the absence of oxygen
Glucose
lactic acid + energy
Fig. 10.1  During exercise, some muscles may
respire anaerobically
Have you ever wondered why you get
muscle cramps after heavy exercise? The
cramps occur when muscle cells respire
anaerobically. The partial breakdown of
glucose produces lactic acid. The
accumulation of lactic acid causes muscle
cramps. We get relief from cramps after a
hot water bath or a massage. Can you
guess why it is so? Hot water bath or
massage improves circulation of blood.
As a result, the supply of oxygen to the
muscle cells increases. The increase in
the supply of oxygen results in the
complete breakdown of lactic acid into
carbon dioxide and water.
10.2 BREATHING
Activity 10.1
Yeasts are single-celled organisms.
They respire anaerobically and during
this process yield alcohol. They are,
therefore, used to make wine and beer.
CAUTION
Do this activity under the supervision
of your teacher.
Close your nostrils and mouth
tightly and look at a watch. What did
you feel after some time? How long were
you able to keep both of them closed?
Note down the time for which you could
hold your breath (Fig. 10.2).
So, now you know that you cannot
survive for long without breathing.
Breathing means taking in air rich
in oxygen and giving out air rich in
carbon dioxide with the help of
respiratory organs. The taking in of air
rich in oxygen into the body is called
inhalation and giving out of air rich in
carbon dioxide is known as exhalation.
It is a continuous process which goes
SCIENCE
you like to find out your breathing rate?
Do you want to know whether it is
constant or it changes according to the
requirement of oxygen by the body? Let
us find out by doing the following
activity.
Activity 10.2
Generally we are not aware that we are
breathing. However, if you try you can
count your rate of breathing. Breathe
in and out normally. Find out how many
times you breathe in and breathe out
in a minute? Did you inhale the same
number of times as you exhaled? Now
count your breathing rate (number of
breaths/minute) after brisk walk and
after running. Record your breathing
rate as soon as you finish and also after
complete rest. Tabulate your findings
and compare your breathing rates under
different conditions with those of your
classmates.
From the above activity, you must
have realised that whenever a person
needs extra energy, he/she breathes
faster. As a result more oxygen is
Boojho noticed that when he
released his breath after holding
it for some time, he had to
breathe heavily. Can you tell
him why it was so?
Fig. 10.2   Holding breath
on all the time and throughout the life
of an organism.
The number of times a person
breathes in a minute is termed as the
breathing rate. During breathing
inhalation and exhalation take place
alternately. A breath means one
inhalation plus one exhalation. Would
Table 10.1 Changes in breathing rate under different conditions
Name of the classmate
Breathing rate
Normal
After a brisk
After running
At rest
walk for 10
fast 100 m
minutes
RESPIRATION IN ORGANISMS
Fig. 10.3   Variation in the breathing rate during
different activities
supplied to our cells. It speeds up
the breakdown of food and more
energy is released. Does this explain
why do we feel hungry after a
physical activity?
When you feel drowsy, does your
breathing rate slow down? Does your
body receive sufficient oxygen?
Activity 10.3
Figure 10.3 shows the various activities
carried out by a person during a normal
day. Can you say in which activity, the
rate of breathing will be the slowest and
in which it will be the fastest? Assign
numbers to the pictures in the order of
increasing rate of breathing according
to your experience.
10.3 HOW DO WE BREATHE?
Let us now learn about the mechanism
of breathing. Normally we take in air
through our nostrils. When we inhale
air, it passes through our nostrils into
the nasal cavity. From the nasal cavity,
the air reaches our lungs through the
windpipe. Lungs are present in the
chest cavity (Fig. 10.4). This cavity is
surrounded by ribs on the sides. A large,
muscular sheet called diaphragm forms
the floor of the chest cavity (Fig. 10.4).
Breathing involves the movement of the
diaphragm and the rib cage.
During inhalation, ribs move up and
outwards and diaphragm moves down.
This movement increases space in our
chest cavity and air rushes into the
lungs. The lungs get filled with air.
During exhalation, ribs move down and
inwards, while diaphragm moves up to
its former position. This reduces the size
of the chest cavity and air is pushed out
of the lungs (Fig. 10.5). These
movements in our body can be felt
On an average, an adult human being
at rest breathes in and out 15ñ18
times in a minute. During heavy
exercise, the breathing rate can
increase upto 25 times per minute.
While we exercise, not only do we
breathe fast, we also take deep breaths
and thus inhale more oxygen.
Paheli wants to know why
we yawn when we are
sleepy or drowsy.
SCIENCE
easily. Take a deep breath. Keep your
palm on the abdomen, feel the
movement of abdomen. What do you
find?
After having learnt that during
breathing there are changes in the size
of the chest cavity, children got involved
in the chest expansion competition.
Fig 10.4 Human respiratory system
The air around us has various types of unwanted particles, such as smoke, dust,
pollens, etc. When we inhale, the particles get trapped in the hair present in our
nasal cavity. However, sometimes these particles may get past the hair in the
nasal cavity. Then they irritate the lining of the cavity, as a result of which we
sneeze. Sneezing expels these foreign particles from the inhaled air and a dust-
free, clean air enters our body.
TAKE CARE: When you sneeze, you should cover your nose so that the foreign
particles you expel are not inhaled by other persons.
Smoking damages lungs. Smoking is
also linked to cancer. It must be
avoided.
Nasal passage
Oral cavity
Pharynx
Trachea
Lungs
Diaphragm
Everyone was boasting that she/he
could expand it the maximum. How
about doing this activity in the class
with your classmates?
RESPIRATION IN ORGANISMS
Activity 10.4
Take a deep breath. Measure the size
of the chest with a measuring tape
(Fig. 10.6) and record your observations
in Table 10.2. Measure the size of the
chest again when expanded and
indicate which classmate shows the
maximum expansion of the chest.
We can understand the mechanism
of breathing by a simple model.
Activity 10.5
Take a wide plastic bottle. Remove the
bottom. Get a Y-shaped glass or plastic
tube. Make a hole in the lid so that the
tube may pass through it. To the forked
end of the tube fix two deflated balloons.
Introduce the tube into the bottle as
shown in Fig. 10.7. Now cap the bottle.
Seal it to make it airtight. To the open
base of the bottle tie a thin rubber or
plastic sheet using a large rubber band.
Fig. 10.5  Mechanism of breathing in human beings
Table 10.2: Effect of breathing on the chest size of some classmates
Name of the
Size of the chest (cm)
classmate
During inhalation
During exhalation
Difference in size
Ribs move
Diaphragm
moves down
Air is
drawn in
Air forced out
Ribs move
Diaphragm
moves back
(a) Inhalation
(b) Exhalation
SCIENCE
Fig. 10.6  Measuring chest size
test-tube. Insert a plastic straw through
the hole in the lid in such a way that it
dips in lime water. Now blow gently
through the straw a few times (Fig.
10.8). Is there a change in the
appearance of lime water? Can you
explain this change on the basis of what
you learnt in Chapter 6?
You are aware that air we
inhale or exhale is a mixture of
gases. What do we exhale? Do we
exhale only carbon dioxide or a mixture
of gases along with it? You must have
also observed that if you exhale on a
mirror, a film of moisture appears on its
surface. From where do these droplets
come?
To understand the expansion of the
lungs, pull the rubber sheet from the
base downwards and watch the balloons.
Next, push the rubber/plastic sheet up
and observe the balloons. Did you see
any changes in the balloons?
What do the balloons in this model
represent? What does the rubber sheet
represent?
Now, you should be able to explain
the mechanism of breathing.
10.4 WHAT DO WE BREATHE OUT?
Activity 10.6
Take a slender, clean test tube or a
glass/plastic bottle. Make a hole in its
lid and fix it on the bottle.  Pour some
freshly prepared lime water in the
Plastic
bottle
Balloons
Ruber
sheet
Fig 10.7  Model to show mechanism of
breathing
Boojho wants to know how
much air a person can hold in
the lungs.
RESPIRATION IN ORGANISMS
Fig.10.9  Tracheal system
Tracheae
10.5 BREATHING IN OTHER ANIMALS
Animals such as elephants, lions, cows,
goats, frogs, lizards, snakes, birds, have
lungs in their chest cavities like the
human beings.
How do other organisms breathe? Do
they also have lungs like those of human
beings? Let us find out.
Cockroach: A cockroach has small
openings on the sides of its body. Other
insects also have similar openings.
Boojho wants to know if
cockroaches, snails, fish,
earthworms, ants and mosquitoes
also have lungs.
These openings are called spiracles
(Fig. 10.9). Insects have a network of air
tubes called tracheae for gas exchange.
Oxygen rich air rushes through spiracles
into the tracheal tubes, diffuses into the
body tissue, and reaches every cell of
the body. Similarly, carbon dioxide from
the cells goes into the tracheal tubes and
moves out through spiracles. These air
tubes or tracheae are found only in
insects and not in any other group of
animals.
Fig 10.8  Effect of exhaled air on lime water
The percentage of oxygen and carbon
dioxide in inhaled and exhaled air.
Inhaled air
Exhaled air
Lungs
21% oxygen
16.4% oxygen
4.4% carbon
dioxide
0.04% carbon
dioxide
Straw
Lime water
Earthworm: Recall from Chapter 9 of
Class VI that earthworms breathe
through their skins. The skin of an
earthworm feels moist and slimy on
touching. Gases can easily pass through
them. Though frogs have a pair of lungs
like human beings, they can also
breathe through their skin, which is
moist and slippery.
SCIENCE
Gills
Fig. 10.10  Breathing organs in fish
Paheli wants to know whether
roots, which are underground
also take in oxygen? If so, how?
dioxide. In the cells oxygen is used to
break down glucose into carbon dioxide
and water as in other organisms. In
plants each part can independently take
in oxygen from the air and give out
carbon dioxide. You have already learnt
in Chapter 1 that the leaves of the plants
have tiny pores called stomata for
exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide.
Soil particles
Root hair
Air space
Fig. 10.11  Roots absorb air from the soil
10.6 BREATHING UNDER WATER
Can we breathe and survive in water?
There are many organisms which live in
water. How do they breathe under water?
You have studied in Class VI that
gills in fish help them to use oxygen
dissolved in water. Gills are projections
of the skin. You may wonder how gills
help in breathing. Gills are well supplied
with blood vessels (Fig. 10.10) for
exchange of gases.
Boojho has seen in television
programmes that whales and
dolphins often come up to the
water surface. They even release
a fountain of water sometimes
while moving upwards. Why do
they do so?
10.7 DO PLANTS ALSO RESPIRE?
Like other living organisms, plants also
respire for their survival as you have
learnt in Class VI. They also take in
oxygen from the air and give out carbon
Like all other living cells of the
plants, the root cells also need
oxygen to generate energy. Roots take
up air from the air spaces present
between the soil particles (Fig. 10.11).
RESPIRATION IN ORGANISMS
Can you guess what would happen
if a potted plant is overwatered?
In this chapter you learnt
that respiration is a vital biological
What you have learnt
Respiration is essential for survival of living organisms. It releases energy
from the food.
The oxygen we inhale is used to breakdown glucose into carbon dioxide
and water. Energy is released in the process.
The breakdown of glucose occurs in the cells of an organism (cellular
respiration).
If the food is broken down with the use of oxygen, it is called aerobic
respiration. If the breakdown occurs without the use of oxygen, the
respiration is called anaerobic respiration.
During heavy exercise when the supply of oxygen to our muscle cells is
insufficient, food breakdown is by anaerobic respiration.
Breathing is a part of the process of respiration during which an
organism takes in the oxygen-rich air and gives out air rich in carbon
dioxide. The respiratory organs for the exchange of gases vary in different
organisms.
During inhalation, our lungs expand and then come back to the original
state as the air moves out during exhalation.
Increased physical activity enhances the rate of breathing.
In animals like cow, buffalo, dog and cat the respiratory organs and the
process of breathing are similar to those in humans.
In earthworm, the exchange of gases occurs through the moist skin. In
fishes it takes place through gills and in insects through the tracheae.
In a plant the roots take in air present in the soil. Leaves have tiny pores
called stomata through which they exchange gases. The breakdown of
glucose in the plant cells is similar to that in other living beings.
process. All living organisms need
to respire to get the energy needed
for their survival.
Keywords
Aerobic respiration
Anaerobic respiration
Breathing rate
Cellular respiration
Diaphragm
Exhalation
Gills
Lungs
Inhalation
Spiracles
Tracheae
SCIENCE
Exercises
1. Why does an athlete breathe faster and deeper than usual after
finishing the race?
2. List the similarities and differences between aerobic and anaerobic
respiration.
3. Why do we often sneeze when we inhale a lot of dust-laden air?
4. Take three test-tubes. Fill æth of each with water. Label them A, B and
C. Keep a snail in test-tube A, a water plant in test-tube B and in C,
keep snail and plant both. Which test-tube would have the highest
concentration of CO2?
5. Tick the correct answer:
In cockroaches, air enters the body through
lungs
gills
(iii)
spiracles
During heavy exercise, we get cramps in the legs due to the
accumulation of
carbon dioxide
lactic acid
(iii)
alcohol
water
Normal range of breathing rate per minute in an average adult
person at rest is:
15ñ18
(iii)
21ñ24
30ñ33
During exhalation, the ribs
move outwards
move downwards
(iii)
move upwards
do not move at all
6. Match the items in Column I with those in Column II:
Column I
Column II
Yeast
Earthworm
Diaphragm
Gills
(iii)
Alcohol
Leaves
Chest cavity
Stomata
Lungs and skin
(vii)
Tracheae
RESPIRATION IN ORGANISMS
7. Mark ëTí if the statement is true and ëFí if it is false:
During heavy exercise the breathing rate of a person slows
down. (T/F)
Plants carry out photosynthesis only during the day and
respiration only at night. (T/F)
(iii)
Frogs breathe through their skins as well as their lungs. (T/F)
The fishes have lungs for respiration. (T/F)
The size of the chest cavity increases during inhalation. (T/F)
8. Given below is a square of letters in which are hidden different words
related to respiration in organisms. These words may be present in any
direction ó upwards, downwards, or along the diagonals. Find the words
for your respiratory system. Clues about those words are given below
the square.
The air tubes of insects
Skeletal structures surrounding chest cavity
(iii)
Muscular floor of chest cavity
Tiny pores on the surface of leaf
Small openings on the sides of the body of an insect
The respiratory organs of human beings
(vii)
The openings through which we inhale
(viii) An anaerobic organism
An organism with tracheal system
9. The mountaineers carry oxygen with them because:
At an altitude of more than 5 km there is no air.
SCIENCE
Did you know?
For us oxygen is essential, but for those organisms which do not use it,
oxygen is toxic. In fact, for humans and other organisms it may be
dangerous to breathe pure oxygen for long.
The amount of air available to a person is less than that available
on the ground.
The temperature of air is higher than that on the ground.
The pressure of air is higher than that on the ground.
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. Observe fish in an aquarium. You will find flap like structures on both
sides of their heads. These are flaps which cover the gills. These flaps
open and close alternately. On the basis of these observations, explain
the process of respiration in the fish.
2. Visit a local doctor. Learn about the harmful effects of smoking. You can
also collect material on this topic from other sources. You can seek help
of your teacher or parents. Find out the percentage of people of your
area who smoke. If you have a smoker in your family, confront him with
the material that you have collected.
3. Visit a doctor. Find out about artificial respiration. Ask the doctor:
When does a person need artificial respiration?
Does the person need to be kept on artificial respiration temporarily
or permanently?
From where can the person get supply of oxygen for artificial
respiration?
4. Measure the breathing rate of the members of your family and some of
your friends. Investigate:
If the breathing rate of children is different from that of adults.
If the breathing rate of males is different from that of females.
If there is a difference in any of these cases, try to find the reason.
Transportation in Animals
and Plants
ou have learnt earlier that all
organisms need food, water and
oxygen for survival. They need to
transport all these to various parts of
their body. Further, animals need to
transport wastes to parts from where
they can be removed. Have you
wondered how all this is achieved? Look
at Fig. 11.1. Do you see the heart and
the blood vessels? They function to
transport substances and together form
the circulatory system. In this chapter
you shall learn about transport of
substances in plants and animals.
11.1 CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
Blood
What happens when you get a cut on
your body? Blood flows out. But what
is blood? Blood is the fluid which
flows in blood vessels. It transports
substances like digested food from the
small intestine to the other parts of the
body. It carries oxygen from the lungs
to the cells of the body. It also transports
waste for removal from the body.
How does the blood carry various
substances? Blood is a liquid, which has
cells of various kinds suspended in it.
Heart
Artery
Why is the colour of
blood red?
Fig. 11.1  Circulatory system
(Arteries are shown in red colour and vein in blue)
SCIENCE
The fluid part of the blood is called
plasma.
One type of cells are the red blood
cells (RBC) which contain a red pigment
called haemoglobin. Haemoglobin
binds with oxygen and transports it to
all the parts of the body and ultimately
to all the cells. It will be difficult to
provide oxygen efficiently to all the cells
of the body without haemoglobin. The
presence of haemoglobin makes blood
appear red.
The blood also has white blood cells
(WBC) which fight against germs that
may enter our body.
Boojho fell down while playing a
game and his knee got injured. Blood
was coming out from the cut. After some
time, he noticed that bleeding had
stopped and a dark red clot had plugged
the cut. Boojho was puzzled about this.
The clot is formed because of the
presence of another type of cells in the
blood, called platelets.
Blood vessels
There are different types of blood vessels
in the body. You know that during
inhalation a fresh supply of oxygen fills
the lungs. Oxygen has to be transported
to the rest of the body.
Also, the blood picks up the waste
materials including carbon dioxide from
the cells. This blood has to go back to
the heart for transport to the lungs for
removal of carbon dioxide as you have
learnt in Chapter 10. So, two types of
blood vessels,  arteries and veins are
present in the body. (Fig. 11.1)
Arteries carry oxygen-rich blood
from the heart to all parts of the body.
Since the blood flow is rapid and at a
high pressure, the arteries have thick
elastic walls.
Let us perform an activity to study
the flow of blood through arteries.
Activity 11.1
Place the middle and index finger of
your right hand on the inner side of your
left wrist (Fig. 11.2). Can you feel some
throbbing movements? Why do you
think there is throbbing? This
throbbing is called the pulse and it is
due to the blood flowing in the arteries.
Count the number of pulse beats in one
minute.
How many pulse beats could you
count? The number of beats per minute
is called the pulse rate. A resting
person, usually has a pulse rate between
72 and 80 beats per minute. Find other
places in your body where you can feel
the pulse.
Record your own pulse beats per
minute and those of your classmates.
Fig. 11.2  Pulse in the wrist
TRANSPORTATION IN ANIMALS AND PLANTS
Table 11.1 Pulse rate
S. No.
Pulse per minute
Compare the values you obtained and
insert them in Table 11.1.
Paheli explained that the
pulmonary artery carries blood
from the heart, so it is called an
artery and not a vein. It carries
carbon dioxide-rich blood to the
lungs. Pulmonary vein carries
oxygen-rich blood from the
lungs to the heart.
Veins are the vessels which carry
carbon dioxide-rich blood from all parts
of the body back to the heart. The veins
have thin walls. There are valves present
in veins which allow blood to flow only
towards the heart.
Refer to Fig. 11.3. Do you see the
arteries divide into smaller vessels. On
reaching the tissues, they divide further
into extremely thin tubes called
capillaries. The capillaries join up to
form veins which empty into the heart.
Heart
The heart is an organ which beats
continuously to act as a pump for the
transport of blood, which carries other
substances with it.
Imagine a pump working for
years without stopping! Absolutely
impossible. Yet our heart works like a
pump non-stop. Let us now learn about
the heart.
The heart is located in the chest
cavity with its lower tip slightly tilted
towards the left (Fig. 11.1). Hold your
fingers inwards on your palm. That
Fig. 11.3  Schematic diagram of circulation
Capillaries
Artery
Heart
Lungs
I am confused! I have learnt
that an artery always
carries oxygen-rich blood.
Pulmonary
artery
Pulmonary
SCIENCE
makes your fist. Your heart is roughly
the size of your fist.
What will happen if the blood rich in
oxygen and the blood rich in carbon
dioxide mix with each other? To avoid
this from happening, the heart has four
chambers. The two upper chambers are
called the atria (singular: atrium) and
the two lower chambers are called the
ventricles (Fig. 11.4). The partition
between the chambers  helps to avoid
Paheli wonders which side of
the heart will have oxygen-rich
blood and which side will have
carbon dioxide-rich blood.
Fig. 11.4  Sections of human heart
Vena Cava
Right atrium
Right ventricle
Partition completely
separating the two
halves
Left atrium
Left ventricle
Pulmonary artery
Pulmonary vein
mixing up of blood rich in oxygen with
the blood rich in carbon dioxide.
To understand the functioning of the
circulatory system, start from the right
side of the heart in Fig. 11.3 and follow
the arrows. These arrows show the
direction of the blood flow from the heart
Aorta
TRANSPORTATION IN ANIMALS AND PLANTS
to the lungs and back to the heart from
where it is pumped to the rest of the
body.
Heartbeat
The walls of the chambers of the heart
are made up of muscles. These muscles
contract and relax rhythmically. This
rhythmic contraction followed by its
relaxation constitute a heartbeat.
Remember that heartbeats continue
every moment of our life. If you place
your hand on the left side of your chest,
you can feel your heartbeat. The doctor
feels your heartbeats with the help of
an instrument called a stethoscope.
A doctor uses the stethoscope as a
device to amplify the sound of the heart.
It consists of a chest piece that carries a
sensitive diaphragm, two ear pieces and
a tube joining the parts. Doctors can
get clues about the condition of your
heart
listening
through
stethoscope.
Let us construct a model of a
stethoscope with the materials that are
available around us.
Activity 11.2
Take a small funnel of 6ñ7 cm in
diameter. Fix a rubber tube (50 cm long)
tightly on the stem of the funnel. Stretch
a rubber sheet (or a balloon) on the
mouth of the funnel and fix it tightly
with a rubber band. Put the open end
of the tube on one of your ears. Place
Table 11.2 Heartbeat and pulse rate
Name of student
While resting
After running (4–5 minutes)
Heartbeat
Pulse rate
Heartbeat
Pulse rate
Fig. 11.5  Instrument to hear heartbeat
(a) Stethoscope
(b) Model of
stethoscope
Chest Piece
Ear Piece
SCIENCE
the mouth of the funnel on your chest
near the heart. Now try to listen
carefully. Do you hear a regular
thumping sound ? The sound is that of
heart beats. How many times did your
heart beat in a minute ? Count again
after running for 4ñ5 minutes. Compare
your observations.
Record your own pulse rate and heart
beat and that of your friends while
resting and after running and record in
Table 11.2. Do you find any relationship
between your heart beat and pulse rate?
Each heart beat generates one pulse in
the arteries and the pulse rate per
minute indicates the rate of heart beat.
The rhythmic beating of the various
chambers of the heart maintain
circulation of blood and transport of
substances to the different parts of the
body.
Boojho wonders if sponges and
hydra also have blood? Animals such
as sponges and Hydra do not posses any
circulatory system. The water in which
they live brings food and oxygen as it
enters their bodies. The water carries
away waste materials and carbon dioxide
as it moves out. Thus, these animals do
not need a circulatory fluid like the
blood.
Let us now learn about the removal
of waste other than carbon dioxide.
11.2 EXCRETION IN ANIMALS
Recall how carbon dioxide is removed
as waste from the body through the
lungs during exhalation. Also recall that
the undigested food is removed during
egestion. Let us now find out how the
other waste materials are removed from
the body. You may wonder where these
unwanted materials come from!
When our cells perform their
functions, certain waste products are
released. These are toxic and hence need
to be removed from the body. The
process of removal of wastes produced
in the cells of the living organisms is
called excretion. The parts involved in
excretion forms the excretory system.
Excretory system in humans
The waste which is present in the blood
has to be removed from the body. How
can this be done? A mechanism to filter
the blood is required. This is done by
the blood capillaries in the kidneys.
When the blood reaches the two kidneys,
it contains both useful and harmful
substances. The useful substances are
absorbed back into the blood. The
wastes dissolved in water are removed
as urine. From the kidneys, the urine
goes into the urinary bladder through
The English physician, William Harvey
(A.D.1578ñ1657), discovered the
circulation of blood. The current
opinion in those days was that blood
oscillates in the vessels of the body.
For his views, Harvey was ridiculed
and was called ìcirculatorî. He lost
most of his patients. However, before
he died, Harveyís idea about
circulation was generally accepted as
a biological fact.
TRANSPORTATION IN ANIMALS AND PLANTS
Sometimes a personís kidneys may
stop working due to infection or
injury. As a result of kidney failure,
waste products start accumulating in
the blood. Such persons cannot
survive unless their blood is filtered
periodically through an artificial
kidney. This process is called dialysis.
tube-like ureters. It is stored in the
bladder and is passed out through the
urinary opening at the end of a
muscular tube called urethra (Fig. 11.6).
The kindeys, ureters, bladder and
urethra form the excretory system.
An adult human being normally
passes about 1ñ1.8 L of urine in 24
hours. The urine consists of 95% water,
2.5% urea and 2.5% other waste
products.
We have all experienced that we sweat
on a hot summer day. The sweat
Paheli wants to know
whether other animals also
urinate?
The way in which waste chemicals
are removed from the body of the
animal depends on the availability
of water. Aquatic animals like fishes,
excrete cell waste as ammonia which
directly dissolves in water. Some
land animals like birds, lizards,
snakes excrete a semi-solid, white
coloured compound (uric acid). The
major excretory product in humans
is urea.
Fig. 11.6  Human excretory system
Kidney
Ureter
Urinary bladder
Urethra
contains water and salts. Boojho has
seen that sometimes in summer, white
patches are formed on our clothes,
especially in areas like underarms.
These marks are left by salts present in
the sweat.
Does sweat serve any other function?
We know that the water kept in an
earthen pot (matka) is cooler. This is
because the water evaporates from the
pores of the pot, which causes cooling.
Urinary opening
SCIENCE
Similarly, when we sweat, it helps to cool
our body.
11.3 TRANSPORT OF SUBSTANCES IN
PLANTS
In Chapter 1 you learnt that plants take
water and mineral nutrients from the soil
through the roots and transport it to the
leaves. The leaves prepare food for the
plant, using water and carbon dioxide
during photosynthesis. You also learnt in
Chapter 10 that food is the source of
energy and every cell of an organism gets
energy by the breakdown of glucose. The
cells use this energy to carry out vital
activities of life. Therefore food must be
made available to every cell of an
organism. Have you ever wondered how
water and nutrients absorbed by the
root are transported to the leaves? How
is the food prepared by the leaves carried
to the parts which cannot make food?
Transport of water and
minerals
Plants absorb water and minerals by
the roots. The roots have root hair.
The root hair increase the surface area
of the root for the absorption of water
and mineral nutrients dissolved in
water. The root hair is in contact with
the water present between the soil
particles [Fig. 11.7 (a)].
Can you guess how water moves
from the root to the leaves? What kind
of transport system is present in plants?
Boojho thinks that plants
may have pipes to transport
water to the entire plant like
we have in our homes for the
supply of water.
Xylem vessels
Fig. 11.7  Transport of water and minerals in
(a) a section of root, (b) a tree
Root hair
TRANSPORTATION IN ANIMALS AND PLANTS
Sugar
solution
Potato
Water
Well, Boojho is right. Plants have
pipe-like vessels to transport water and
nutrients from the soil. The vessels are
made of special cells, forming the
vascular tissue. A tissue is a group of
cells that perform specialised function
in an organism. The vascular tissue for
the transport of water and nutrients in the
plant is called the xylem [Fig. 11.7 (a)].
The xylem forms a continuous
network of channels that connects roots
to the leaves through the stem and
branches and thus transports water to
the entire plant [Fig. 11.7 (b)].
Paheli says her mother puts
ladyfinger and other vegetables in
water if they are somewhat dry.
She wants to know how water
enters into them.
Boojho wants to know why
plants absorb a large quantity
of water from the soil, then give
it off by transpiration!
Fig. 11.8  Transportation of water through cells
into a dish containing a small amount
of water. Make sure that the level of water
is below the level of the pin. Allow the
apparatus to stand for a few hours.
You would find an increase in the
level of sugar solution. How did water
get inside the potato? For very short
distances water can move from one cell
to another. In the same way water
reaches xylem vessels of the root from
the soil [Fig. 11.7 (a)].
Transpiration
In Class VI you learnt that plants release
a lot of water by the process of
transpiration.
Plants absorb mineral nutrients and
water from the soil. Not all the water
absorbed is utilised by the plant. The
water evaporates through the stomata
present on the surface of the leaves by
You know that leaves synthesise
food. The food has to be transported to
all parts of the plant. This is done by
the vascular tissue called the phloem.
Thus, xylem and phloem transport
substances in plants.
Activity 11.3
Take a large potato and peel off its outer
skin. Cut one of its ends to make the
base flat. Now make a deep and hollow
cavity on the opposite side. Fill half of
the cavity with sugar solution and mark
the level by inserting a pin in the wall
of the potato (Fig. 11.8). Put the potato
SCIENCE
What you have learnt
In most animals the blood that circulates in the body distributes food
and oxygen to different cells of the body. It also carries waste products to
different parts of the body for excretion.
Circulatory system consists of the heart and blood vessels.
In humans, blood flows through arteries and veins and the heart acts
as a pumping organ.
Blood consists of plasma, RBC, WBC and platelets. Blood is red due to
the presence of a red pigment, haemoglobin.
The human heart beats about 70ñ80 times per minute in an adult
person. This is called heart rate.
Arteries carry blood from the heart to all parts of the body.
Veins carry blood from all parts of the body back to the heart.
Removal of waste products from the body is called excretion.
Excretory system of humans consists of two kidneys, two ureters, a
urinary bladder, and urethra.
Salts and urea are removed along with water as sweat.
the process of transpiration. The
evaporation of water from leaves
generates a suction pull (the same
that you produce when you suck
water through a straw) which can
pull water to great heights in the
tall trees. Transpiration also cools
the plant.
Keywords
Ammonia
Artery
Blood
Blood vessels
Capillary
Circulatory system
Dialysis
Excretion
Excretory system
Haemoglobin
Heart beat
Kidneys
Phloem
Plasma
Platelets
Pulse
Red blood cell
Root hair
Stethoscope
Sweat
Tissue
Ureter
Urethra
Uric acid
Urinary bladder
White blood cell
Xylem
TRANSPORTATION IN ANIMALS AND PLANTS
Fish excrete waste substances such as ammonia which directly dissolve
in water.
Birds, insects and lizard excrete uric acid in semi-solid form.
Water and mineral nutrients are absorbed by roots from the soil.
Nutrients are transported along with water to the entire plant via the
vascular tissue called xylem.
The vascular tissue for the transport of food to the various parts of the
plant is phloem.
A lot of water is lost by plants in the form of vapour through stomata
during transpiration.
Transpiration generates a force which pulls up water absorbed by the
roots from the soil, to reach the stem and leaves.
Exercises
1. Match structures given in Column I with functions given in Column II.
Column  I
Column  II
Stomata
Absorption of water
Xylem
Transpiration
(iii)
Root hairs
Transport of food
Phloem
Transport of water
Synthesis of carbohydrates
2. Fill in the blanks.
The blood from the heart is transported to all parts of the body by
the                         .
Haemoglobin is present in                         cells.
(iii)
Arteries and veins are joined by a network of                         .
The rhythmic expansion and contraction of the heart is called
The main excretory product in human beings is                         .
Sweat contains water and                         .
(vii)
Kidneys eliminate the waste materials in the liquid form called
(viii) Water reaches great heights in the trees because of suction pull
caused by                        .
SCIENCE
3. Choose the correct option:
In plants, water is transported through
xylem
phloem
(iii)
stomata
root hair
Water absorption through roots can be increased by keeping the
plants
in the shade
in dim light
(iii)
under the fan
covered with a polythene bag
4. Why is transport of materials necessary in a plant or in an animal?
Explain.
5. What will happen if there are no platelets in the blood?
6. What are stomata? Give two functions of stomata.
7. Does transpiration serve any useful function in the plants? Explain.
8. What are the components of blood?
9. Why is blood needed by all the parts of a body?
10. What makes the blood look red?
11. Describe the function of the heart.
12. Why is it necessary to excrete waste products?
13. Draw a diagram of the human excretory system and label the various
parts.
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. Find out about blood groups and their importance.
2. When a person suffers from chest pain, the doctor immediately takes
an ECG. Visit a doctor and get information about ECG. You may even
look up an encyclopaedia or the internet.
Did you know?
There is no substitute for blood. If people lose blood from surgery or injury
or if their bodies cannot produce enough blood, there is only one way to
get it ó through transfusion of blood donated by volunteers. Blood is
usually in short supply. Donating blood does not decrease the strength of
the donors.
Reproduction in Plants
o produce its kind is a
characteristic of all living
organisms. You have already
learnt this in Class VI. The production
of new individuals from their parents is
known as reproduction. But, how do
plants reproduce? There are different
modes of reproduction in plants which
we shall learn in this chapter.
12.1 MODES OF REPRODUCTION
In Class VI you learnt about different
parts of a flowering plant. Try to list the
various parts of a plant and write the
functions of each. Most plants have
roots, stems and leaves. These are called
the vegetative parts of a plant. After a
certain period of growth, most plants
bear flowers. You may have seen the
mango trees flowering in spring. It is
these flowers that give rise to juicy
mango fruit we enjoy in summer. We eat
the fruits and usually discard the seeds.
Seeds germinate and form new plants.
So, what is the function of flowers in
plants? The flowers perform the function
of reproduction in plants. Flowers are
the reproductive parts of a plant. A
flower may have either the male part or
the female part or both male and female
parts.
There are several ways by which
plants produce their offspring. These are
categorised into two types: (i) asexual,
Asexual reproduction
In asexual reproduction new plants are
obtained without production of seeds or
spores.
Vegetative propagation
It is a type of asexual reproduction in
which new plants are produced from
roots, stems, leaves and buds. Since
reproduction is through the vegetative
parts of the plant, it is known as
vegetative propagation.
Activity 12.1
Cut a branch of rose or champa with a
node. This piece of branch is termed a
cutting. Bury the cutting in the soil. A
node is a part of the stem/branch at
Paheli thought that new
plants always grow from seeds.
But, she has never seen the seeds
of sugarcane, potato and rose. She
wants to know how these plants
reproduce.
and (ii) sexual reproduction. In asexual
reproduction plants can give rise to new
plants without seeds, whereas in sexual
reproduction, new plants are obtained
from seeds.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
which a leaf arises (Fig. 12.1). Water the
cutting every day and observe its
growth. Observe and record the number
of days taken for roots to come out and
new leaves to arise. Try the same activity
by growing money plant in a jar of water
and record your observations.
of a potato, each with an eye and bury
them in the soil. Water the pieces
regularly for a few days and observe
their progress. What do you find?
You must have seen flower buds
developing into flowers. Apart from
flower buds, there are buds in the axil
(point of attachment of the leaf at the
node) of leaves which develop into
shoots. These buds are called vegetative
buds (Fig. 12.2). A bud consists of a
short stem around which immature
overlapping leaves are folded. The
vegetative buds can also give rise to new
plants.
Activity 12.2
Take a fresh potato. Observe the scars
on it with the help of a magnifying glass.
You may find bud(s) in them. These scars
are also called “eyes”. Cut a few pieces
Fig. 12.1  Stem-cutting of rose
Fig. 12.2  Potato plant sprouting from an ‘eye’
Fig. 12.3  Ginger with new plants sprouting
from it
Likewise you can also grow ginger
(Fig. 12.3) or turmeric.
Bryophyllum (sprout leaf plant) has
buds in the margins of leaves (Fig. 12.4).
If a leaf of this plant falls on a moist
soil, each bud can give rise to a new
plant.
Bud in
the axil
© NCERT
not to be republished
REPRODUCTION IN PLANTS
multiply every few hours if sufficient
nutrients are made available to them.
Remember that yeast is a single-celled
organism. Let us see how they reproduce?
Activity 12.3
(To be demonstrated by the teacher)
Take a piece of yeast cake or yeast
powder  from a bakery or a chemist shop.
Take a pinch of yeast and place it in a
container with some water. Add a
spoonful of sugar and shake to dissolve
it. Keep it in the warm part of a room.
After an hour, put a drop of this liquid
on a glass slide and observe under a
microscope. What do you observe? You
may see the formation of new yeast cells
(Fig. 12.5).
The roots of some plants can also
give rise to new plants. Sweet potato and
dahlia are examples.
Plants such as cacti produce new
plants when their parts get detached
from the main plant body. Each
detached part can grow into a new
plant.
Fig. 12.5  Reproduction in yeast by budding
Fig. 12.4  Leaf of Bryophyllum with buds in the
margin
Boojho wants to know if
there is any advantage of
vegetative propagation.
Plants produced by vegetative
propagation take less time to grow and
bear flowers and fruits earlier than those
produced from seeds. The new plants
are exact copies of the parent plant, as
they are produced from a single parent.
Later in this chapter you will learn
that plants produced by sexual
reproduction have characters of both the
parents. Plants produce seeds as a result
of sexual reproduction.
Budding
You have already learnt about the tiny
organisms like yeast can be seen only
under a microscope. These grow and
The small bulb-like projection
coming out from the yeast cell is called
a bud. The bud gradually grows and
gets detached from the parent cell and
forms a new yeast cell. The new yeast
cell grows, matures and produces more
yeast cells. Sometimes, another  bud
arises from the bud forming a chain of
buds. If this process continues, a large
number of yeast cells are produced in a
short time.
New plants
Yeast cell
Developing bud
Chain of buds
New bud
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
like mesh on the bread. When spores
are released they keep floating in the
air. As they are very light they can cover
long distances.
The spores are asexual reproductive
bodies. Each spore is covered by a
hard protective coat to withstand
unfavourable conditions such as high
temperature and low humidity. So
they can survive for a long time. Under
favourable conditions, a spore
germinates and develops into a new
individual. Plants such as moss and
ferns (Fig. 12.8) also reproduce by
means of spores.
12.2 SEXUAL REPRODUCTION
You have learnt earlier the structure of
a flower. You know that the flowers are
the reproductive parts of a plant. The
stamens are the male reproductive part
and the pistil is the female reproductive
part (Fig. 12.9).
Fragmentation
You might have seen slimy green
patches in ponds, or in other stagnant
water bodies. These are the algae. When
water and nutrients are available algae
grow and multiply rapidly by
fragmentation. An alga breaks up into
two or more fragments. These fragments
or pieces grow into new individuals
(Fig. 12.6). This process continues and
they cover a large area in a short period
of time.
Fig. 12.7  Reproduction through spore formation
in fungus
Spore formation
In Chapter 1 you learnt that the fungi
on a bread piece grow from spores which
are present in the air. Repeat Activity
1.2. Observe the spores in the cotton-
Fig. 12.8  Reproduction through spore formation
in fern
Hypha
Sporangium
Spores
(Spore forming
bodies)
Fig. 12.6  Fragmentation in spirogyra (an alga)
© NCERT
not to be republished
REPRODUCTION IN PLANTS
Boojho wants to know how the
male gamete in the pollen grain
reaches the female gamete present
in the ovule.
Pollination
Generally pollen grains have a tough
protective coat which prevents them
from drying up. Since pollen grains are
light, they can be carried by wind or
Activity 12.4
Take a mustard/china rose/petunia
flower and separate its reproductive
parts. Study the various parts of a
stamen and pistil.
The flowers which contain either
only the pistil or only the stamens are
called unisexual flowers. The flowers
which contain both stamens and pistil
are called bisexual flowers. Corn,
papaya and cucumber produce
unisexual flowers, whereas mustard,
rose and petunia have bisexual flowers.
Fig. 12.10  Pollination in flower
Fig. 12.9  Reproductive parts
(b) Pistil
Stigma
Style
Ovary
Anther
Filament
(a) Stamen
Ovule
(a) Self-pollination
(b)  Cross-pollination
Anther
Stigma
Stigma
Both the male and the female unisexual
flowers may be present in the same plant
or in different plants.
Could you identify the anther and
the filament of a stamen? [Fig. 12.9 (a)].
Anther contains pollen grains which
produce male gametes. A pistil consists
of stigma, style and ovary. The ovary
contains one or more ovules. The
female gamete or the egg is formed in
an ovule [Fig. 12.9 (b)]. In sexual
reproduction a male and a female
gamete fuse to form a zygote.
Pollens
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
water. Insects visit flowers and carry
away pollen on their bodies. Some of
the pollen lands on the stigma of a flower
of the same kind. The transfer of pollen
from the anther to the stigma of a flower
is called pollination.  If the pollen lands
on the stigma of the same flower it is
called self-pollination. When the pollen
of a flower lands on the stigma of another
flower of the same plant, or that of a
different plant of the same kind, it is
called cross-pollination [Fig. 12.10 (a)
and (b)].
Fertilisation
The cell which results after fusion of
the gametes is called a zygote. The
process of fusion of male and female
Boojho wants to know why
flowers are generally so colourful
and fragrant. Is it to attract
insects?
Fig. 12.12  (a) Section of an apple, (b) Almond
gametes (to form a zygote) is called
fertilisation (Fig. 12.11). The zygote
develops into an embryo.
12.3 FRUITS AND SEED FORMATION
After fertilisation, the ovary grows into
a fruit and other parts of the flower fall
off. The fruit is the ripened ovary. The
seeds develop from the ovules. The seed
contains an embryo enclosed in a
protective seed coat.
Some fruits are fleshy and juicy such
as mango, apple and orange. Some fruits
are hard like almonds and walnuts
[Fig. 12.12 (a) and (b)].
12.4 SEED DISPERSAL
In nature same kind of plants grow at
different places. This happens because
seeds are dispersed to different places.
Sometimes after a walk through a forest
or a field or a park, you may have found
seeds or fruits sticking to your clothes.
Fig. 12.11  Fertilisation (Zygote formation)
Pollen grain (germinating)
Zygote
formation
Pollen tube
© NCERT
not to be republished
REPRODUCTION IN PLANTS
Did you try to observe how these seeds
were clinging to your clothes?
What do you think will happen if all
seeds of a plant were to fall at the same
place and grow there? There would be
severe competition for sunlight, water,
minerals and space. As a result the seeds
would not grow into healthy plants.
Plants benefit by seed dispersal. It
prevents competition between the plant
and its own seedlings for sunlight, water
and minerals. It also enables the plants
to invade new habitats for wider
distribution.
Seeds and fruits of plants are carried
away by wind, water and animals.
Winged seeds such as those of
drumstick and maple [Fig. 12.13 (a) and
(b)], light seeds of grasses or hairy seeds
of aak (Madar) and hairy fruit of
sunflower [Fig. 12.14 (a), (b)], get blown
off with the wind to far away places.
Some seeds are dispersed by water. These
fruits or seeds usually develop floating
ability in the form of spongy or fibrous
outer coat as in coconut. Some seeds
are dispersed by animals, especially
spiny seeds with hooks which get
attached to the bodies of animals and
are carried to distant places. Examples
are Xanthium (Fig. 12.15) and Urena.
Some seeds are dispersed when the
fruits burst with sudden jerks. The seeds
are scattered far from the parent plant.
This happens in the case of castor and
balsam.
Fig. 12.13  Seeds of (a) drumstick and
(b) maple
Fig. 12.15  Xanthium
Fig. 12.14  (a) The hairy fruit of sunflower and
(b) hairy seed of madar (aak)
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
What you have learnt
All organisms multiply or reproduce their own kind.
In plants there are two modes of reproduction, asexual and sexual.
There are several methods of asexual reproduction such as
fragmentation, budding, spore formation and vegetative propagation.
Sexual reproduction involves the fusion of male and female gametes.
In vegetative propagation new plants are produced from different
vegetative parts such as leaves, stems and roots.
Flower is the reproductive part of a plant.
A flower may be unisexual with either the male or the female reproductive
parts.
A bisexual flower has both the male and the female reproductive parts.
The male gametes are found inside the pollen grains and female gametes
are found in the ovule.
Pollination is the process of transfer of pollen grains from the anther of
one flower to the stigma of the same or another flower.
Pollination is of two types, self-pollination and cross-pollination. In
self-pollination, pollen grains are transferred from the anther to the
stigma of the same flower. In cross-pollination, pollen grains are
transferred from the anther of one flower to the stigma of another flower
of the same kind.
Pollination takes place in plants with the help of wind, water and insects.
The fusion of male and female gametes is called fertilisation.
Fertilised egg is called zygote. Zygote develops into an embryo.
Fruit is the mature ovary whereas ovule develops into a seed, which
contains the developing embryo.
Seed dispersal is aided by wind, water and animals.
Seed dispersal helps the plants to (i) prevent overcrowding, (ii) avoid
competition for sunlight, water and minerals and (iii) invade new habitats.
Keywords
Asexual reproduction
Budding
Embryo
Fertilisation
Fragmentation
Gametes
Hypha
Ovule
Pollen grain
Pollen tube
Pollination
Seed dispersal
Sexual reproduction
Spore
Sporangium
Vegetative propagation
Zygote
© NCERT
not to be republished
REPRODUCTION IN PLANTS
Exercises
1. Fill in the blanks:
Production of new individuals from the vegetative part of parent is
called_____________.
A flower may have either male or female reproductive parts. Such
a flower is called_____________.
The transfer of pollen grains from the anther to the stigma of the
same or of another flower of the same kind is known as
_____________.
The fusion of male and female gametes is termed as _____________.
Seed dispersal takes place by means of _____________,
_____________ and _____________.
2. Describe the different methods of asexual reproduction. Give examples.
3. Explain what you understand by sexual reproduction.
4. State the main difference between asexual and sexual reproduction.
5. Sketch the reproductive parts of a flower.
6. Explain the difference between self-pollination and cross-pollination.
7. How does the process of fertilisation take place in flowers?
8. Describe the various ways by which seeds are dispersed.
9. Match items in Column I with those in Column II:
Column I
Column II
Maple
Spirogyra
Fragmentation
(iii)
Yeast
Wings
Bread mould
Spores
Potato
10. Tick (9) the correct answer:
The reproductive part of a plant is the
(ii) stem
(iii) root
(iv) flower
The process of fusion of the male and the female gametes is called
fertilisation
pollination
(iii)
reproduction
seed formation
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
S. No.
Name of fruit- Agent through  which
Part of or seed which
bearing plant
seeds are dispersed
helps in dispersal
Mature ovary forms the
stamen
(iii)
pistil
fruit
A spore producing plant is
bread mould
(iii)
potato
ginger
Bryophyllum can reproduce by its
leaves
(iii)
roots
flower
Extended Learning—Activities and Projects
1. Make your own cactus garden by collecting pieces cut from different
kinds of cacti. Grow the variety in one single flat container or in
separate pots.
2. Visit a fruit market and collect as many local fruits as possible. If many
fruits are not available, you can collect tomatoes and cucumbers (these
are fruits, though we use them as vegetables). Make drawings of the
different fruits. Split the fruits and examine the seeds within. Look for
any special characteristics in the fruits and their seeds. If possible visit
the website:
www.saps.plantsci.cam.ac.uk/fscfruit/dispersal.pdf
You can visit a library also to learn about this.
3. Think of ten different fruit-bearing plants. Remember that many
vegetables are also fruits of the plants. Discuss with your teacher,
parents, farmers, fruit growers and agricultural experts (if available
nearby) and find out the manner of their dispersal. Present your data
in the form of a table as shown below:
4. Suppose there is one member of a particular kind of organism in a
culture dish, which doubles itself in one hour through asexual
reproduction. Work out the number of members of that kind of organism
which will be present in the culture dish after ten hours. Such a colony
of individuals arising from one parent is called a “clone”.
You can read more on the following website:
www.edumedia-sciences.com/a437_l2-blog-call.html
© NCERT
not to be republished
Motion and Time
n Class VI, you learnt about different
types of motions. You learnt that a
motion could be along a straight line,
it could be circular or periodic. Can you
recall these three types of motions?
Table 13.1 gives some common
examples of motions. Identify the type
of motion in each case.
13.1 SLOW OR FAST
We know that some vehicles move faster
than others. Even the same vehicle may
move faster or slower at different times.
Make a list of ten objects moving along
a straight path. Group the motion of
these objects as slow and fast. How did
you decide which object is moving slow
and which one is moving fast?
If vehicles are moving on a road in
the same direction, we can easily tell
which one of them is moving faster than
the other.
Activity 13.1
Look at Fig. 13.1. It shows the position
of some vehicles moving on a road in
the same direction at some instant of
time. Now look at Fig. 13.2. It shows the
position of the same vehicles after some
time. From your observation of the two
figures, answer the following questions:
Which vehicle is moving the fastest
of all? Which one of them is moving the
slowest of all?
The distance moved by objects in a
given interval of time can help us to
decide which one is faster or slower. For
example, imagine that you have gone to
see off your friend at the bus stand.
Suppose you start pedalling your bicycle
at the same time as the bus begins to
move. The distance covered by you after
Table 13.1 Some examples of
different types of motion
Example of
Type of motion
motion
Along a straight
line/circular/
periodic
Soldiers in a
march past
Bullock cart
moving on a
straight road
Hands of an
athlete in a race
Pedal of a bicycle
in motion
Motion of the earth
around the sun
Motion of a swing
Motion  of a
pendulum
It is common experience that the
motion of some objects is slow while that
of some others is fast.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
5 minutes would be much smaller than
that covered by the bus. Would you say
that the bus is moving faster than the
bicycle?
We often say that the faster vehicle
has a higher speed.  In a 100-metre race
it is easy to decide whose speed
is the highest. One who takes
shortest time to cover the
distance of 100 metres has the
highest speed.
13.2 SPEED
You are probably familiar with
the word speed. In the
examples given above, a higher
speed seems to indicate that a
given distance has been
covered in a shorter time, or a
larger distance covered in a
given time.
The most convenient way to
find out which of the two or
more objects is moving faster
is to compare the distances
moved by them in a unit time.
Thus, if we know the distance
covered by two buses in one
hour, we can tell which one is
slower. We call the distance
covered by an object in a unit
time as the speed of the object.
When we say that a car is
moving with a speed of 50
kilometres per hour, it implies
that it will cover a distance of
Fig. 13.2  Position of vehicles shown in
Fig. 13.1 after some time
Fig. 13.1  Vehicles moving in the same
direction on a road
50 kilometres in one hour. However, a
car seldom moves with a constant speed
for one hour. In fact, it starts moving
slowly and then picks up speed. So,
when we say that the car has a speed of
50 kilometres per hour, we usually
consider only the total distance covered
by it in one hour. We do not bother
whether the car has been moving with
© NCERT
not to be republished
MOTION AND TIME
We can determine the speed of a given
object once we can measure the time
taken by it to cover a certain distance.
In Class VI you learnt how to measure
distances. But, how do we measure
time? Let us find out.
13.3 MEASUREMENT OF TIME
If you did not have a clock, how would
you decide what time of the day it is?
Have you ever wondered how our elders
could tell the approximate time of the
day by just looking at shadows?
How do we measure time interval of
a month? A year?
Our ancestors noticed that many
events in nature repeat themselves after
definite intervals of time. For example,
they found that the sun rises everyday
in the morning. The time between one
sunrise and the next was called a day.
Similarly, a month was measured from
one new moon to the next. A year was
fixed as the time taken by the earth to
complete one revolution of the sun.
Often we need to measure intervals
of time which are much shorter than a
day. Clocks or watches are perhaps the
most common time measuring devices.
Have you ever wondered how clocks and
watches measure time?
The working of clocks is rather
complex. But all of them make use of
some periodic motion. One of the most
well-known periodic motions is that of
a simple pendulum.
In everyday life we seldom find objects
moving with a constant speed over long
distances or for long durations of time.
If the speed of an object moving along
a straight line keeps changing, its
motion is said to be non-uniform. On
the other hand, an object moving along
a straight line with a constant speed
is said to be in uniform motion. In
this case, the average speed is the
same as the actual speed.
Fig. 13.3  Some common clocks
(b) Table clock
(c) Digital clock
(a) Wall clock
a constant speed or not during that
hour. The speed calculated here is
actually the average speed of the car. In
this book we shall use the term speed
for average speed. So, for us the speed
is the total distance covered divided
by the total time taken. Thus,
Total distance covered
Speed =
Total time taken
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
A simple pendulum consists of a
small metallic ball or a piece of stone
suspended from a rigid stand by a
thread [Fig. 13.4 (a)]. The metallic ball
is called the bob of the pendulum.
Fig. 13.4 (a) shows the pendulum at
rest in its mean position. When the bob
of the pendulum is released after taking
it slightly to one side, it begins to move
to and fro [Fig. 13.4 (b)]. The to and fro
motion of a simple pendulum is an
example of a periodic or an oscillatory
motion.
The pendulum is said to have
completed one oscillation when its bob,
starting from its mean position O, moves
To set the pendulum in motion,
gently hold the bob and move it slightly
to one side. Make sure that the string
attached to the bob is taut while you
displace it. Now release the bob from its
displaced position. Remember that the
bob is not to be pushed when it is
released. Note the time on the clock
when the bob is at its mean position.
Instead of the mean position you may
note the time when the bob is at one of
its extreme positions. Measure the time
the pendulum takes to complete 20
oscillations. Record your observations
Fig. 13.4  (b) Different
positions of the bob of an
oscillating simple pendulum
Fig. 13.4  (a) A simple
pendulum
to A, to B and back to O. The
pendulum also completes one
oscillation when its bob moves
from one extreme position A to the
other extreme position B and
comes back to A. The time taken
by the pendulum to complete one
oscillation is called its time
period.
Activity 13.2
Set up a simple pendulum as
shown in Fig. 13.4 (a) with a
thread or string of length nearly
one metre. Switch off any fans
nearby. Let the bob of the
pendulum come to rest at its
mean position. Mark the mean
position of the bob on the floor
below it or on the wall behind it.
To measure the time period of
the pendulum we will need
a stopwatch. However, if a
stopwatch is not available, a table
clock or a wristwatch can be used.
© NCERT
not to be republished
MOTION AND TIME
Table 13.2 Time period of a simple
pendulum
Length of the string = 100 cm
S.No. Time taken for 20
Time period
oscillations
2.1 s
cells. These clocks are called quartz
clocks. The time measured by quartz
clocks is much more accurate than that
by the clocks available earlier.
Units of time and speed
The basic unit of time is a second. Its
symbol is s. Larger units of time are
minutes (min) and hours (h). You
already know how these units are related
to one another.
What would be the basic unit of
speed?
Since the speed is distance/time, the
basic unit of speed is m/s. Of course, it
could also be expressed in other units
such as m/min or km/h.
You must remember that the
symbols of all units are written in
singular. For example, we write 50 km
and not 50 kms, or 8 cm and not 8 cms.
Boojho is wondering how many
seconds there are in a day and how
many hours in a year. Can you help
in Table 13.2. The first observation
shown is just a sample. Your
observations could be different from
this. Repeat this activity a few times and
record your observations. By dividing
the time taken for 20 oscillations by 20,
get the time taken for one oscillation, or
the time period of the pendulum.
Is the time period of your pendulum
nearly the same in all cases?
Note that a slight change in the initial
displacement does not affect the time
period of your pendulum.
Nowadays most clocks or watches
have an electric circuit with one or more
There is an interesting story about the discovery that the time period of a given
pendulum is constant. You might have heard the name of famous scientist
Galileo Galilie (A.D. 1564 –1642). It is said that once Galileo was sitting in a
church. He noticed that a lamp suspended from the ceiling with a chain was
moving slowly from one side to the other. He was surprised to find that his
pulse beat the same number of times during the interval in which the lamp
completed one oscillation. Galileo experimented with various pendulums to
verify his observation. He found that a pendulum of a given length takes always
the same time to complete one oscillation. This observation led to the
development of pendulum clocks. Winding clocks and wristwatches were
refinements of the pendulum clocks.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Different units of time are used
depending on the need.  For example, it
is convenient to express your age in
years rather than in days or hours.
Similarly, it will not be wise to express
in years the time taken by you to cover
the distance between your home and
your school.
How small or large is a time interval
of one second? The time taken in saying
aloud “two thousand and one” is nearby
one second. Verify it by counting aloud
from "two thousand and one" to "two
thousand and ten". The pulse of a
normal healthy adult at rest beats about
72 times in a minute that is about 12
times in 10 seconds.  This rate may be
slightly higher for children.
Paheli wondered how time was
measured when pendulum
clocks were not available.
Many time measuring devices were
used in different parts of the world before
the pendulum clocks became popular.
Sundials, water clocks and sand clocks
are some examples of such devices.
Different designs of these devices were
developed in different parts of the world
(Fig. 13.5).
13.4 MEASURING SPEED
Having learnt how to measure time and
distance, you can calculate the speed of
an object. Let us find the speed of a ball
moving along the ground.
Activity 13.3
Draw a straight line on the ground with
chalk powder or lime and ask one of
your friends to stand 1 to 2 m away from
it. Let your friend gently roll a ball along
the ground in a direction perpendicular
to the line. Note the time at the moment
the ball crosses the line and also when
it comes to rest (Fig. 13.6). How much
time does the ball take to come to rest?
The smallest time interval that can be measured with commonly available
clocks and watches is one second. However, now special clocks are available
that can measure time intervals smaller than a second.  Some of these clocks
can measure time intervals as small as one millionth or even one billionth of a
second. You might have heard the terms like microsecond and nanosecond.
One microsecond is one millionth of a second. A nanosecond is one billionth
of a second. Clocks that measure such small time intervals are used for scientific
research. The time measuring devices used in sports can measure time intervals
that are one tenth or one hundredth of a second. On the other hand, times of
historical events are stated in terms of centuries or millenniums. The ages of
stars and planet are often expressed in billions of years. Can you imagine the
range of time intervals that we have to deal with?
© NCERT
not to be republished
MOTION AND TIME
Measure the distance between the point
at which the ball crosses the line and
the point where it comes to rest. You
can use a scale or a measuring
tape. Let different groups repeat the
activity. Record the measurements in
Table 13.3. In each case calculate the
speed of the ball.
You may now like to compare your
speed of walking or cycling with that of
your friends. You need to know the
distance of the school from your home
or from some other point. Each one of
you can then measure the time taken
to cover that distance and calculate your
speed. It may be interesting to know who
amongst you is the fastest. Speeds of
some living organisms are given in
Fig. 13.6  Measuring the speed of a ball
(a) Sundial at Jantar Mantar, Delhi
(b) Sand clock
(c) Water clock
Fig. 13.5  Some ancient time-measuring devices
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Table 13.3 Distance moved and time taken by a moving ball
Name of the group
Distance moved by Time taken (s)
Speed = Distance/
the ball (m)
Time taken (m/s)
Boojho wants to know
whether there is any device
that measures the speed.
Table 13.4, in km/h. You can calculate
the speeds in m/s yourself.
Rockets, launching satellites into
earth’s orbit, often attain speeds up to
8 km/s. On the other hand, a tortoise
can move only with a speed of about 8
cm/s. Can you calculate how fast is the
rocket compared with the tortoise?
Once you know the speed of an
object, you can find the distance moved
by it in a given time. All you have to do
is to multiply the speed by time. Thus,
Distance covered = Speed × Time
You can also find the time an object
would take to cover a distance while
moving with a given speed.
You might have seen a meter fitted
on top of a scooter or a motorcycle.
Similarly, meters can be seen on the
dashboards of cars, buses and other
vehicles. Fig. 13.7 shows the dashboard
of a car. Note that one of the meters has
km/h written at one corner. This is
called a speedometer. It records the
Time taken = Distance/Speed
Table 13.4 Fastest speed that some animals can attain
S. No.
Name of the object
Speed in km/h
Speed in m/s
Falcon
Cheetah
Blue fish
40 – 46
Rabbit
Squirrel
Domestic mouse
Human
Giant tortoise
Snail
© NCERT
not to be republished
MOTION AND TIME
speed directly in km/h. There is also
another meter that measures the
distance moved by the vehicle. This
meter is known as an odometer.
While going for a school picnic, Paheli
decided to note the reading on the
odometer of the bus after every
30 minutes till the end of the journey.
Later on she recorded her readings in
Table 13.5.
Can you tell how far was the picnic
spot from the school? Can you calculate
the speed of the bus? Looking at the
Table, Boojho teased Paheli whether she
can tell how far they would have
travelled till 9:45 AM. Paheli had no
answer to this question. They went to
their teacher. She told them that one
way to solve this problem is to plot a
distance-time graph. Let us find out how
such a graph is plotted.
Table 13.5 Odometer reading at
different times of the journey
Odometer
Distance from
reading
the starting
point
8:00 AM
36540 km
8:30 AM
36560 km
20 km
9:00 AM
36580 km
40 km
9:30 AM
36600 km
60 km
10:00 AM
36620 km
80 km
13.5 DISTANCE-TIME GRAPH
You might have seen that newspapers,
magazines, etc., present information in
various forms of graphs to make it
Fig. 13.8  A bar graph showing runs scored by
a team in each over
interesting. The type of graph shown in
Fig. 13.8 is known as a bar graph.
Another type of graphical representation
is a pie chart (Fig. 13.9). The graph
shown in Fig. 13.10 is an example of a
line graph. The distance-time graph is a
line graph.  Let us learn to make such a
graph.
Fig. 13.7  The dashboard of a car
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Table 13.6 The motion of a car
S. No.
Distance
1 min
2 min
3 min
4 min
5 min
Fig. 13.10  A line graph showing change in
weight of a man with age
Fig. 13.9  A pie chart showing composition
of air
Fig. 13.11  x-axis and y-axis on a graph paper
Take a sheet of graph paper. Draw
two lines perpendicular to each other
on it, as shown in Fig. 13.11. Mark the
horizontal line as XOX'. It is known as
the x-axis. Similarly mark the vertical
line YOY'. It is called the y-axis. The point
of intersection of XOX' and YOY' is
known as the origin O. The two
quantities between which the graph is
drawn are shown along these two axes.
We show the positive values on the
x-axis along OX. Similarly, positive
values on the y-axis are shown along
OY. In this chapter we shall consider
only the positive values of quantities.
Therefore, we shall use only the shaded
part of the graph shown in Fig. 13.11.
Boojho and Paheli found out the
distance travelled by a car and the time
taken by it to cover that distance. Their
data is shown in Table 13.6.
Weight (in kg)
Age (in year)
You can make the graph by following
the steps given below:
Draw two perpendicular lines to
represent the two axes and mark
them as OX and OY as in Fig. 13.11.
Decide the quantity to be shown
along the x-axis and that to be
shown along the y-axis. In this case
Other gases
Oxygen
Nitrogen
© NCERT
not to be republished
MOTION AND TIME
we show the time along the x-axis
and the distance along the y-axis.
Choose a scale to represent the
distance and another to represent
the time on the graph. For the motion
of the car scales could be
Time: 1 min = 1 cm
Distance: 1 km = 1 cm
Mark values for the time and the
distance on the respective axes
according to the scale you have
chosen. For the motion of the car
mark the time 1 min, 2 min, … on
the x-axis from the origin O.
Similarly, mark the distance 1 km,
2 km … on the y-axis (Fig. 13.12).
Now you have to mark the points on
the graph paper to represent each
set of values for distance and time.
Observation recorded at S. No. 1
in Table 13.6 shows that at time
0 min the distance moved is also
zero. The point corresponding to this
set of values on the graph will
therefore be the origin itself. After 1
minute, the car has moved a distance
of 1 km. To mark this set of values
look for the point that represents
1 minute on the x-axis. Draw a line
parallel to the y-axis at this point.
Then draw a line parallel to the
x-axis from the point corresponding
to distance 1 km on the y-axis. The
point where these two lines
intersect represents this set of values
on the graph (Fig. 13.12). Similarly,
mark on the graph paper the
points corresponding to different
sets of values.
Fig. 13.13 shows the set of points on
the graph corresponding to positions
of the car at various times.
Join all the points on the graph as
shown in Fig. 13.13. It is a straight
line. This is the distance-time graph
for the motion of the car.
If the distance-time graph is a
straight line, it indicates that the
object is moving with a constant
speed. However, if the speed of the
object keeps changing, the graph can
be of any shape.
Fig. 13.12  Making a graph
Fig. 13.13  Making a graph
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Generally, the choice of scales is not
as simple as in the example given above.
We may have to choose two different scales
to represent the desired quantities on the
x-axis and the y-axis. Let us try to
understand this process with an example.
Let us again consider the motion of
the bus that took Paheli and her friends
to the picnic. The distance covered and
time taken by the bus are shown in
Table 13.5. The total distance covered
by the bus is 80 km. If we decide to
choose a scale 1 km = 1 cm, we shall
have to draw an axis of length 80 cm.
This is not possible on a sheet of paper.
On the other hand, a scale 10 km = 1
cm would require an axis of length only
8 cm. This scale is quite convenient.
However, the graph may cover only a
small part of the graph paper.  Some of
the points to be kept in mind while
choosing the most suitable scale for
drawing a graph are:
the difference between the highest
and the lowest values of each
quantity.
the intermediate values of each
quantity, so that with the scale
chosen it is convenient to mark the
values on the graph, and
to utilise the maximum part of the
paper on which the graph is to be
drawn.
Suppose that we have a graph paper
of size 25 cm × 25 cm. One of the scales
which meets the above conditions and
can accommodate the data of Table 13.5
could be
Distance: 5 km = 1 cm, and
Time: 6 min = 1 cm
Can you now draw the distance-time
graph for the motion of the bus? Is the
graph drawn by you similar to that
shown in Fig. 13.13?
Distance-time graphs provide a
variety of information about the motion
Fig. 13.14  Distance-time graph of the bus
© NCERT
not to be republished
MOTION AND TIME
when compared to the data presented
by a table. For example, Table 13.5 gives
information about the distance moved
by the bus only at some definite time
intervals. On the other hand, from the
distance-time graph we can find the
distance moved by the bus at any
instant of time. Suppose we want to
know how much distance the bus had
travelled at 8:15 AM. We mark the point
corresponding to the time (8:15 AM) on
the x-axis. Suppose this point is A.  Next
we draw a line perpendicular to the
x-axis (or parallel to the y-axis) at
point A. We then mark the point, T, on
the graph at which this perpendicular
line intersects it (Fig. 13.14). Next, we
draw a line through the point T parallel
to the x-axis. This intersects the y-axis
at the point B. The distance
corresponding to the point B on the
y-axis, OB, gives us the distance in km
covered by the bus at 8:15 AM. How
much is this distance in km? Can you
now help Paheli to find the distance
moved by the bus at 9:45 AM? Can you
also find the speed of the bus from its
distance-time graph?
Bar graph
Graphs
Non-uniform motion
Keywords
Oscillation
Simple pendulum
Speed
Time period
Uniform motion
Unit of time
What you have Learnt
The distance moved by an object in a unit time is called its speed.
Speed of objects help us to decide which one is moving faster than the
other.
The speed of an object is the distance travelled divided by the time taken
to cover that distance. Its basic unit is metre per second (m/s).
Periodic events are used for the measurement of time. Periodic motion of
a pendulum has been used to make clocks and watches.
Motion of objects can be presented in pictorial form by their
distance-time graphs.
The distance-time graph for the motion of an object moving with a constant
speed is a straight line.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Exercises
1. Classify the following as motion along a straight line, circular or
oscillatory motion:
Motion of your hands while running.
Motion of a horse pulling a cart on a straight road.
(iii)
Motion of a child in a merry-go-round.
Motion of a child on a see-saw.
Motion of the hammer of an electric bell.
Motion of a train on a straight bridge.
2. Which of the following are not correct?
The basic unit of time is second.
Every object moves with a constant speed.
(iii)
Distances between two cities are measured in kilometres.
The time period of a given pendulum is not constant.
The speed of a train is expressed in m/h.
3. A simple pendulum takes 32 s to complete 20 oscillations. What is the
time period of the pendulum?
4. The distance between two stations is 240 km. A train takes 4 hours to
cover this distance. Calculate the speed of the train.
5. The odometer of a car reads 57321.0 km when the clock shows the time
08:30 AM. What is the distance moved by the car, if at 08:50 AM, the
odometer reading has changed to 57336.0 km? Calculate the speed of
the car in km/min during this time. Express the speed in km/h also.
6. Salma takes 15 minutes from her house to reach her school on a
bicycle. If the bicycle has a speed of 2 m/s, calculate the distance
between her house and the school.
7. Show the shape of the distance-time graph for the motion in the
following cases:
A car moving with a constant speed.
A car parked on a side road.
8. Which of the following relations is correct?
Speed = Distance × Time
Speed =
Distance
(iii)
Speed =
Distance
Speed =
Distance
© NCERT
not to be republished
MOTION AND TIME
9. The basic unit of speed is:
km/min
m/min
(iii)
10. A car moves with a speed of 40 km/h for 15 minutes and then with a
speed of 60 km/h for the next 15 minutes. The total distance covered by
the car is:
100 km
25 km
(iii)
15 km
10 km
11. Suppose the two photographs, shown in Fig. 13.1 and Fig. 13.2, had
been taken at an interval of 10 seconds. If a distance of 100 metres is
shown by 1 cm in these photographs, calculate the speed of the blue car.
12. Fig. 13.15 shows the distance-time graph for the motion of two vehicles A
and B. Which one of them is moving faster?
Fig. 13.15 Distance-time graph for the motion of two cars
13. Which of the following distance-time graphs shows a truck moving with
speed which is not constant?
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Extend Learning — Activities and Projects
1. You can make your own sundial and use it to mark the time of the day
at your place. First of all find the latitude of your city with the help of an
atlas. Cut out a triangular piece of a cardboard such that its one angle
is equal to the latitude of your place and the angle opposite to it is a
right angle. Fix this piece, called gnomon, vertically along a diameter of
a circular board a shown in Fig. 13.16. One way to fix the gnomon could
be to make a groove along a diameter on the circular board.
Next, select an open space, which receives sunlight for most of the day.
Mark a line on the ground along the North-South direction. Place the
sundial in the sun as shown in Fig. 13.16.  Mark the position of the tip
of the shadow of the gnomon on the circular board as early in the day
as possible, say 8:00 AM. Mark the position of the tip of the shadow
every hour throughout the day. Draw lines to connect each point marked
by you with the centre of the base of the gnomon as shown in Fig. 13.16.
Extend the lines on the circular board up to its periphery. You can use
this sundial to read the time of the day at your place. Remember that
the gnomon should always be placed in the North-South direction as
shown in Fig. 13.16.
2. Collect information about time-measuring devices that were used in the
Fig. 13.16
(iii)
© NCERT
not to be republished
MOTION AND TIME
Did you know?
The time-keeping services in India are provided by the National Physical
Laboratory, New Delhi. The clock they use can measure time intervals
with an accuracy of one-millionth of a second. The most accurate clock
in the world has been developed by the National Institute of Standards
and Technology in the U.S.A. This clock will lose or gain one second after
running for 20 million years.
ancient times in different parts of the world. Prepare a brief write up on
each one of them. The write up may include the name of the device, the
place of its origin, the period when it was used, the unit in which the time
was measured by it and a drawing or a photograph of the device, if
available.
3. Make a model of a sand clock which can measure a time interval of 2
minutes (Fig. 13.17).
4. You can perform an interesting activity when you visit a park to ride a
swing. You will require a watch. Make the swing oscillate without
anyone sitting on it. Find its time period in the same way as you did for
the pendulum. Make sure that there are no jerks in the motion of the
swing. Ask one of your friends to sit on the swing. Push
it once and let it swing naturally.  Again measure its time period.
Repeat the activity with different persons sitting on the swing. Compare
the time period of the swing measured in different cases. What
conclusions do you draw from this activity?
Fig. 13.17
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Electric Current and its
Effects
ou might have tried the game
‘How steady is your hand?’
suggested in Chapter 12 of
Class VI. If not, you may try it out now.
Paheli and Boojho had also set up the
game by connecting an electric circuit
as suggested in Class VI. They had lots
of fun trying it out with their families
and friends. They enjoyed it so much
that they decided to suggest it to a
cousin of theirs who stayed in a
different town. So, Paheli made a neat
drawing showing how the various
electric components were to be
connected (Fig.14.1).
Fig. 14.1  Setup to check how steady
your hand is
circuit
conveniently? It made Boojho wonder if
there was an easier way to represent
these electric components.
14.1 SYMBOLS OF ELECTRIC
COMPONENTS
Some common electric components can
be represented by symbols. In Table 14.1,
some electric components and their
symbols are shown. You may come
across different symbols for these
components in different books. However,
in this book, we shall be using the
symbols shown here.
Look at the symbols carefully. In the
symbol for the electric cell, notice that
there is a longer line and a shorter but
thicker parallel line. Do you recall that
an electric cell has a positive terminal
and a negative terminal? In the symbol
of the electric cell, the longer line
represents the positive terminal and the
thicker, shorter line represents the
negative terminal.
For a switch the ‘ON’ position and
the ‘OFF’ position are represented by the
symbols as shown. The wires used to
connect the various components in a
circuit are represented by lines.
In Table 14.1, a battery and its
symbol are also shown. Do you know
what a battery is? Look at the symbol of
a battery. Can you make out what a
battery could be? For some of the
activities we may need more than one
cell. So, we connect two or more cells
together as shown in Fig.14.2. Notice
ELECTRIC CURRENT AND ITS EFFECTS
Many devices such as torches,
transistors, toys, TV remote controls, use
batteries. However, in some of these
devices the electric cells are not always
placed one after the other as shown in
Fig. 14.2. Sometimes the cells are placed
side by side. Then how are the terminals
of the cells connected? Look carefully
inside the battery compartment of any
device. There is usually a thick wire or
a metal strip connecting the positive
terminal of one cell to the negative
terminal of the next cell (Fig.14.3). In
order to help you to place the cells
correctly in the battery compartment,
‘+’ and ‘–’ symbols are usually printed
there.
How can we connect the cells to
prepare batteries for our activities? You
may make a cell holder, as shown in
Fig.14.4, using a wooden block, two iron
strips and rubber bands. It is necessary
Fig. 14.3  Connecting two cells together to make
a battery
Fig. 14.2  (a) A battery of two cells
(b) A battery of four cells
Table 14.1 Symbols for some
electric circuit components
S.No. Electric component
Symbol
Electric cell
Electric bulb
Switch in ‘ON’ position
Switch in ‘OFF’ position
Battery
that the positive terminal of one cell is
connected to the negative terminal of the
next cell. Such a combination of two or
more cells is called a battery.
SCIENCE
that the rubber bands hold the metal
strips tightly.
You could also buy cell holders from
the market for making batteries of two
or more electric cells. Place the cells in
them properly, such that the positive
terminal of one cell is connected to the
negative terminal of the next cell.
Connect a piece of wire each to the two
metal clips on the cell holder as shown
in Fig.14.5.  Your battery is ready for
The symbol used for representing a
battery is shown in Table.14.1.
Let us now draw a circuit diagram of
an electric circuit using symbols shown
in Table 14.1.
Activity 14.1
Make the electric circuit shown in
Fig. 14.7. You used a similar circuit in
Class VI to make an electric bulb glow.
Do you remember that the bulb glows
only when the switch is in the ‘ON’
position? The bulb glows as soon as
the switch is moved to the ‘ON’
position.
Copy this electric circuit in your
notebook. Make also a circuit diagram
of this circuit using symbols for the
various electric components.
Is your diagram similar to the one
shown in Fig. 14.8?
It is much easier to draw a circuit
diagram using symbols. Therefore, we
generally represent an electric circuit by
its circuit diagram.
Fig. 14.9 shows another circuit
diagram. Is it identical to the circuit
diagram shown in Fig.14.8? In which
way is it different?
Would the bulb glow in this electric
circuit? Recall that the bulb glows only
when the switch is in the ‘ON’ position
and the electric circuit is closed.
Fig. 14.4  A cell holder
Fig. 14.5  Holder for battery of two cells
Paheli and Boojho wonder whether
the batteries used in tractors, trucks
and inverters are also made from cells.
Then why is it called a battery? Can
you help them to find the answer to
this question?
Fig. 14.6  Truck battery and its cutout
ELECTRIC CURRENT AND ITS EFFECTS
electric current passes through it. When
the bulb gets fused, its filament is
broken.
Fig. 14.8  Circuit diagram of electric circuit
shown in Fig. 14.7
Fig. 14.9 Another circuit diagram
If the filament of the bulb is broken,
would the circuit be complete?   Would
the bulb still glow?
You might have noticed that a
glowing electric bulb become warm. Do
you know why?
14.2 HEATING EFFECT OF ELECTRIC
CURRENT
Activity 14.2
Take an electric cell, a bulb, a switch
and connecting wires. Make an electric
circuit as shown in Fig.14.9. This
activity has to be done using only one
cell. Keep the switch in the ‘OFF’
Fig. 14.7  An electric circuit
In the bulb there is a thin wire, called
the filament, which glows when an
CAUTION
Never touch a lighted electric bulb
connected to the mains. It may be very
hot and your hand may get burnt
badly. Do not experiment with the
electric supply from the mains or a
generator or an inverter. You may get
an electric shock, which may be
dangerous. Use only electric cells for
all the activities suggested here.
Notice that the key or switch can
be placed anywhere in the circuit.
When the switch is in the ‘ON’
position, the circuit from the
positive terminal of the battery to
the negative terminal is complete.
The circuit is then said to be closed
and the current flows throughout
the circuit instantly.
When the switch is in the ‘OFF’
position, the circuit is incomplete.
It is said to be open. No current
flows through any part of the
circuit.
SCIENCE
position.  Does the bulb glow? Touch
the bulb. Now move the electric switch
to the ‘ON’ position and let the bulb glow
for a minute or so. Again touch the bulb.
Do you feel any difference? After moving
the switch back to the ‘OFF’ position,
touch the bulb again.
Activity 14.3
Make a circuit as shown in Fig.14.10.
Take about 10 cm long piece of nichrome
wire and tie it between the nails. (You
can get nichrome wire from an electric
repair shop or you can use a piece of
discarded coil of an electric heater.)
Touch the wire. Now switch on the
current in the circuit by moving the
switch to the ‘ON’ position. After a few
The wire gets hot when an electric
current passes through it. This is the
heating effect of the electric current.
Can you think of any electric appliance
where the heating effect of the electric
current is used?  Make a list of such
appliances.
Fig. 14.10
seconds touch the wire. (Do not hold it
for a long time.) Switch off the current.
Touch the wire again after a few
minutes.
You might have seen an electric
room heater or an electric heater used
for cooking. All these contain a coil of
wire. This coil of wire is called an
element. You may have noticed that
when these appliances are switched on
CAUTION
Do not keep the switch in the ‘ON’
position for a long time, otherwise the
cell may become weak very quickly.
Boojho could not see element in an
electric iron.  Paheli told him that
electrical appliances, such as
immersion heaters, hotplates, irons,
geysers, electric kettles, hair dryers,
have elements inside them. Have you
ever seen the element in any
appliance?
Fig. 14.11 Element of electric iron
ELECTRIC CURRENT AND ITS EFFECTS
requirements, the wires of different
materials and different lengths and
thicknesses are used.
The wires used for making electric
circuits do not normally become hot. On
the other hand, the elements of some
electric appliances become so hot that
they are easily visible. The filament of
an electric bulb gets heated to such a
high temperature that it starts glowing.
If a large current passes through a
wire, the wire may become so hot that it
may even melt and break. But is it
possible for a wire to melt and break?
Let us check it out.
Activity 14.4
Make the circuit we used for Activity 14.3
again. However, replace the cell with a
battery of four cells. Also, in place of
Fig. 14.12  Glowing filament of an electric bulb
after connecting to the electric supply,
their elements become red hot and give
out heat.
The amount of heat produced in a
wire depends on its material, length
and thickness. Thus, for different
An electric bulb is used for light but it also gives heat. This is not desirable. This
results in the wastage of electricity. This wastage can be reduced by using
fluorescent tube lights in place of the bulbs. Compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs)
also reduce wastage and can be fixed in the ordinary bulb holders.
Fig. 14.13  Tube lights and CFLs
However, before buying bulbs or tubes, or CFLs, look for the ISI mark of the
Bureau of Indian Standards.  In fact, before buying any electrical appliance,
look for this mark. The ISI mark ensures that the appliance is safe and wastage
of energy is minimum.
SCIENCE
One reason for excessive currents in
electrical circuits is the direct
touching of wires. This may happen if
the insulation on the wires has come
off due to wear and tear.  This may
cause a short circuit. Another reason
for excessive current can be the
connection of many devices to a single
socket.  This may cause overload in
the circuit. You might have read
reports in newspapers about fires
caused by short circuits and
overloads.
Fuses of different kinds are used
for different purposes. Fig. 14.14 shows
fuses used in our houses. Fuses
shown in Fig. 14.15 are generally used
in electrical appliances.
the nichrome wire, tie a thin strand of
steel wool. (The steel wool is commonly
used for cleaning utensils and is
available in grocery shops.) If there are
any fans in the room, switch them off.
Now pass the current through the circuit
for sometime. Observe the strand of steel
wool carefully. Note what happens.  Does
the strand of steel wool melt and break?
Wires made from some special
materials melt quickly and break when
large electric currents are passed
through them. These wires are used for
making electric fuses (Fig.14.14). In all
buildings fuses are inserted in all
electrical circuits. There is a maximum
limit on the current which can safely
flow through a circuit. If by accident the
current exceeds this safe limit, the wires
may become overheated and may cause
fire. If a proper fuse is there in the circuit,
it will blow off and break the circuit. A
fuse is thus a safety device which
prevents damages to electrical circuits
and possible fires.
CAUTION
Never try to investigate an electric fuse
connected to mains circuit on your
own. You may, however, visit an
electric repair shop and compare the
burnt out fuses with the new ones.
Fig. 14.15  Fuses used in electrical appliances
Fig. 14.14  Fuse used in buildings
We observed the heating effect of the
electric current and learnt how we use
it to our advantage. Does the electric
current have other effects also?
ELECTRIC CURRENT AND ITS EFFECTS
Fig. 14.17  Effect of current on a
compass needle
Fig. 14.18  Hans Christian Oersted
(A.D. 1777-1851)
14.3 MAGNETIC EFFECT OF
ELECTRIC CURRENT
Activity 14.5
Take the cardboard tray from inside a
discarded matchbox. Wrap an electric
wire a few times around the cardboard
tray. Place a small compass needle
inside it. Now connect the free ends of
this wire to an electric cell through a
switch as shown in Fig.14.17.
Note the direction in which the
compass needle is pointing. Bring a bar
magnet near the compass needle.
Observe what happens. Now, while
watching the compass needle carefully,
move the switch to the ‘ON’ position.
What do you observe? Does the compass
needle deflect? Move the switch back to
the ‘OFF’ position. Does the compass
needle come back to its initial position?
Repeat the experiment a few times.
What does this experiment indicate?
We know that the needle of a compass
is a tiny magnet, which points in
north-south direction. When we bring
a magnet close to it, the needle gets
deflected. We have also seen that
These days Miniature
circuit breakers (MCBs)
are increasingly being
used in place of fuses.
These are switches which
automatically turn off
when current in a circuit
exceeds the safe limit. You
turn them on and the
circuit is once again
complete. Look for ISI
mark on MCBs also.
Fig. 14.16  Miniature
circuit breaker (MCB)
CAUTION
Always, use proper fuses which have
been specified for particular
applications, carrying ISI mark. Never
use just any wire or strip of metal in
place of a fuse.
SCIENCE
to the terminals of a cell through a switch
as shown in Fig 14.19.
Place some pins on or near the end
of the nail. Now switch on the current.
What happens? Do the pins cling to the
tip of the nail? Switch off the current.
Are the pins still clinging to the end of
the nail?
The coil in the above activity behaves
like a magnet when electric current flows
through it. When the electric current is
switched off, the coil generally loses its
magnetism. Such coils are called
electromagnets. The electromagnets
can be made very strong and can lift
very heavy loads. Do you remember the
crane about which you read in Chapter 13
of Class VI? The end of such a crane
has a strong electromagnet attached to
it. The electromagnets are also used to
separate magnetic material from the
junk. Doctors use tiny electromagnets
to take out small pieces of magnetic
material that have accidentally fallen in
the eye. Many toys also have
electromagnets inside them.
14.5 ELECTRIC BELL
We are quite familiar with an electric bell.
It has an electromagnet in it.  Let us see
how it works.
Fig. 14.20 shows the circuit of an
electric bell. It consists of a coil of wire
wound on an iron piece.  The coil acts
Fig. 14.19  An electromagnet
compass needle gets deflected when the
current flows in a nearby wire. Can you
connect the two observations? When the
current flows through a wire, does the
wire behave like a magnet?
This is what a scientist called Hans
Christian Oersted (Fig. 14.18) also
wondered. He was the first person who
noticed the deflection of compass needle
every time the current was passed
through the wire.
So, when electric current passes
through a wire, it behaves like a magnet.
This is the magnetic effect of the electric
current. In fact, an electric current can
be used to make magnets. Do you find
it too surprising?  Let us try it out.
14.4 ELECTROMAGNET
Activity 14.6
Take around 75 cm long piece of
insulated (plastic or cloth covered or
enamelled) flexible wire and an iron nail,
say about 6–10 cm long. Wind the wire
tightly around the nail in the form of a
coil. Connect the free ends of the wire
Remember not to switch on the
current for more than a few seconds
at a time. The electromagnet weakens
the cell quickly if left connected.
ELECTRIC CURRENT AND ITS EFFECTS
pulls the iron strip. In the process, the
hammer at the end of the strip strikes
the gong of the bell to produce a sound.
However, when the electromagnet pulls
the iron strip, it also breaks the circuit.
The current through the coil stops
flowing. Will the coil remain an
electromagnet?
The coil is no longer an electromagnet.
It no longer attracts the iron strip. The
iron strip comes back to its original
position and touches the contact screw
again. This completes the circuit. The
current flows in the coil and the
hammer strikes the gong again.   This
process is repeated in quick succession.
The hammer strikes the gong every time
the circuit is completed.  This is how
the bell rings.
Keywords
Battery
Electric components
Circuit diagram
Electric bell
Electromagnet
Heating effect of current
Magnetic effect of current
What you have learnt
It is convenient to represent electric components by symbols. Using these,
an electric circuit can be represented by a circuit diagram.
When an electric current flows through a wire, the wire gets heated. It is
the heating effect of current. This effect has many applications.
Wires made from some special materials melt quickly and break when
large electric currents are passed through them. These materials are
used for making electric fuses which prevent fires and damage to electric
appliances.
When an electric current flows through a wire, it behaves like a magnet.
A current carrying coil of an insulated wire wrapped around a piece of
iron is called an electromagnet.
Electromagnets are used in many devices.
as an electromagnet. An iron strip with
a hammer at one end is kept close to
the electromagnet. There is a contact
screw near the iron strip. When the iron
strip is in contact with the screw, the
current flows through the coil which
becomes an electromagnet. It, then,
Fig. 14. 20  Circuit of an electric bell
SCIENCE
Exercises
1. Draw in your notebook the symbols to represent the following
components of electrical circuits: connecting wires, switch in the ‘OFF’
position, bulb, cell, switch in the ‘ON’ position, and battery
2. Draw the circuit diagram to represent the circuit shown in Fig.14.21.
Fig. 14.21
3. Fig.14.22 shows four cells fixed on a board. Draw lines to indicate how
you will connect their terminals with wires to make a battery of four
cells.
Fig. 14.22
4. The bulb in the circuit shown in Fig.14.23 does not glow. Can you
identify the problem? Make necessary changes in the circuit to make
the bulb glow.
Fig. 14.23
5. Name any two effects of electric current.
ELECTRIC CURRENT AND ITS EFFECTS
6. When the current is switched on through a wire, a compass needle kept
nearby gets deflected from its north-south position. Explain.
7. Will the compass needle show deflection when the switch in the circuit
shown by Fig.14.24 is closed?
Fig. 14.24
8. Fill in the blanks:
Longer line in the symbol for a cell represents its                     terminal.
The combination of two or more cells is called a                        .
When current is switched ‘on’ in a room heater, it                        .
The safety device based on the heating effect of electric current is
called a                         .
9. Mark ‘T’ if the statement is true and ‘F’ if it is false:
To make a battery of two cells, the negative terminal of one cell is
connected to the negative terminal of the other cell. (T/F)
When the electric current through the fuse exceeds a certain limit,
the fuse wire melts and breaks. (T/F)
An electromagnet does not attract a piece of iron. (T/F)
An electric bell has an electromagnet. (T/F)
10. Do you think an electromagnet can be used for separating plastic bags
from a garbage heap? Explain.
11. An electrician is carrying out some repairs in your house.  He wants to
replace a fuse by a piece of wire.  Would you agree? Give reasons for
your response.
12. Zubeda made an electric circuit using a cell holder shown in Fig. 14.4,
a switch and a bulb. When she put the switch in the ‘ON’ position, the
bulb did not glow. Help Zubeda in identifying the possible defects in the
circuit.
SCIENCE
13. In the circuit shown in Fig. 14.25
Fig. 14.25
Would any of the bulb glow when the switch is in the ‘OFF’
position?
What will be the order in which the bulbs A, B and C will glow
when the switch is moved to the ‘ON’ position?
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. Set up the circuit shown in Fig. 14.17 again. Move the key to ‘ON’
position and watch carefully in which direction the compass needle
gets deflected. Switch ‘OFF’ the current. Now keeping rest of the circuit
intact, reverse the connections at the terminal of the cell. Again switch
‘on’ the current. Note the direction in which the needle gets deflected.
Think of an explanation.
2. Make four electromagnets with 20, 40, 60 and 80 turns. Connect them
one by one to a battery of 2 cells. Bring the electromagnet near a box of
pins. Count the number of pins attracted by it. Compare the strengths
of the electromagnets.
Paheli and Boojho saw a magic trick sometime back. The magician placed
an iron box on a stand. He then called Boojho and asked him to lift the
box. Boojho could easily lift the box. Now the magician made a show of
moving his stick around the box while muttering some thing. He again
asked Boojho to lift the box. This time Boojho could not even move it. The
magician again muttered some thing and now Boojho could lift the box.
The audience, including Paheli and Boojho, were very impressed with
the show and felt that the magician had some supernatural powers.
However, after reading this chapter Paheli is wondering if the trick was
indeed some magic or some science was involved? Can you guess what
science might be involved?
ELECTRIC CURRENT AND ITS EFFECTS
Did You Know?
The credit for the invention of the electric bulb
is usually given to Thomas Alva Edison, though
others before him had worked on it.  Edison
was a remarkable man.  He made some 1300
inventions including the electric bulb,
gramophone, the motion picture camera and
the carbon transmitter, which facilitated the
invention of the telephone.
Fig. 14.27  Thomas Alva Edison
(A.D. 1847 – 1931)
Fig. 14.26  A working model of a railway signal
4. Visit an electric shop. Request a mechanic to show you the various
types of fuses and MCB and to explain how they work.
You can read more on the following website:
www.glenbrook.k12.il.us/gbssci/phys/class/circuits/u9l2a.html
3. Using an electromagnet, you can make a working model of a railway
signal as shown in Fig.14.26.
Cardboard signal
Thread
Iron nail
SCIENCE
Light
ou might have seen a beam of
sunlight when it enters a room
through a narrow opening or a hole.
You may have also seen beams of light from
the headlamps of scooters, cars and engines
of trains [Fig. 15.1 (a)]. Similarly, a beam
of light can be seen from a torch. Some of
(a) Rail engine
Fig. 15.1  Beams of light
(b) Light house
Fig. 15.2  Looking at a candle through a straight and a bent pipe
you may have seen a beam of searchlight
from a light house or from an airport
tower [Fig. 15.1 (b)].
What do these experiences suggest?
15.1 LIGHT TRAVELS ALONG A
STRAIGHT LINE
Boojho recalls an activity he performed
in Class VI. In that activity he looked
LIGHT
Fig. 15.3  Reflection of objects in water
at a lighted candle first through
a straight pipe and then through
a bent pipe (Fig. 15.2). Why was
Boojho not able to see the candle
flame through a bent pipe?
This activity showed that
light travels along straight lines.
How can we change the path
of light? Do you know, what
happens when light falls on a
polished or a shiny surface?
15.2  REFLECTION OF LIGHT
One way to change the direction
of light is to let it fall on a shiny
surface. For example, a shining
stainless steel plate or a shining
steel spoon can change the
direction of light. The surface of
water can also act like a mirror
and change the path of light.
Have you ever seen the reflection
of trees or buildings in water
(Fig. 15.3)?
Any polished or a shiny surface can
act as a mirror. What happens when
light falls on a mirror?
You have learnt in Class VI that a
mirror changes the direction of light that
falls on it. This change of direction by a
mirror is called reflection of light. Can
you recall the activity in which you got
the light of a torch reflected from a
mirror? Let us perform a similar activity.
Activity 15.1
Take a torch. Cover its glass with a chart
paper which has three slits as shown in
Fig. 15.5. Spread a sheet of chart paper
Paheli remembers the story of the lion and the
rabbit from the Panchtantra, in which the
rabbit fooled the lion by showing him his
reflection in water (Fig. 15.4).
Fig. 15.4  Reflection of the lion in water
SCIENCE
on a smooth wooden board. Fix a plane
mirror strip vertically on the chart paper
(Fig. 15.5). Now direct the beam of light
on the mirror from the torch with slits.
Place the torch in such a way that its
light is seen along the chart paper on
the board. Now adjust its position so
that the light from the torch strikes the
plane mirror at an angle (Fig. 15.5).
Does the mirror change the direction
of light that falls on it? Now move the
torch slightly to either side. Do you find
any change in the direction of reflected
light?
Look into the mirror along the
direction of the reflected light. Do you
see the slits in the mirror? This is the
image of the slits.
This activity shows how light gets
reflected from a plane mirror.
Let us play around with the images
formed in mirrors and know a little more
about them.
Activity 15.2
Fig. 15.6  Image of a candle in a plane mirror
Fig. 15.5  Reflection of light from a mirror
Paheli wants to know, what
makes things visible to us?
Boojho thinks that objects are
visible only when light reflected
from them reaches our eyes. Do
you agree with him?
CAUTION
Handle the lighted candle with care.
It is better if this activity is performed
in the presence of a teacher or an elder
person.
Place a lighted candle in front of a
plane mirror. Try to see the flame of the
candle in the mirror. It appears as if a
similar candle is placed behind the
mirror. The candle, which appears
behind the mirror, is the image of the
candle formed by the mirror (Fig. 15.6).
The candle itself is the object.
Now move the candle to different
positions in front of the mirror. Observe
the image in each case.
LIGHT
cannot be obtained on the screen in
either case.
What about the distance of the image
from mirror? Let us perform another
activity.
Activity 15.3
Take a chess board. If a chess board is
not available, draw on a chart paper 64
(8◊8) squares of equal size. Draw a thick
line in the middle of the paper. Fix a
plane mirror vertically on this line. Place
any small object, such as a pencil
sharpner, at the boundary of the third
square counting from the mirror
(Fig. 15.7). Note the position of the
image. Now shift the object to the
boundary of the fourth square. Again
note the position of the image. Did you
find any relation between the distance
of the image from the mirror and that of
the object in front of it?
Was the image upright in each case?
Did the flame appear on top of the candle
as in the object? Such an image is called
erect. An image formed by a plane
mirror is erect and of the same size as
the object.
Now place a vertical screen behind
the mirror. Try to obtain the image of
the candle on this screen. Can you get
the image on the screen? Now place the
screen in front of the mirror. Can you
get the image on the screen now? You
will find that the image of the candle
Boojho noted in his notebook: Is
it not surprising that my image is
of the same size as me whether
the mirror is small or large?
Fig. 15.7  Locating image in a plane mirror
Paheli made a note in her notebook:
In a plane mirror the image is
formed behind the mirror. It is erect,
of the same size and is at the same
distance from the mirror as the
object is in front of it.
You will find that the image
is at the same distance behind
the mirror as the object is in front
of it. Now verify this by placing
the object anywhere on the chart
paper.
SCIENCE
Fig. 15.8  Left hand appears on the right side in
the image
Fig. 15.9  An ambulance
mirror. How does it appear in the
mirror?
15.3  RIGHT OR LEFT!
When you see your image in a plane
mirror, is it exactly like you? Have you
ever noticed that there is one interesting
difference between you and your image
in a mirror? Let us find out.
Activity 15.4
Stand in front of a plane mirror and look
at your image. Raise your left hand.
Which hand does your image raise
(Fig. 15.8)? Now touch your right ear.
Which ear does your hand touch in your
image? Observe carefully. You will find
that in the mirror the ërightí appears ëleftí
and the ëleftí appears ërightí. Note that
only sides are interchanged; the image
does not appear upside down.
Now write down your name on a piece
of paper and hold it in front of a plane
Boojho saw an ambulance on
the road. He was surprised to
see that the word ëAMBULANCEí
in front was written in a strange
manner.
understand
why the word ëAMBULANCEí is written
as in Fig. 15.9 ? When the driver of a
vehicle ahead of an ambulance looks in
her/his rear view mirror, she/he can
read ëAMBULANCEí written on it and
give way to it. It is the duty of every one
of us to allow an ambulance to pass
without blocking its way.
You might have observed that in the
side mirror of a scooter or a car the
images of all the objects appear smaller
than the objects themselves. Have you
ever wondered why it is so?
LIGHT
15.4 PLAYING WITH SPHERICAL
MIRRORS
Paheli and Boojho were waiting for their
dinner. Boojho lifted a stainless steel
plate and saw his image in it. Oh! This
plate acts as a plane mirror. My image
is erect and is of the same size. Paheli
saw her image using the back of a steel
spoon. ìBoojho look here! I can also see
my erect image though it is smaller in
size. This spoon also acts as a mirror of
some kindî, said Paheli.
You can also use a spoon or any
curved shining surface to see your
image.
Activity 15.5
Take a stainless steel spoon. Bring the
outer side of the spoon near your face
and look into it. Do you see your image
in it (Fig. 15.10)? Is this image different
from what you see in a plane mirror? Is
this image erect? Is the size of the image
the same, smaller or larger?
Fig. 15.10  Image from the outer side of a spoon
Fig. 15.11  Image from the inner side of a spoon
Fig. 15.12  A concave and a convex mirror
Now look at your image using the
inner side of the spoon. This time you
may find that your image is erect and
larger in size. If you increase the distance
of the spoon from your face, you may
see your image inverted (Fig. 15.11). You
can also compare the image of your pen
or pencil instead of your face.
The curved shining surface of a
spoon acts as a mirror. The most
common example of a curved mirror is
a spherical mirror.
If the reflecting surface of a spherical
mirror is concave, it is called a concave
mirror. If the reflecting surface is convex,
then it is a convex mirror (Fig. 15.12).
SCIENCE
CAUTION
You will conduct Activity 15.6 in the
sunlight. Be careful, never look
directly towards the sun or its image
as it may damage your eyes. You may
look at the image of the sun when it
is thrown on a screen or a wall.
The inner surface of a spoon acts like
a concave mirror, while its outer surface
acts like a convex mirror.
We know that the image of an object
formed by a plane mirror cannot be
obtained on a screen. Let us investigate
if it is also true for the image formed by
a concave mirror.
Activity 15.6
Fig. 15.14  A concave mirror forms a real image
of the sun
Take a concave mirror. Hold it facing
the sun. Try to get the light reflected by
the mirror on a sheet of paper. Adjust
the distance of the paper until you get a
sharp bright spot on it (Fig. 15.14). Hold
the mirror and the sheet of paper steady
for a few minutes. Does the paper start
burning?
This bright spot is, in fact, the image
of the sun. Notice that this image is
formed on a screen. An image formed
on a screen is called a real image.
Recollect that in Activity 15.2 the image
formed by a plane mirror could not be
obtained on a screen. Such an image is
called a virtual image.
Now let us try to obtain on the screen
the image of a candle flame formed by a
concave mirror.
Activity 15.7
Fix a concave mirror on a stand (any
arrangement to keep the mirror steady
would do) and place it on a table
(Fig. 15.15). Paste a piece of white paper
on a cardboard sheet (say about
Why are concave and convex mirrors
called spherical mirrors?
Take a rubber ball and cut a
portion of it with a knife or a hack-
saw blade [Fig. 15.13 (a)]. (Be careful.
Ask an elder person to help you in
cutting the ball). The inner surface
of the cut ball is called concave and
the outer surface is called convex
(Fig. 15.13 (b)).
Fig. 15.13  A spherical mirror is a part of a
sphere
Convex surface
Concave surface
LIGHT
15cm◊10cm). This will act as a screen.
Keep a lighted candle on the table at a
distance of about 50 cm from the mirror.
Try to obtain the image of the flame on
the screen. For this, move the screen till
a sharp image of the flame is obtained.
Make sure that, the screen does not
Fig. 15.15  Real images formed by a concave mirror
obstruct the light from the candle falling
on the mirror. Is this image real or
virtual? Is it of the same size as the flame?
Now move the candle towards the
mirror and place it at different distances
from it. In each case try to obtain the
image on the screen. Record your
observation in Table 15.1. Is it possible
to obtain the image on the screen when
the candle is too close to the mirror
(Fig. 15.16)?
We see that the image formed by a
concave mirror can be smaller or larger
in size than the object. The image may
also be real or virtual.
Concave mirrors are used for many
purposes. You might have seen doctors
using concave mirrors for examining
eyes, ears, nose and throat. Concave
mirrors are also used by dentists
to see an enlarged image of the teeth
(Fig. 15.17). The reflectors of torches,
headlights of cars and scooters are
concave in shape (Fig. 15.18).
Fig. 15.16  Virtual image formed by a concave
mirror
SCIENCE
Boojho observed his image in the
shiny surface of the bell on his new
bicycle. He found that his image was
erect and smaller in size. He wondered
if the bell is also a kind of spherical
mirror. Can you recognise the type of
the mirror?
Note that the reflecting surface of the
bell is convex.
Activity 15.8
Repeat Activity 15.7 now with a convex
mirror in place of a concave mirror
(Fig. 15.19). Record your observations
in a Table similar to Table 15.1.
Could you get a real image at any
distance of the object from the convex
Table 15.1 Image formed by a concave mirror for object
placed at different distances from it
Distance of the object from
Smaller/larger
Character of the image
the mirror
than the object
Inverted/ erect
Real/virtual
50 cm
40 cm
30 cm
20 cm
10 cm
Fig. 15.19  Image formed by a convex mirror
Fig. 15.17  A dentist examining a patient
Fig. 15.18  Reflector of a torch
Concave surface
LIGHT
Fig. 15.20  Convex mirror as side view mirror
mirror? Did you get an image larger in
size than the object?
Can you now recognise the mirrors
used as side mirrors in scooters? These
are convex mirrors. Convex mirrors can
form images of objects spread over a large
area. So, these help the drivers to see
the traffic behind them (Fig. 15.20).
15.5  IMAGES FORMED BY LENSES
You might have seen a magnifying glass.
It is used to read very small print
(Fig. 15.21). You might have also used
it to observe the body parts of a
cockroach or an earthworm. The
magnifying glass is actually a type of a lens.
Lenses are widely used in spectacles,
telescopes and microscopes. Try to add
a few more uses of lenses to this list.
Get some lenses. Touch and feel
them. Can you find some difference just
by touching? Those lenses which feel
thicker in the middle than at the edges
are convex lenses [Fig. 15.22 (a)]. Those
which feel thinner in the middle than
at the edges are concave lenses
[Fig. 15.22 (b)]. Notice that the lenses
are transparent and light can pass
through them.
CAUTION
It is dangerous to look through a lens
at the sun or a bright light. You should
also be careful not to focus sunlight
with a convex lens on any part of your
body.
Fig. 15.21  A magnifying glass
Fig. 15.22  (a) A convex lens and (b) a concave
Let us play with lenses.
SCIENCE
It means that we can see the
image formed by a lens from the
side opposite to that of the object.
Activity 15.9
Take a convex lens or magnifying glass.
Put it in the path of sunrays. Place a
sheet of paper as shown (Fig. 15.23).
Adjust the distance between the lens and
the paper till you get a bright spot on
the paper. Hold the lens and the paper
in this position for a few minutes. Does
the paper begin to burn?
Now replace the convex lens with a
concave lens. Do you see a bright spot
A convex lens converges (bends
inward) the light generally falling on it
[Fig. 15.24 (a)]. Therefore, it is called a
converging lens. On the other hand, a
concave lens diverges (bends outward)
the light and is called a diverging lens
[Fig. 15.24 (b)].
on the paper this time, too? Why are
you not getting a bright spot this time?
We have seen in the case of mirrors
that for different positions of the object
the nature and size of the image change.
Is it true for lenses also?
Let us find out.
Activity 15.10
Take a convex lens and fix it on a stand
as you did with the concave mirror. Place
it on a table. Place a lighted candle at a
distance of about 50 cm from the lens
[Fig. 15.25 (a)]. Try to obtain the image
Fig. 15.23  Real image of the sun by a convex
Fig. 15.24
of the candle on a paper screen placed
on the other side of the lens. You may
have to move the screen towards or away
from the lens to get a sharp image of
the flame. What kind of image did you
get? Is it real or virtual?
Now vary the distance of the candle
from the lens [Fig. 15.25 (b)]. Try to
obtain the image of the candle flame
every time on the paper screen by
moving it. Record your observations as
you did in Activity 15.7 for the concave
mirror.
LIGHT
Fig. 15.25  Image by a convex lens for object placed at different distance from it
Fig. 15.27  Image formed by a concave lens
Fig. 15.26  Virtual image formed by
the convex lens
Did you get in any position of the
object an image which was erect and
magnified (Fig. 15.26). Could this image
be obtained on a screen? Is the image
real or virtual? This is how a convex lens
is used as a magnifying glass.
In a similar fashion study the images
formed by a concave lens. You will find
that the image formed by a concave lens
is always virtual, erect and smaller in
size than the object (Fig. 15.27).
15.6 SUNLIGHT — WHITE OR
COLOURED?
Have you ever seen a rainbow in the
sky? You might have noticed that it
appears usually after the rain when the
sun is low in the sky. The rainbow is
SCIENCE
seen as a large arc in the sky with many
colours (Fig. 15.28).
How many colours are present in a
rainbow? When observed carefully, there
are seven colours in a rainbow, though
it may not be easy to distinguish all of
them. These are ó red, orange, yellow,
green, blue, indigo and violet.
Paheli wants to tell you
that you can see a
rainbow only when your
back is towards the sun.
You  might have seen that when you
blow soap bubbles, they appear
colourful. Similarly, when light is
reflected from the surface of a
Compact Disk (CD), you see many
colours (Fig. 15.29).
On the basis of these experiences,
could we say that the sunlight is a
mixture of different colours? Let us
investigate.
Activity 15.11
Take a glass prism. Allow a narrow beam
of sunlight through a small hole in the
window of a dark room to fall on one
face of the prism. Let the light coming
out of the other face of the prism fall on
Does this mean that the
white light consists of
seven colours?
Fig. 15.28  A rainbow
Fig. 15.29  A CD placed in sun
Fig. 15.30  A prism splits sunlight into seven colours
LIGHT
Fig. 15.31  (a) A disc with seven colours (b) It appears white on rotating
a white sheet of paper or on a white wall.
What do you observe? Do you see colours
similar to those in a rainbow (Fig.
15.30)? This shows that the sunlight
consists of seven colours. The sunlight
is said to be white light. This means that
the white light consists of seven colours.
Try to identify these colours and write
their names in your notebook.
Can we mix these colours to get white
light? Let us try.
Activity 15.12
Take a circular cardboard disc of about
10 cm diameter. Divide this disc into
seven segments. Paint the seven
rainbow colours on these segments
as shown in Fig. 15.31 (a). You can
also paste, coloured papers on
these segments. Make a small hole
at the centre of the disc. Fix the
disc loosely on the tip of a refill of a
ball pen. Ensure that the disc rotates
freely [Fig. 15.31 (a)]. Rotate the disc
in the daylight. When the disc is
rotated fast, the colours get mixed
together and the disc appears
to be whitish [Fig. 15.31 (b)]. Such
a disc is popularly known as Newtonís
disc.
Paheli has a brilliant idea! She
has prepared a small top with
a small circular disc with
seven
rainbow
colours
painted on it (Fig. 15.32).
When the top rotates it
appears nearly white.
Fig. 15.32  A top with seven colours
SCIENCE
Keywords
Magnified image
Magnifying glass
Prism
Rainbow
Real image
Rear view mirror
Side mirror
Spherical mirror
Virtual image
What you have learnt
Light travels along straight lines.
Any polished or a shining surface acts as a mirror.
An image which can be obtained on a screen is called a real image.
An image which cannot be obtained on a screen is called a virtual image.
The image formed by a plane mirror is erect. It is virtual and is of the
same size as the object. The image is at the same distance behind the
mirror as the object is in front of it.
In an image formed by a mirror, the left side of the object is seen on the
right side in the image, and right side of the object appears to be on the
left side in the image.
A concave mirror can form a real and inverted image. When the object is
placed very close to the mirror, the image formed is virtual, erect and
magnified.
Image formed by a convex mirror is erect, virtual and smaller in size
than the object.
A convex lens can form real and inverted image. When the object is
placed very close to the lens, the image formed is virtual, erect and
magnified.  When used to see objects magnified, the convex lens is called
a magnifying glass.
A concave lens always forms erect, virtual and smaller image than the
object.
White light is composed of seven colours.
Concave lens
Concave mirror
Convex lens
Convex mirror
Erect image
LIGHT
Exercises
1. Fill in the blanks:
An image that cannot be obtained on a screen is called
____________.
Image formed by a convex __________ is always virtual and smaller
in size.
An image formed by a __________ mirror is always of the same size
as that of the object.
An image which can be obtained on a screen is called a _________
image.
An image formed by a concave ___________ cannot be obtained on
a screen.
2. Mark ëTí if the statement is true and ëFí if it is false:
We can obtain an enlarged and erect image by a convex mirror. (T/F)
A concave lens always form a virtual image. (T/F)
We can obtain a real, enlarged and inverted image by a concave
mirror. (T/F)
A real image cannot be obtained on a screen. (T/F)
A concave mirror always form a real image. (T/F)
3. Match the items given in Column I with one or more items of Column II.
Column I
Column II
A plane mirror
Used as a magnifying glass.
A convex mirror
Can form image of objects
spread over a large area.
A convex lens
(iii)
Used by dentists to see
enlarged image of teeth.
A concave mirror
The image is always inverted
and magnified.
A concave lens
The image is erect and of the
same size as the object.
The image is erect and smaller
in size than the object.
4. State the characteristics of the image formed by a plane mirror.
5. Find out the letters of English alphabet or any other language known to
you in which the image formed in a plane mirror appears exactly like
the letter itself. Discuss your findings.
SCIENCE
6. What is a virtual image? Give one situation where a virtual image is
formed.
7. State two differences between a convex and a concave lens.
8. Give one use each of a concave and a convex mirror.
9. Which type of mirror can form a real image?
10. Which type of lens forms always a virtual image?
Choose the correct option in questions 11–13
11. A virtual image larger than the object can be produced by a
concave lens
concave mirror
(iii)
convex mirror
plane mirror
12. David is observing his image in a plane mirror. The distance between
the mirror and his image is 4 m. If he moves 1 m towards the mirror,
then the distance between David and his image will be
(iii)
13. The rear view mirror of a car is a plane mirror. A driver is reversing his
car at a speed of 2 m/s. The driver sees in his rear view mirror the
image of a truck parked behind his car. The speed at which the image of
the truck appears to approach the driver will be
1 m/s
2 m/s
(iii)
4 m/s
8 m/s
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. Play with a mirror
Write your name with a
sketch pen on a thin sheet
of paper, polythene or glass.
Read your name on the sheet
while standing in front of a
plane mirror. Now look at
your image in the mirror.
2. A burning candle in water
Take a shoe box, open on one
side. Place a small lighted
candle in it. Place a clear
glass sheet (roughly 25 cm ◊
25 cm) infront of this candle
(Fig. 15.33). Try to locate the
image of the candle behind
Fig. 15.33 Candle burning in water
LIGHT
the glass sheet. Place a glass of water at its position. Ask your friends to
look at the image of the candle through the sheet of glass. Ensure that
candle is not visible to your friends. Your friends will be surprised to see
the candle burning in water. Try to explain the reason.
3. Make a rainbow
Try to make your own rainbow. You can try this project in the morning
or in the evening. Stand with your back towards the sun. Take a hosepipe
or a water pipe used in the garden. Make a fine spray in front of you.
You can see different colours of rainbow in the spray.
4. Visit a laughing gallery in some science centre or a science park or a
village mela. You will find some large mirrors there. You can see your
distorted and funny images in these mirrors. Try to find out the kind of
mirrors used there.
5. Visit a nearby hospital. You can also visit the clinic of an ENT
specialist, or a dentist. Request the doctor to show you the mirrors used
for examining ear, nose, throat and teeth. Can you recognise the kind of
mirror used in these instruments?
6. Role play
Here is a game that a group of children can play. One child will be
chosen to act as object and another will act as the image of the object.
The object and the image will sit opposite to each other. The object will
make movements, such as raising a hand, touching an ear, etc. The
image will have to make the correct movement following the movement
of the object. The rest of the group will watch the movements of the
image. If the image fails to make the correct movement, she/he will be
retired. Another child will take her/his place and the game will
continue. A scoring scheme can be introduced. The group that scores
the maximum will be declared the winner.
You can read more on the following website:
www.glenbrook.k12.il.us/gbssci/phys/mmedia/optics/ifpm.html
SCIENCE
Did you know?
The mirrors can be used as weapons. Archimedes, a Greek scientist, is said
to have done just that more than two thousand years ago. When the
Romans attacked Syracuse, a coastal city-state in Greece, Archimedes used
mirrors arranged as shown in Fig. 15.34. The mirrors could be moved in any
direction. They were positioned such that they reflected the sunlight on the
Roman soldiers. The soldiers were dazzled by the sunlight. They did not
know what was happening. They got confused and ran away. This was an
example of triumph of ideas over military might.
Fig. 15.34  Archimedes mirrors
Water: A Precious Resource
You are perhaps aware that 22 March is
celebrated as the world water day! A
school celebrated ‘water day’ and invited
posters from the children of your age
group. Some of the posters presented
on that day are shown in Fig. 16.1.
“Jal Hai, To Kal Hai”
“If you have water, you can think of the future”
teachers must very often be advising you
not to waste water. No wonder we
celebrate water day every year to attract
the attention of everybody towards the
importance of conserving water.
The amount of water recommended
by the United Nations for drinking,
washing, cooking and maintaining proper
hygiene is a minimum of 50 litres per
person per day. This amount is about
two and a half buckets of water per
person per day. Is your family getting at
least this much of water? If yes, you
should consider yourself fortunate
because millions of people in our
country do not get enough water. What
about your friends and their families?
Share your experience with them.
In some places there is an acute
shortage of water. Taps running dry,
long queues for water (Fig. 16.2), fights,
marches and protests for demand of
water have become a common sight,
especially during summers. Some of the
newspaper clippings shown in Fig. 16.3
clearly indicate this message. Is it not
true that we face acute shortage of
water?
Fig. 16.1  Collage of posters
What is the message you get from
these posters? Write your observations
in your notebook and discuss them in
the class.
Have you ever felt a shortage of water
at home or at school? Your parents or
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Activity 16.1
Collect clippings from newspapers and
magazines on the news items, articles
and pictures related to water shortage.
Paste them in your scrapbook and share
it with your friends. List some problems
faced by the people and discuss them
in the class.
Water shortage has become a matter
of concern throughout the world. It is
estimated that in a few years from now
Fig. 16.4  Earth appears blue from space
Fig. 16.2  Long queue for water
Fig. 16.3  Newspaper clippings
Year 2003 was observed as
the International Year of
Freshwater to make people
aware of this dwindling natural resource.
more than one third of the people in
the world could face water scarcity.
Before we discuss why water is
getting scarce we must know how much
water is available for use on our planet.
16.1 HOW MUCH WATER IS AVAILABLE
Look at the picture of the earth taken
from space. Why does it appear blue?
Surely, you can guess!
You are aware that about 71% of
the earth’s surface is covered with
water. Almost all the water on the
earth is contained in the seas and
oceans, rivers, lakes, ice caps, as
groundwater and in the atmosphere.
However, most of this water is not fit for
human consumption. The water that is
fit for use is freshwater. Perform the
© NCERT
not to be republished
WATER: A PRECIOUS RESOURCE
Paheli quickly calculated and
found that this amount is
roughly 0.006% of all water
found on the earth.
following activity to estimate roughly
the relative amount of water available
in some of these sources.
Activity 16.2
Most of us assume water to be a limitless
resource. From this activity can you
Remark
Assume that this water
represents all the water present
on the earth.
represents
total
freshwater on the earth.
This gives a measure of usable
water present as ground-
water.
It represents all the water
present in all the lakes and
rivers of the world.
Steps
Take a medium-sized bucket
and fill it up with water. It
contains about twenty litres of
water.
Take a tea spoon of about 5 mL
capacity and transfer 100
spoons of water from the bucket
to a small container, like a bath
From the bath mug transfer
thirty spoons of water to a glass
tumbler.
Finally take out a quarter (1/4th)
spoonfull of water from the mug.
Figure
The water left in the bucket represents the saline water present in the seas,
oceans and partly as groundwater. This water is not fit for human use.
The water left in the bath mug represents the water, which is present in the
frozen form in glaciers, ice caps and permanent snow; again not available readily.
Boojho wondered about the
alarmingly small quantity of
water available for our use.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
appreciate the actual amount of water
available for human use? Does the
finding worry you? Discuss this in your
class.
16.2 FORMS OF WATER
Are you afraid that continuous use will
some day exhaust all the water available
for use? You know that water on the
earth has been maintained for millions
of years by various processes which
make the water cycle. You have studied
the water cycle in Class VI. Write in your
own words what you know about the
water cycle.
You know that when water circulates
through the water cycle it can be found
in all the three forms, i.e., solid, liquid
and gas — at any given time somewhere
on the earth. The solid form, snow and
ice, is present as ice caps at the poles of
the earth, snow-covered mountains and
glaciers. Liquid water is present in
oceans, lakes, rivers, and even
underground. The gaseous form is the
water vapour present in the air around
us. The continuous cycling of water
among its three forms keeps the total
amount of water on the earth constant
even when the whole world is using it.
Does it give you any relief?
Can you recall the processes involved
in water cycle? The following activity will
help you.
Activity 16.3
Fig. 16.5 shows the processes involved
in the water cycle. They are labelled by
numbers. Match these numbers with
the processes given in the jumbled form.
Most towns and cities have water
supply system maintained by the civic
1. rudgon rawet
2. atooniaervp
3. acestoonnnid
4. duclos
5. tspratniaoinr
6. aitfinlronit
7. ntciepirtaipo
Fig. 16.5   Water cycle
© NCERT
not to be republished
WATER: A PRECIOUS RESOURCE
bodies. The water is drawn from
nearby lakes, rivers, ponds or
wells. The water is supplied
through a network of pipes.
Many villages do not have such
a water supply system. There
people fetch water directly from
the sources. Often women and
children have to walk several
kilometres to fetch water
(Fig. 16.6). The children suffer
a lot. They cannot attend
school regularly since they
spend hours in fetching water.
place to place, and it may even change
at a given place. The water table may be
at a depth of less than a metre or may
be several metres below the ground. The
water found below the water table is
called groundwater. What is the source
of this groundwater?
The rainwater and water from other
sources such as rivers and ponds seeps
through the soil and fills the empty
spaces and cracks deep below the
ground. The process of seeping of water
into the ground is called infiltration.
The groundwater thus gets recharged
by this process. At places the
groundwater is stored between layers of
hard rock below the water table. This is
known as an aquifer. Water in the
aquifers can be usually pumped out with
the help of tube wells or handpumps.
Have you ever been to a site where
construction work is going on? From
Women have to
perform a number of
household chores. If they have
also to spend time to fetch water
it adds to their burden.
A large number of people draw water
from wells, tube wells or hand pumps.
From where do these sources get water?
16.3 GROUNDWATER AS AN IMPORTANT
SOURCE OF WATER
If we dig a hole in the ground near a
water body we may find that the soil is
moist. The moisture in the soil indicates
the presence of water underground. If
we dig deeper and deeper, we would
reach a level where all the space between
particles of soil and gaps between rocks
are filled with water (Fig. 16.7). The
upper limit of this layer is called the
water table. The water table varies from
Fig. 16.6  Women fetching water
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
where do the workers get water for
construction? May be you have seen
boring being done at such sites to reach
the water table. Enquire from the people
working there how deep they have to dig.
Can we keep on drawing water from
under the ground? How will it affect the
water table?
16.4 DEPLETION OF WATER TABLE
Water drawn from under the ground gets
replenished by seepage of rainwater. The
water table does not get affected as long
as we draw as much water as is
replenished by natural processes.
However, water table may go down if the
water is not sufficiently replenished.
This may happen due to many reasons.
Increase in population, industrial and
agricultural activities are some common
factors affecting water table. Scanty
rainfall is another factor that may
deplete the water table. Yet another
factor affecting water table could be
deforestation and decrease in the
effective area for seepage of water.
Increasing population
Increasing population creates demand
for construction of houses, shops,
offices, roads and pavements. This
decreases the open areas like parks, and
playgrounds. This, in turn, decreases the
seepage of rainwater into the ground.
What could be the consequence? Recall
that a pukka floor does not allow water
to seep in easily, while in a grass lawn
water seeps through in no time.
Fig. 16.7  Groundwater and water table
Stream or lake
Groundwater
Aquifer
Water table
Recharge
Hand pump
© NCERT
not to be republished
WATER: A PRECIOUS RESOURCE
Moreover a huge amount of water is
required for construction work. Often
groundwater is used for this purpose.
So, on the one hand we are
consuming more groundwater, and on
the other we are allowing lesser water
to seep into the ground. This results in
depletion of water table. In fact, the
water table in some parts of many cities
has gone down to alarmingly low levels.
Increasing industries
Water is used by all the industries.
Almost everything that we use needs
water somewhere in its production
process. The number of industries is
increasing continuously. Water used by
most of the industries is drawn from the
ground.
Activity 16.4
Name some industries familiar to you.
Make a list of the products obtained
from these and used in our daily life.
Discuss with your teacher and parents
how the growing industrial activity is
responsible for the depletion of water
table.
Agricultural activities
A majority of farmers in India depend
upon rains for irrigating their crops.
Irrigation systems such as canals are
there only in a few places. Even these
systems may suffer from lack of water
due to erratic rainfall. Therefore, farmers
have to use groundwater for irrigation.
Population pressure on agriculture
forces increasing use of groundwater
day by day. This results in depletion of
water table.
16.5 DISTRIBUTION OF WATER
The distribution of water over the globe
is quite uneven due to a number of
factors.
Some places have good amount of
rain and are water-rich. On the other
hand, there are deserts which have
scanty rainfall.
India is a vast country and the
rainfall is not the same everywhere.
Some regions have excessive rains while
some others have very little rainfall.
Excessive rains cause floods, whereas
the absence of rains results in droughts.
Therefore, some regions in our country
may have floods while others may suffer
from droughts at the same time.
Activity 16.5
Given here is the rainfall map of India
(Fig. 16.8). It gives the average annual
rainfall in different regions of our country.
Locate on the map the place you live
Are you blessed with sufficient
rainfall?
Is there sufficient water available in
your area throughout the year?
It may be possible that we are living
in an area where there is sufficient
rainfall yet there is shortage of water. Can
we attribute this to mismanagement of
water resources?
16.6 WATER MANAGEMENT
You have read in Class VI that in many
places a regular supply of water is
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Fig. 16.8  Rain map of India
Government of India, Copyright 2007.
Based upon Survey of India map with the permission of the Surveyor General of India.
The territorial waters of India extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured from the appropriate baseline.
The external boundaries and coastlines of India agree with the Record/Master Copy certified by Survey of India.
© NCERT
not to be republished
WATER: A PRECIOUS RESOURCE
provided by a well-planned pipe system.
When the civic authorities supply water
through pipes not all of it may reach
the destination. You might have seen
water supply pipes leaking and a lot of
water gushing out of the pipes. It is
the responsibility of the civic
authorities to prevent such wastage of
precious water.
Mismanagement or wastage may
take place at the level of individuals also.
All of us, knowingly or unknowingly,
waste water while brushing teeth,
shaving, bathing, washing and during
many other activities. Leaking taps is
another source of huge water wastage.
We waste water as though we do not need
water the next time!
We have seen that most of the water
that we get as rainfall just flows away.
This is a waste of precious natural
resource. The rainwater can be used to
recharge the groundwater. This is
referred to as water harvesting or
rainwater harvesting, about which you
have learnt in Class VI.
Find out if the buildings in your
neighbourhood have water harvesting
systems installed.
We have at many places in India an
age old practice of water storage and
water recharge like the bawris. Bawri
was the traditional way of collecting
water. With time the bawris fell into
disuse and garbage started piling in these
reservoirs. However, because of the acute
water shortage, people in these areas
have had to rethink. The bawris are being
revived. Today the situation is that inspite
of scanty rains these places are
managing their water needs well.
A farmer using water in the field can
also use water economically. Maybe
you have heard of drip irrigation
(Fig. 16.9). Drip irrigation is a technique
of watering plants by making use of
narrow tubings which deliver water
directly at the base of the plant.
A case study
Bhujpur in the Kutch area of Gujarat has a very erratic rainfall. The only source
of freshwater lies underground because rivers in this area do not have water
throughout the year. Over the years, demand for water has grown. The withdrawal
of groundwater has far exceeded recharge. As a result the water table has gone
down alarmingly.
In 1989, the villagers along with a non-governmental organisation, decided to
harvest rainwater. Eighteen check-dams were built on the Rukmavati river and
its many tributaries. The water so collected increased percolation through the
soil and recharged the aquifers.
According to farmers, the wells have water now and the water that flowed into
the sea and was wasted has become available for irrigation.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
16.7 WHAT ROLE YOU CAN PLAY
Have you ever shown concern if you saw
a tap leaking in your house, school or
any other place? Leaking taps waste a
lot of water. You must make efforts to
stop this leakage.
There are a number of ways you can
adopt to minimise the wastage of water.
Let us begin. We have given a few
examples. Add on!
Water-wise habits
1. Turn off taps while
brushing
2. Mop the floor instead of
washing
16.8 EFFECT OF WATER SCARCITY ON
PLANTS
You must have seen potted plants
wilting and ultimately drying up if they
did not get water even for a few days.
You have already learnt in Chapter 1
that plants need water to get nutrients
from the soil to prepare their food. Just
imagine the consequences if water is not
available to plants!
The green character of the planet
shall be lost. This may mean the end
of all life, for a world without plants
shall mean no food, no oxygen, not
enough rain, and innumerable other
problems.
A successful initiative
Rajasthan is a hot and dry place. The challenge of natural scarcity of water was
met by a successful experiment. A band of social workers has transformed a dry
area in the Alwar district into a green place. They have revived five dried-up
rivers — Arveri, Ruparel, Sarsa, Bhagani and Jahazwali by constructing water-
harvesting structures.
Keywords
Aquifer
Depletion
Drip irrigation
Groundwater
Infiltration
Recharge
Water harvesting
Water table
Fig. 16.9  Drip irrigation in a field
© NCERT
not to be republished
WATER: A PRECIOUS RESOURCE
Exercises
1. Mark ‘T’ if the statement is true and ‘F’ if it is false:
The freshwater stored in the ground is much more than that
present in the rivers and lakes of the world. (T/F)
Water shortage is a problem faced only by people living in rural
areas. (T/F)
Water from rivers is the only source for irrigation in the fields. (T/F)
Rain is the ultimate source of water. (T/F)
2. Explain how groundwater is recharged?
3. There are ten tubewells in a lane of fifty houses. What could be the long
term impact on the water table?
4. You have been asked to maintain a garden. How will you minimise the
use of water?
5. Explain the factors responsible for the depletion of water table.
6. Fill in the blanks with the appropriate answers:
People obtain groundwater  through________ and ________.
What you have learnt
Water is essential for all living beings. There can be no life without it.
Water exists in three forms: solid, liquid and vapour.
Though water is maintained by the water cycle, yet there is an acute
scarcity of water in many parts of the globe.
There is an uneven distribution of water. Much of it has resulted from
human activities.
Rapid growth of industries, increasing population, growing irrigation
requirements and mismanagement are some of the causes for water
shortage.
We need to be worried about the wastage during the supply of water
through pipes, the leaking taps in buildings and other places.
Unnecessary use of water and overdrawing from groundwater should be
avoided. Recharge of water to the ground should be increased.
The need of the hour is that every individual uses water economically.
Plants wilt and ultimately dry-up if they are not watered for a few days.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Three forms of water are ________, ________ and ________.
The water bearing layer of the earth is ________.
The process of water seepage into the ground is called ________.
7. Which one of the following is not responsbile for water shortage?
Rapid growth of industries
Increasing population
(iii)
Heavy rainfall
Mismanagement of water resources
8. Choose the correct option. The total water
in the lakes and rivers of the world remains constant.
under the ground remains constant.
(iii)
in the seas and oceans of the world remains constant.
of the world remains constant.
9. Make a sketch showing groundwater and water table. Label it.
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1.  Role play
You are a water detective in your school. You have a team of six
members. Survey the campus and make a note of the following:
Total number of taps
Number of taps leaking
Amount of water wasted due to leakage
Reasons of leakage
Corrective measures taken
2. Groundwater pumped out
Try to find out if there are any hand pumps in your neighbourhood. Go
to the owner or the users of a few of these and find out the depth at
which they struck water? If there are any differences, think of the
probable reason. Write a brief report and discuss it in your class. If
possible, visit a place where boring is going on to install a hand pump.
Watch the process carefully and find out the depth of the water table at
that place.
3. Catching rainwater — Traditional methods
Form groups of 4 to 5 students in the class and prepare a report on the
various traditional ways of water harvesting. If possible, use the
following web link: www.rainwaterharvesting.org.
© NCERT
not to be republished
WATER: A PRECIOUS RESOURCE
4. Conservation of water
Carrry out a campaign to conserve water at home and in the school.
Design posters to remind others of the importance of water resources.
5.  Create a logo
Hold a competition to create a logo or a symbol depicting water scarcity.
Did you know?
The importance of water management has been highlighted by a watershed
management project near the village of Kothapally. The project has yielded
dramatic results. Groundwater levels have risen, green cover has
increased, and productivity and incomes in this semi-arid region have
dramatically improved.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Forests: Our Lifeline
ne evening Boojho entered the
park with an elderly person. He
introduced him to his friends.
Prof Ahmad was a scientist working in
the university. The children started
playing while Prof Ahmad sat on a
bench in the corner. He was tired as he
had participated in the golden jubilee
celebrations of the town. After a while,
the children also came and sat around
him. They wanted to know about the
celebrations. Prof Ahmad told them that
after the cultural programme, the
senior people discussed the town’s
unemployment problem. A plan was
proposed to put up a factory by clearing
an area of the forest just outside the
town. This would give the increasing
population of the town a chance to get
jobs. The children were very surprised
when Prof Ahmad told them that many
people had objected to this idea.
“This is because the forests serve as
green lungs and water purifying systems
in nature”, Prof Ahmad explained. The
children were confused. Prof Ahmad
realised that the children had not visited
a forest. The children also wanted to
know more about the forest, so they
decided to visit it with Prof Ahmad.
17.1 VISIT TO A FOREST
One Sunday morning, the children
packed a few things like a knife, a hand
lens, a stick, a notebook and walked
together through a forest trail near a
village. On their way, they met Tibu, a
young boy of their age group, of nearby
village, who was taking cattle for grazing
along with his aunt. He was very agile,
running here and there to keep the herd
together. When he saw the children,
Tibu also started walking along with
them, while his aunt went on a different
path. As soon as they entered the forest
Tibu raised his hand and signalled them
to keep quiet because noise could
disturb the animals living in the forest.
Tibu then took them to a place at a
height to show them the broad view of
the forest. Children were surprised
because they could not see any land
(Fig. 17.1). The different treetops had
formed green cover over the land. However,
the cover was not uniformly green. The
Fig. 17.1  A view of a forest
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORESTS: OUR LIFELINE
environment was peaceful and a cool
breeze was blowing. This made children
quite fresh and happy.
While coming down, they got excited
on hearing a sudden sound of birds and
some noise from the top branches of the
trees. Tibu told them to relax since it
was a normal phenomenon here.
Because of the children’s presence, some
monkeys had climbed higher up on the
trees where they disturbed the birds.
Animals often give this type of warning
call to alert other animals. Tibu also told
that many other animals like boar,
bison, jackals, porcupine, elephants live
in the deeper areas of the forest
(Fig. 17.2). Prof Ahmad cautioned
children that they should not go deep
into the forest.
Boojho and Paheli remembered that
they have studied about forests as
Fig. 17.2  Some forest animals
Fig. 17.3  Forest as habitat
an example of a habitat in Class VI
(Fig. 17.3). They could see now how the
forest provides a home for many animals
and plants.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
The land where the children were
walking was uneven and covered with
many trees. Tibu helped them to identify
sal, teak, semal, sheesham, neem,
palash, fig, khair, amla, bamboo,
kachnar (Fig. 17.4). Prof Ahmad pointed
out that there are several other trees,
shrubs, herbs and grasses in the forest.
The trees were also covered with different
types of creepers and climbers. The sun
was barely visible through the leaves of
the trees, making it quite dark inside
the forest.
Activity 17.1
Observe the various things in your home
and make a list of those which are made
from material which may have been
obtained from the forest.
You might have many wooden items
on your list like plywood, fuel wood,
boxes, paper, matchsticks, and
furniture. Do you know that gum, oils,
spices, fodder for animals and medicinal
plants are also some of the products
which we get from the forest (Fig. 17.5).
Fig. 17.4  Some forest plants
Semal
Sheesham
Bambooo
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORESTS: OUR LIFELINE
Fig. 17.6  Some crown shapes
Wooden
statue
Sheila wondered who would have
planted these trees. Prof Ahmad replied
that in nature trees produce enough
seeds. The forest floor provides
favourable conditions for them to
germinate and develop into seedlings
Prof Ahmad asked children to look
up and observe how the branches of the
tall trees look like a roof over the other
plants in the forest. He told them that
this is called a canopy (Fig. 17.7).
Activity 17.2
Visit a forest or a park in your
neighbourhood. Observe the trees and
try to identify them. You can take the
help of some elders or books on trees.
List the characteristics of the trees that
you observe, such as the height, shape
of leaves, crown, flowers, and fruits. Also
draw the crowns of some trees.
Prof Ahmad pointed out that trees
had crowns of different types and sizes.
These had created different horizontal
layers in the forest. These are known as
understoreys (Fig. 17.7). Giant and tall
trees constituted the top layer followed
by shrubs and tall grasses, and herbs
formed the lowest layer.
“Would we see similar kind of trees
in every forest?” — asked Boojho.
Prof Ahmad said, “No, due to different
climatic conditions there are variations
in the types of trees and other plants.
The types of animals also differ from
forest to forest.”
Fig. 17.5  Forest products
Sealing wax
Catechu
and saplings. Some grow up into trees.
He added that branchy part of a tree
above the stem is known as the crown
of the tree (Fig. 17.6).
Honey
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
other small animals on the bark of the
trees, plant leaves and on decaying
leaves on the forest floor (Fig. 17.8). They
started making sketches of these
creatures. The forest floor seemed dark
coloured and was covered with a layer
of dead and decaying leaves, fruits,
seeds, twigs and small herbs. The
decaying matter was moist and warm.
Children picked up various seeds
and leaves for their collection. Walking
over the dead leaf layer on the forest floor
was like walking over a spongy carpet!
Is the decaying matter always warm?
Prof Ahmad suggested that the children
could perform an activity to get an
answer to this question.
Activity 17.3
Dig a small pit. Put vegetable waste and
leaves in it. Cover them with soil. Add
some water. After three days, remove the
Fig. 17.7  Canopy and under storeys in a forest
A few children were busy watching
beautiful butterflies fluttering here and
there on the flowers of shrubs and
herbs. They had a close look at the
bushes. While doing that their hair and
clothes had seeds and shrubs clinging
to them.
They came across numerous insects,
spiders, squirrels, ants and various
Understorey
Fig. 17.8  Forest floor
Canopy
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORESTS: OUR LIFELINE
Fig. 17.9  Interrelationship of plant, soil and decomposers in a forest
upper layer of the soil. Does the pit feel
warm inside?
Paheli asked, “There are so many
trees here. Also, there are many forest
like this. What difference will it make if
we cut some trees for a factory?”
Prof Ahmad said, “You have read
about autotrophs, heterotrophs and
saprotrophs. You have learnt how green
plants produce food. All animals,
whether herbivores or carnivores,
depend ultimately on plants for food.
Organisms which feed on plants often
get eaten by other organisms, and so
on. For example, grass is eaten by
insects, which in turn, is taken by the
frog. The frog is consumed by snakes.
This is said to form a food chain:
Grass→ insects → frog→ snake→ eagle.
Many food chains can be found in the
forest. All food chains are linked. If any
one food chain is disturbed, it affects
other food chains. Every part of the
forest is dependent on the other parts.
If we remove one component, say trees,
all other components would be affected.”
Prof Ahmad asked children to pick
up leaves from the forest floor and
observe them under a hand lens. They
found tiny mushrooms over the
Photosynthesis
Decomposers
Oxygen
Carbon dioxide
Water
Nutrients
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
plants release oxygen through the
process of photosynthesis. The plants
help to provide oxygen for animal
respiration. They also maintain the
balance of oxygen and carbon dioxide
in the atmosphere (Fig. 17.10). That is
why forests are called lungs.
decaying leaves. They also saw an army
of tiny insects, millipedes, ants and
beetle on them. They were wondering
how these organisms live there. Prof Ahmad
explained that apart from these animals
which are easily seen, there are several
organisms and micro-organisms that
live in the soil. Paheli wondered what
mushroom and other micro-organisms
eat. Prof Ahmad replied that they feed
upon the dead plant and animal tissues
and convert them into a dark coloured
substance called humus.
You have learnt about humus in
Chapter 9. In which layer of the soil
would you find humus? What is its
importance to the soil?
The micro-organisms which convert
the dead plants and animals to humus
are known as decomposers. These
micro-organisms play an important role
in the forest. Soon, Paheli removed some
dead leaves and discovered under them
a layer of humus on forest floor.  The
presence of humus ensures that the
nutrients of the dead plants and
animals are released into the soil. From
there, these nutrients are again absorbed
by the roots of the living plants. “What
happens if an animal dies in the forest?”
Sheila asked. Tibu replied the dead
animals become food for vultures, crows,
jackals and insects.” In this way, the
nutrients are cycled. So, nothing goes
waste in a forest (Fig. 17.9).
Paheli reminded Prof Ahmad that he
had not explained why forests are called
green lungs. Prof Ahmad explained that
Fig. 17.10  Balance of oxygen and carbon
dioxide
Paheli reminded their
friends that they have
studied photosynthesis in
Chapter 1.
The children saw clouds forming in
the sky. Boojho recalled what he had
learnt about the water cycle in Class VI.
Trees take in water from their roots and
release water vapour into the air
through evaporation.
If there were fewer trees, how will the
water cycle be affected?
Tibu told them that the forest is not
just home to plants and animals. Many
people also live in the forest. Some of
them may belong to different tribes. Tibu
explained that these people depend
mostly on the forests. The forest provides
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORESTS: OUR LIFELINE
them with food, shelter, water and
medicines. They have traditional
knowledge about many medicinal plants
in the forest.
While Boojho was drinking water
from a small stream, he saw some deer
crossing the stream (Fig. 17.11). They
disappeared into the bushes. The dense
bushes and the tall grass provide
animals with the food and shelter. They
also protect them from carnivores that
live in the forest.
between various types of droppings.
Prof Ahmad informed them that the
forest officers could recognise the
presence of some animals in the forest
by their droppings and footprints.
Boojho called every one and showed
them a large, decaying heap of animal
dropping. Several beetles and grubs
were feeding on the heap and a bunch
of seedlings was sprouting. “These
seedlings are of the herbs and shrubs.
The animals also disperse the seeds of
certain plants and help the forest to grow
Paheli remembered that she
saw a Pipal sapling on the
sidewall in her school. Can you
help her to understand how this
would have happened?
Fig. 17.12  A sapling on a wall
Tibu then started looking closely at
the forest floor. Soon he called and
showed the children droppings of some
animals, and explained the difference
and regenerate. The decaying animal
dung also provides nutrients to the
seedlings to grow”, said Prof Ahmad.
After listening to this, Boojho noted
in his notebook, “By harbouring greater
variety of plants, the forest provides
greater opportunities for food and
habitat for the herbivores. Larger
number of herbivores means increased
availability of food for a variety of
carnivores. The wide variety of animals
Fig. 17.11  Deer in a forest
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
helps the forest to regenerate and grow.
Decomposers help in maintaining the
supply of nutrients to the growing plants
in the forest. Therefore, the forest is a
‘dynamic living entity’ — full of life and
vitality.”
It was about afternoon and the
children wanted to go back. Tibu
suggested another route for going back.
While they were going back, it started
raining. However, surprisingly, they saw
that the raindrops were not hitting the
forest floor directly. The uppermost layer
of the forest canopy intercepted the flow
of raindrops, and most of the water was
coming down through the branches and
Fig. 17.13  Rainwater drips from the trees and seeps into the ground
Covered ground with
decaying material acts
like a sponge
The root system helps
water to seep down in
the ground
The closed canopy and
many layers of vegetation
slow down the speed of
raindrops
Transpiration and evaporation
Root system
Water table
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORESTS: OUR LIFELINE
the stems of the trees. From the leaves
it was dripping slowly over branches of
the shrubs and herbs (Fig. 17.13). They
found that the ground was still dry. After
about half an hour, the rain stopped.
They noticed that the layer of dead
leaves over the forest floor appeared wet
now. But water did not stagnate in the
forest.
Boojho thought that if it had rained
so heavily in his town, it would have
flooded the drains and roads.
What would happen if it rains heavily
in your town?
Prof Ahmad told them that the forest
also acts as a natural absorber of
rainwater and allows it to seep. It helps
maintain the water table throughout the
year. Forests not only help in controlling
floods but also help maintain the flow
of water in the streams so that we get a
steady supply of water. On the other
hand, if trees are not present, rain hits
the ground directly and may flood the
area around it. Heavy rain may also
damages the soil. Roots of trees normally
bind the soil together, but in their
absence the soil is washed away or
eroded.
The children spent an hour at Tibu’s
village on their way back. The weather
of the village was quite pleasant. Villagers
told them that due to the surrounding
forest, they receive good rainfall. The air
also remained cool. Noise pollution, too
is less because the forest absorbs the
noise of the nearby highway.
The children learnt about the history
of the village. It surprised them that the
villages and the agricultural fields of
that area were created after clearing the
forest about sixty years ago. Tibu’s
grandfather told them that when he was
young, the village was not as large as it
was now. It was also surrounded
by forests. Construction of roads,
buildings, industrial development and
increasing demand of wood created
pressure on the forests and it started
vanishing. He was not happy that the
forest adjoining their village is not
regenerating and is on the verge of
disappearing due to overgrazing of
animals and indiscriminate felling of
trees. Prof Ahmad said that if we did
things wisely we could preserve forests
and environment as well as have
development.
Children prepared a few pictures to
show the consequences of such an
event.
At the end of the visit, Prof Ahmad
asked children to sum up the
importance of forests. The children
wrote: Forests provide us with oxygen.
They protect soil and provide habitat to
a large number of animals. Forests
help in bringing good rainfall in
neighbouring areas. They are a source
of medicinal plants, timber and many
other useful products. We must preserve
our forests.
What would happen if forests
disappear?
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
If forests disappear, the
amount of carbon dioxide in
air will increase, resulting in
the increase of earth’s
temperature.
In the absence of trees and
plants, the animals will not
get food and shelter.
In the absence of trees, the
soil will not hold water, which
will cause floods.
Deforestation will endanger
our life and environment.
Think, what we can do to
preserve our forests.
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORESTS: OUR LIFELINE
What you have learnt
We get various products from the forests surrounding us.
Forest is a system comprising various plants, animals and
micro-organisms.
In a forest, trees form the uppermost layer, followed by shrubs.
The herbs form the lowest layer of vegetation.
Different layers of vegetation provide food and shelter for animals,
birds and insects.
The various components of the forest are interdependent on one
another.
The forest keeps on growing and changing, and can regenerate.
In the forest, there is interaction between soil, water, air and
living organisms.
Forests protect the soil from erosion.
Soil helps forests to grow and regenerate.
Forests are the lifeline for the forest-dwelling communities.
Forests influence climate, water cycle and air quality.
Exercises
1. Explain how animals dwelling in the forest help it grow and regenerate.
2. Explain how forests prevent floods.
3. What are decomposers? Name any two of them. What do they do in the
forest?
4. Explain the role of forest in maintaining the balance between oxygen
and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
5. Explain why there is no waste in a forest.
6. List five products we get from forests?
Keywords
Canopy
Crown
Decomposers
Seed dispersal
Soil erosion
Understorey
Deforestation
Humus
Regeneration
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
7. Fill in the blank:
The insects, butterflies, honeybees and birds help flowering plants
in                       .
A forest is a purifier of                        and                        .
Herbs form the                         layer in the forest.
The decaying leaves and animal droppings in a forest enrich the
8. Why should we worry about the conditions and issues related to forests
far from us?
9. Explain why there is a need of variety of animals and plants in a forest.
10. In Fig. 17.15, the artist has forgotten to put the labels and directions on
the arrows. Mark the directions on the arrows and label the diagram
using the following labels:
clouds, rain, atmosphere, carbon dioxide, oxygen, plants, animals, soil,
roots, water table.
11. Which of the following is not
a forest product?
Plywood
(iii)
Sealing wax
Kerosene
12. Which of the following
statements is not correct?
Forests protect the soil
from erosion.
Plants and animals in
a forest are not
depedent on one
another.
(iii)
Forests influence the
climate and water
cycle.
Soil helps forests to
grow and regenerate.
Fig. 17.15
Carbon dioxide
Oxygen
© NCERT
not to be republished
FORESTS: OUR LIFELINE
13. Micro-organisms act upon the dead plants to produce
(ii) mushrooms
(iii) humus
(iv) wood
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. The Department of Environment is to decide whether some portion of a
forest in your area could be cleared for a housing complex. Write a letter
to the department explaining your point of view as a concerned citizen.
2. Visit a forest. Here is a list of points that would make your visit more
fruitful.
Make sure that you have permission to go into the forest.
Make sure that you can find your way around. Get a map and go
along with some one who is familiar with the area.
Keep a record of the things you see and do. Observations make
the visit interesting. Sketches and photographs are useful.
You may record bird calls.
Collect different kinds of seeds or hard fruits like nuts.
Try to recognise various types of trees, shrubs, herbs, etc. Make
lists of plants from different places in the forest and of different
layers. You may not be able to name all the plants, but it is worth
recording and seeing where they grow. Make a record of
approximate heights of plants, crown shape, bark texture, leaf
size, and flower colour.
Learn to recognise the animal’s droppings.
Interview the forest officials and the people of surrounding vil
lages and other visitors.
You must never collect birds’ eggs, and their nests should never be
disturbed.
You can read more on the following website:
www.wild-india.com
Did you know?
In India the area under forest cover is about 21% of the total area. It had
steadily been falling since independence. But people now seem to have
realised the importance of the forest cover. Reports suggest that the area
under forest cover has slightly increased in recent years.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Wastewater Story
All of us use water in our homes and
make it dirty.
Dirty! Are you surprised?
Rich in lather, mixed with oil, black–
brown water that goes down the drains
from sinks, showers, toilets, laundries
is dirty. It is called wastewater. This
used water should not be wasted. We
must clean it up by removing pollutants.
Have you ever thought where the
wastewater goes and what happens to it?
18.1 WATER, OUR LIFELINE
Clean water is a basic need of human
being. Let us make a mindmap of the
many uses of clean water.
Activity 18.1
(We have given one example of the
use of clean water. You can add many
more.)
Clean water that is fit
for use is unfortunately
not available to all. It
has been reported that
more than one billion of
our fellow human beings
have no access to safe drinking water.
This accounts for a large number of
water-related diseases and even deaths.
Women and girls walk for several
kilometres to collect clean water, as you
read in Chapter 16. Is it not a serious
matter for human dignity?
You have studied in Chapter 16
about the increasing scarcity of fresh-
water due to population growth,
pollution, industrial development,
mismanagement and other factors.
Realising the urgency of the situation
on the World Water Day, on 22 March
2005, the General Assembly of the
United Nations proclaimed the period
2005–2015 as the International Decade
for action on “Water for life”. All efforts
made during this decade aim to reduce
by half the number of people who do
not have access to safe drinking water.
Cleaning of water is a process of
removing pollutants before it enters a
water body or is reused. This process of
wastewater treatment is commonly
known as “Sewage Treatment”. It takes
place in several stages.
Clean water
put to use
Drinking
© NCERT
not to be republished
WASTEWATER STORY
18.2 WHAT IS SEWAGE?
Sewage is wastewater released by homes,
industries, hospitals, offices and other
users. It also includes rainwater that has
run down the street during a storm or
heavy rain. The water that washes off
roads and rooftops carries harmful
substances with it. Sewage is a liquid waste.
Most of it is water, which has dissolved
and suspended impurities. These
impurities are called contaminants.
Activity 18.2
Locate an open drain near your home,
school or on the roadside and inspect
water flowing through it.
Record colour, odour and any other
observation. Discuss with your friends
and your teacher and fill up the
following Table 18.1.
We know that sewage is a complex
mixture containing suspended solids,
organic and inorganic impurities,
nutrients, saprotrophic and disease
causing bacteria and other microbes.
Organic impurities    –Human faeces,
animal waste,
oil, urea (urine),
pesticides,
herbicides, fruit
and vegetable
waste, etc.
Inorganic impurities – Nitrates,
Phosphates,
metals.
Nutrients                  – Phosphorus
and Nitrogen.
Bacteria                    – Such as which
cause cholera
and typhoid.
Other microbes         – Such as which
cause dysentery.
18.3 WATER FRESHENS UP  — AN
EVENTFUL JOURNEY
In a home or a public building generally
one set of pipes brings clean water and
another set of pipes takes away
wastewater. Imagine that we could see
through the ground. We would see a
network of big and small pipes, called
sewers, forming the sewerage. It is like
a transport system that carries sewage
from the point of being produced to the
point of disposal, i.e. treatment plant.
Manholes are located at every 50 m
to 60 m in the sewerage, at the junction
Table 18.1 Contaminant survey
S. No. Type of sewage
Point of origin
Substances which
Any other
contaminate
remark
Sullage water
Kitchen
Foul waste
Toilets
Trade waste
Industrial
and commercial
organisations
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
of two or more sewers and at points
where there is a change in direction.
Activity 18.3
Study the sewage route in your home/
school/building. Do the following:
Make a line diagram of the sewage
route.
Walk down the street or survey the
campus to find the number of
manholes.
Follow an open drain and find out
where it ends and which living
organisms are found in and
around it.
In case you do not have a sewerage
system in your locality, find out how
sewage is being disposed off.
Treatment of polluted water
Perform the following activity. It will help
you understand the processes that take
place at the wastewater treatment plant.
Activity 18.4
Divide yourself into groups to perform
the activity. Record observations at each
stage:
Fill a large glass jar 3/4 full of water.
Add some dirty organic matter such
as grass pieces or orange peels, a
small amount of detergent, and a few
drops of an ink or any colour.
Cap the jar, shake it well and let the
mixture stand in the sun for two
days.
After two days, shake the mixture
and pour a small sample into test
tube. Label this test tube “Before
treatment; Sample 1”. How does it
smell?
Use an aerator from an aquarium to
bubble air through the sample in the
glass jar. Allow several hours for
aeration; leave the aerator attached
overnight. If you do not have an
aerator, use a mechanical stirrer or
a mixer. You may have to stir it
several times.
The next day when aeration is
complete, pour another sample into
a second test tube. Label it as “After
aeration; Sample 2”.
Fold a piece of filter paper to form a
cone. Wet the paper with tap water
and then insert the cone in a funnel.
Mount the funnel on a support
(as you have learnt in Class VI).
Place layers of sand, fine gravel and
finally medium gravel in the funnel
(Fig. 18.2). (An actual filtration plant
does not use filter paper, but the sand
filter is several metres deep).
Pour the remaining aerated liquid
through the filter into the beakers.
Do not allow the liquid to spill over
the filter. If the filtered liquid is not
clear, filter it a few  times till you get
clear water.
Pour a sample of the filtered water
into a third test tube labelled
“Filtered; Sample 3”.
Pour another sample of the filtered
water into a fourth test tube. Add a
small piece of a chlorine tablet. Mix
well until the water is clear. Label the
test tube “Chlorinated; Sample 4”.
© NCERT
not to be republished
WASTEWATER STORY
Observe carefully the samples in all
the test tubes. Do not taste! Just
smell them!
Now answer the following questions:
(a) What changes did you observe in the
appearance of the liquid after
aeration?
(b) Did aeration change the odour?
(c) What was removed by the sand filter?
(d) Did chlorine remove the colour?
(e) Did chlorine have an odour? Was it
worse than that of the wastewater?
18.4 WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT
(WWTP)
Treatment of wastewater involves
physical, chemical, and biological
processes, which remove physical,
chemical and biological matter that
contaminates the wastewater.
1. Wastewater is passed through bar
screens. Large objects like rags,
sticks, cans, plastic packets, napkins
are removed (Fig. 18.3).
2. Water then goes to a grit and sand
removal tank. The speed of the
incoming wastewater is decreased to
allow sand, grit and pebbles to settle
down (Fig. 18.4).
Fig. 18.2  Filtration process
Fig. 18.3  Bar screen
Fig. 18.4  Grit and sand removal tank
3. The water is then allowed to settle in
a large tank which is sloped towards
the middle. Solids like faeces settle
at the bottom and are removed with
a scraper. This is the sludge. A
skimmer removes the floatable solids
like oil and grease. Water so cleared
is called clarified water (Fig. 18.5).
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
The activated sludge is about 97%
water. The water is removed by sand
drying beds or machines. Dried sludge
is used as manure, returning organic
matter and nutrients to the soil.
The treated water has a very low level
of organic material and suspended
matter. It is discharged into a sea, a river
or into the ground. Nature cleans it up
further.  Sometimes it may be necessary
to disinfect water with chemicals like
chlorine and ozone before releasing it
into the distribution system.
Become an active citizen
Waste generation is a natural part of
human activity. But we can limit the
type of waste and quantity of waste
produced. Often we have been repelled
by offensive smell. The sight of open
drains is disgusting. The situation
The sludge is transferred to a
separate tank where it is decomposed
by the anaerobic bacteria. The biogas
produced in the process can be used as
fuel or can be used to produce electricity.
4. Air is pumped into the clarified water
to help aerobic bacteria to grow.
Bacteria consume human waste,
food waste, soaps and other
unwanted matter still remaining in
clarified water (Fig. 18.6).
After several hours, the suspended
microbes settle at the bottom of the tank
as activated sludge. The water is then
removed from the top.
Fig. 18.6  Aerator
Did you know ?
It has been suggested that we should
plant eucalyptus trees all along
sewage ponds. These trees absorb all
surplus wastewater rapidly and
release pure water vapour into the
atmosphere.
The water in a river is cleaned
naturally by processes that are
similar to those adopted in a
wastewater treatment plant.
Fig. 18.5  Water clarifer
© NCERT
not to be republished
WASTEWATER STORY
worsens in the rainy season when the
drains start overflowing. We have to
wade through the mud pools on the
roads. Most unhygienic and unsanitary
conditions prevail. Flies, mosquitoes and
other insects breed in it.
You can be an enlightened citizen
and approach the municipality or the
gram panchayat. Insist that the open
drains be covered. If the sewage of
any particular house makes the
neighbourhood dirty, you should
Used tealeaves, solid food remains,
soft toys, cotton, sanitary towels, etc.
should also be thrown in the dustbin
(Fig. 18.7). These wastes choke the
Don’t add to the load of
WWTP. Paheli wonders how!
request them to be more considerate
about others’ health.
18.5 BETTER HOUSE KEEPING
PRACTICES
One of the ways to minimise or eliminate
waste and pollutants at their source is
to  see what you are releasing down the
drain.
Cooking oil and fats should not be
thrown down the drain. They can
harden and block the pipes. In an
open drain the fats clog the soil pores
reducing its effectiveness in filtering
water. Throw oil and fats in the
dustbin.
Chemicals like paints, solvents,
insecticides, motor oil, medicines
may kill microbes that help purify
water. So do not throw them down
the drain.
Fig. 18.7  Do not throw every thing in the sink
drains. They do not allow free flow
of oxygen. This hampers the
degradation process.
18.6 SANITATION AND DISEASE
Poor sanitation and contaminated
drinking water is the cause of a large
number of diseases.
Let us look at our own country. A
vast number of our people are still
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
without sewerage facilities. Where do
they relieve themselves?
A very large fraction of our people
defecates in the open, on dry riverbeds,
on railway tracks, near fields and many
a time directly in water. Untreated
human excreta is a health hazard. It
may cause water pollution and soil
pollution. Both the surface water and
groundwater get polluted. Groundwater
is a source of water for wells, tubewells,
springs and many rivers as you learnt
in Chapter 16. Thus, it becomes the
most common route for water borne
diseases. They include cholera, typhoid,
polio, meningitis, hepatitis and
dysentery.
18.7 ALTERNATIVE ARRANGEMENT FOR
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
To improve sanitation, low cost onsite
sewage disposal systems are being
encouraged. Examples are septic tanks,
chemical toilets, composting pits. Septic
tanks are suitable for places where there
is no sewerage system, for hospitals,
Bhoojo wants to know how
sewage is disposed of in an
aeroplane.
isolated buildings or a cluster of 4 to 5
houses.
Some organisations offer hygienic
on-site
human
waste
disposal
technology. These toilets do not require
scavenging. Excreta from the toilet seats
flow through covered drains into a
biogas plant. The biogas produced is
used as a source of energy.
18.8 SANITATION AT PUBLIC PLACES
In our country fairs are organised
periodically. A large number of people
participate in them. In the same way
railway stations, bus depots, airports,
hospitals are very busy places.
Thousands of people visit them daily.
Large amount of waste is generated
here. It must be disposed of properly
otherwise epidemics could break out.
The government has laid down
certain standards of sanitation but,
unfortunately, they are not strictly
enforced.
However, all of us can contribute in
maintaining sanitation at public places.
We should not scatter litter anywhere.
If there is no dustbin in sight, we should
carry the litter home and throw it in the
dustbin.
Vermi-processing toilet
A design of  a toilet in which humans excreta is treated by earthworms has been
tested in India. It has been found to be a novel, low water-use toilet for safe
processing of human waste. The operation of the toilet is very simple and hygienic.
The human excreta is completely converted to vermi cakes — a resource much
needed for soil.
© NCERT
not to be republished
WASTEWATER STORY
What you have learnt
Used water is wastewater. Wastewater could be reused.
Wastewater is generated in homes, industries, agricultural fields and in
other human activities. This is called sewage.
Sewage is a liquid waste which causes water and soil pollution.
Wastewater is treated in a sewage treatment plant.
Treatment plants reduce pollutants in wastewater to a level where nature
can take care of it.
Where underground sewerage systems and refuse disposal systems are
not available, the low cost on-site sanitation system can be adopted.
By-products of wastewater treatment are sludge and biogas.
Open drain system is a breeding place for flies, mosquitoes and organisms
which cause diseases.
We should not defecate in the open. It is possible to have safe disposal of
excreta by low cost methods.
Conclusion
We all have a role to play in keeping our
environment clean and healthy. You
must realise your responsibility in
maintaining the water sources in a
healthy state. Adopting good sanitation
practices should be our way of life. As
an agent of change your individual
initiative will make a great difference.
Keywords
Aeration
Aerobic bacteria
Anaerobic bacteria
Biogas
Contaminant
Sanitation
Sewage
Sewer
Sewerage
Sludge
Wastewater
Mahatma Gandhi said:
“No one need to wait for anyone else
to adopt a humane and enlightened
course of action.”
Influence others with your energy, ideas
and optimism. A lot can be done if people
work together. There is great power in
collective action.
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
Exercises
1. Fill in the blanks:
Cleaning of water is a process of removing ____________.
Wastewater released by houses is called ____________.
Dried ____________ is used as manure.
Drains get blocked by ____________ and ____________.
2. What is sewage? Explain why it is harmful to discharge untreated
sewage into rivers or seas.
3. Why should oils and fats be not released in the drain? Explain.
4. Describe the steps involved in getting clarified water from wastewater.
5. What is sludge? Explain how it is treated.
6. Untreated human excreta is a health hazard. Explain.
7. Name two chemicals used to disinfect water.
8. Explain the function of bar screens in a wastewater treatment plant.
9. Explain the relationship between sanitation and disease.
10. Outline your role as an active citizen in relation to sanitation.
11. Here is a crossword puzzle: Good luck!
© NCERT
not to be republished
WASTEWATER STORY
Across
Liquid waste products
Solid waste extracted in sewage treatment
A word related to hygiene
Waste matter discharged from human body
Used water
A pipe carrying sewage
Micro-organisms which causes cholera
A chemical to disinfect water
12. Study the following statements about ozone:
It is essential for breathing of living organisms.
It is used to disinfect water.
It absorbs ultraviolet rays.
Its proportion in air is about 3%.
Which of these statements are correct?
(a), (b) and (c)
(b) and (c)
(iii)
(a) and (d)
All four
Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. Construct a crossword puzzle of your own using the keywords.
2. Then and now: Talk to your grand parents and other elderly people in
the neighbourhood. Find out the sewage disposal systems available to
them. You can also write letters to people living in far off places to get
more information. Prepare a brief report on the information you
collected.
3. Visit a sewage treatment plant.
It could be as exciting and enriching as a visit to a zoo, a museum, or a
park. To guide your observation here are a few suggestions.
Record in your notepad:
Place ___________
Date  ___________
Time  ___________
Name of the official at the plant __________  Guide/Teacher ___________
© NCERT
not to be republished
SCIENCE
The location of the sewage plant.
Treatment capacity.
The purpose of screening as the initial process.
How is air bubbled through the aeration tank?
How safe is the water at the end of the treatment? How is it tested?
Where is the water discharged after treatment?
What happens to the plant during heavy rains?
Is biogas consumed within the plant or sold to other consumers?
What happens to the treated sludge?
Is there any special effort to protect nearby houses from the plant?
Other observations.
For more information, consult:
Millennium Development Goals:
http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/
“Water for Life” International Decade for Action:
http://www.un.org/waterforlifedecade/
World Water Day - Themes and Importance:
http://www.worldwaterday.org/
Through the ages Development of Sanitation:
http://www.sewerhistory.org/
http://www.cep.unep.org/pubs/Techreports/tr43en/Household%
20systems.htm
An early engineering feat: Indus valley civilisation
One of the ancient civilisations, Harappa and Mohenjodaro had perhaps
the world’s first urban sanitation system. Within the city individual
houses, or groups of houses, obtained water from wells. There was a
separate room for bathing, and wastewater was directed to the covered
drains which lined the major streets. The oldest toilet made of bricks is
about 4500 years old.
“By providing clean water and sanitation to the poorest people on the
planet, we can reduce poverty and suffering and ensure education for all
children.”—UNICEF
© NCERT
not to be republished
INDEX
Absorption
Acidic
Adaptation
Aeration
Aerobic bacteria
Aerobic respiration
Amino acid
Ammonia
Amoeba
Anaerobic bacteria
Anaerobic respiration
Anemometer
Aquifer
Artery
121,122
Asexual reproduction
Assimilation
Autotrophic
Bar graph
Basic
Battery
Biogas
Blood vessels
121,122
Blood
Breathing rate
Buccal cavity
Budding
Canine
Canopy
Capillary
Cellular respiration
Cellulose
Celsius scale
Chemical change
Chemical reaction
Chlorophyll
Circuit diagram
Circulatory system
Clayey
Climate
Cocoon
28,29
Concave lens
Concave mirror    179,180,181,182
Conduction
Conductor
Contaminant
Convection
Convex lens
Convex mirror
179,183
Crown
Crystallisation
Cyclone
86,87
Decomposers
Depletion
Dialysis
Diaphragm
Digestion
Drip irrigation
Egestion
Electric bell
Electric components
Electromagnet
Elements of weather
Embryo
Erect image
Excretion
Excretory system
Exhalation
Fatty acid
Fertilisation
© NCERT
not to be republished
Fleece
24,26
Food vacuole
18,19
Fragmentation
Gall bladder
Galvanisation
Gametes
Gills
Glycerol
Graphs
Groundwater
Haemoglobin
Heartbeat
Heating effect
163,164
Heterotrophs
Humidity
Humus
97,212
Hurricane
Hypha
Incisor
Indicator
Infiltration
Ingestion
Inhalation
Insectivorous
Insulator
Kidneys
Land breeze
Lightning
Liver
Loamy
Low pressure
Magnetic effect
Magnified image
Magnifying glass
Maximum temperature
Migration
Milk teeth
Minimum temperature
Moisture
Molar
Monsoon winds
Neutral
Neutralisation
54,55
Nonuniform motion
Nutrient
Nutrition
Oesophagus
12,15
Oscillation
Ovule
Pancreas
Parasite
Percolation
Permanent teeth
Phloem
Photosynthesis
Physical change
58,59
Plasma
Platelets
Polar region
72,73
Pollen grain
Pollen tube
Pollination
137,138
Premolar
Pressure
Prism
Pseudopodia
Pulse
© NCERT
not to be republished
Radiation
Rainbow
Real image
Rear view mirror
Recharge
Red blood cell
Reeling
Regeneration
Root hair
Rumen
Ruminant
Rumination
Rusting
Saliva
Salivary glands
Sandy
Sanitation
Saprotrophs
Saprotrophic
Scouring
Sea breeze
Seed dispersal
138,213
Sericulture
Sewage
Sewer
Sexual reproduction
133,136
Shearing
Side mirror
Silk moth
28,29
Silkworm
Simple pendulum
145,146
Sludge
Soil erosion
Sorting
Speed
Spherical mirror
Spiracles
Sporangium
Spore
Stethoscope
Stomata
Sweat
Temperature
Thermometer
Thunderstorms
86,87
Time period
Tissue
Tornado
89,90
Trachea
Tropical rainforest
Tropical region
Typhoon
Understorey
Uniform motion
Unit of time
Ureter
Urethra
Uric acid
Urinary bladder
Vegetative propagation
122,123
Villi
Virtual image
Wastewater
Water harvesting
Water retention
Water table
Weather
68,69
White blood cell
Wind flow pattern
Xylem
Zygote
© NCERT
not to be republished
© NCERT
not to be republished
