Appendix-I
Appendix-I
Appendix-I
Appendix-I
Appendix-I
Websites you can see
Bombay Natural History Society: http://www.bnhs.org/
Birding in India and South Asia: http://www.birding.in/
Website of Project Tiger: http://projecttiger.nic.in/
Nature Conservation Foundation: http://www.ncf-india.org/
Wildlife Conservation Society of India: http://www.wildlife.in/
Wildlife Trust of India: http://www.wildlifetrustofindia.org/
Kalpavriksh Environment Action Group: http://www.kalpavriksh.org/
Down to Earth Magazine: http://www.downtoearth.org.in/
Centre for Environment Education, India: http://www.ceeindia.org/cee/index.html
World Steel Association : http://www.worldsteel.org
India Tourism Statistics, 2010, http://tourism.gov.in
2015-16
Production of Iron ore, 2009-10 showing
statewise share in per cent
State
% of total
production
Odisha
Karnataka
Chhattisgarh
Jharkhand
Others
Total
Appendix-II
Appendix-II
Appendix-II
Appendix-II
Appendix-II
Production of Manganese ore, 2009-10 showing
statewise share in per cent
State
% of total
production
Madhya Pradesh
24.28
Odisha
24.75
Karnataka
22.00
Others
28.07
Total
Source: Ministry of Mines, Government of India, Annual
Report 2009-10
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Production of Limestone, 2009-10 showing
statewise share in per cent
State
% of total
production
Andhra Pradesh
Karnataka
Others
Total
Source: Ministry of Mines, Government of India, Annual
Report  2009-10
Production of Copper, 2009-10 showing
statewise share in per cent
State
% of total
production
Madhya Pradesh
Rajasthan
Sikkim
Total
Source: Ministry of Mines, Government of India, Annual
Report 2009-10
2015-16
Appendix-III
Appendix-III
Appendix-III
Appendix-III
Appendix-III
Steel Plants
Year of Establishment
Collaborating
Location
Country
IISCO
1870-1913 (Private initially)
(Nationalised
Kulti and
in 1972)
Burnpur (W.B.)
TISCO
1907 (Private ownership)
Jamshedji Tata
Jamshedpur
(Jharkhand)
1923 Private as MISCO
Nationalised later
Bhadravati
(Karnataka)
Bhilai
1959 (Public Sector)
Soviet Union
Bhilai (M.P.)
Bokaro
1972 (Public Sector)
Soviet Union
Bokaro
(Jharkhand)
Durgapur
1959 (Public Sector)
Durgapur (W.B.)
Rourkela
—  (Public Sector)
Germany
Rourkela
(Odisha)
Vishakhapatnam
—  (Public Sector)
Vishakhapatnam
Andhra Pradesh
Salem
—  (Public Sector)
Salem (T. Nadu)
Vijay Nagar
—  Public Sector
Karnataka
2015-16
Glossary
Glossary
Glossary
Glossary
Glossary
Anticline: A fold in sedimentary strata that resembles an arch.
Gross Domestic Product: It is a monetary measure of the value of goods and services
produced within a natural economy at a given period of time. Normally it is one year.
Geologist: A scientist who studies the composition, structure and history of the
earth.
Geothermal Gradient: The gradual increase in temperature with depth in the
crust. The average is 30°C per kilometer in the upper crust.
Humus: Dead and decayed organic matter adds to the fertility of the top soil.
Igneous Rocks: Rocks which have solidified from molten magma.
Manganese Nodules: A type of sediment scattered on the ocean floor, consisting
mainly of manganese and iron, and usually containing small amounts of copper,
nickel and cobalt.
Metamorphic Rocks: Rocks which were originally igneous or sedimentary, but have
changed in character and appearance.
Oil Trap: A geological structure that allows for significant amounts of oil and gas to
accumulate.
Rock: A consolidated mixture of minerals
Sedimentary Rocks: Rocks which have been deposited as beds and layers of
sediments.
2015-16
First Edition
January 2006    Agrahayana 1928
Reprtined
December 2007    Agrahayana 1929
Feburary  2009  Magha 1930
January  2010  Magha 1931
January 2011 Magha 1932
January 2012 Magha 1933
December 2012 Agrahayana 1934
November 2013 Kartika 1935
November 2014 Agrahayana 1936
PD 500T MJ
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006
` 65.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training, Sri
Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and
printed at Vijayalakshmi Printing Works
Pvt. Ltd., B-117, Sector-5, Noida 201 301
ISBN  81-7450-644-6
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,
re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any
form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
and should be unacceptable.
Publication Team
Head, Publication
N. K. Gupta
Division
Chief Production
Kalyan Banerjee
Officer
Chief Editor
Shveta Uppal
Chief Business
Gautam Ganguly
Manager
Production Officer
Arun Chitkara
Cover, Layout and Illustrations
Nidhi Wadhwa
Cartography
Cartographic Design Agency
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021
Phone :  0361-2674869
2015-16
Everything available in our environment
which can be used to satisfy our needs,
provided, it is technologically accessible,
economically feasible and culturally
acceptable can be termed as ‘Resource’.
The process of transformation of things
available in our environment involves an
inter - dependent relationship between
nature, technology and institutions. Human
beings interact with nature through
technology and create institutions to
accelerate their economic development.
Do you think that resources are free gifts
of nature as is assumed by many?  They
are not. Resources are a function of human
activities. Human beings themselves are
essential components of resources. They
transform material available in our
environment into resources and use them.
These resources can be classified in the
following ways–
(a) On the basis of origin – biotic and abiotic
(b) On the basis of exhaustibility – renewable
and non-renewable
(c) On the basis of ownership – individual,
community, national and international
(d) On the basis of status of development –
potential, developed stock and reserves.
Can you identify and name the various items
used in making life comfortable in our
villages and towns. List the items and name
the material used in their making.
Fig. 1.1:  Interdependent relationship between
nature, technology and institutions
Fig. 1.2:  Classification of resources
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
TYPES OF RESOURCES
On the Basis of Origin
Biotic Resources:  These are obtained from
biosphere and have life such as human beings,
flora and fauna, fisheries,  livestock etc.
Abiotic Resources: All those things which are
composed of non-living things are called abiotic
resources. For example, rocks and metals.
On the Basis of Exhaustibility
Renewable Resources: The resources
which can be renewed or reproduced by
physical, chemical or mechanical processes
are known as renewable or replenishable
resources. For example, solar and wind
energy, water, forests and wildlife, etc. The
renewable resource may further be divided
into continuous or flow (Fig.1.2).
Non-Renewable Resources: These occur over
a very long geological time. Minerals and fossil
fuels are examples of such resources. These
resources take millions of years in their
formation. Some of the resources like metals
are recyclable and some like fossil fuels cannot
be recycled and get exhausted with their use.
On the Basis of Ownership
Individual Resources: These are also owned
privately by individuals. Many farmers own
land which is allotted to them by government
against the payment of revenue. In villages
there are people with land ownership but there
are many who are landless. Urban people own
plots, houses and other property. Plantation,
pasture lands, ponds, water in wells etc. are
some of the examples of resources ownership
by individuals. Make a list of resources owned
by your household.
Community Owned Resources: There are
resources which are accessible to all the
members of the community. Village commons
(grazing grounds, burial grounds, village
ponds, etc.) public parks, picnic spots,
playgrounds in urban areas are de facto
accessible to all the people living there.
National Resources: Technically, all the
resources belong to the nation. The country
has legal powers to acquire even private
property for public good. You might have seen
roads, canals, railways being constructed on
fields owned by some individuals. Urban
Development Authorities get empowered by the
government to acquire land. All the minerals,
water resources, forests, wildlife, land within
the political boundaries and oceanic area upto
12 nautical miles (22.2 km) from the coast
termed as territorial water and resources
therein belong to the nation.
Inter national Resources: There ar e
international institutions which regulate some
resources. The oceanic resources beyond 200
nautical miles of the Exclusive Economic Zone
belong to open ocean and no individual
country can utilise these without the
concurrence of international institutions.
Do you know that India has got the right to
mine manganese nodules from the bed of
the Indian Ocean from that area which lies
beyond the exclusive economic zone. Identify
some other resources which are international
in nature.
On the Basis of the Status of Development
Potential Resources: Resources which are
found in a region, but have not been utilised.
For example, the western parts of India
particularly Rajasthan and Gujarat have
enormous potential for the development of wind
and solar energy, but so far these have not been
developed properly.
Developed Resources: Resources which are
surveyed and their quality and quantity have
been determined for utilisation. The
development of resources depends on
technology and level of their feasibility.
Stock: Materials in the environment which
have the potential to satisfy human needs but
human beings do not have the appropriate
technology to access these, are included among
Identify at least two resources from each
category.
2015-16
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
stock. For example, water is a compound of
two inflammable gases; hydrogen and oxygen,
which can be used as a rich source of energy.
But we do not have the required technical
‘know-how’ to use them for this purpose.
Hence, it can be considered as stock.
Reserves are the subset of the stock, which
can be put into use with the help of existing
technical ‘know-how’ but their use has not
been started. These can be used for meeting
future requirements. River water can be used
for generating hydroelectric power but
presently, it is being utilised only to a limited
extent. Thus, the water in the dams, forests etc.
is a reserve which can be used in the future.
An equitable distribution of resources has
become essential for a sustained quality of life
and global peace. If the present trend of resource
depletion by a few individuals and countries
continues, the future of our planet is in danger.
Therefore, resource planning is essential for
sustainable existence of all forms of life.
Sustainable existence is a component of
sustainable development.
Prepare a list of stock and reserve, resources
that you are familiar with from your local area.
DEVELOPMENT OF RESOURCES
Resources are vital for human survival as well
as for maintaining the quality of life. It was
believed that resources are free gifts of nature.
As a result, human beings used them
indiscriminately and this has led to the
following major problems.
• Depletion of resources for satisfying the
greed of few individuals.
• Accumulation of resources in few hands, which,
in turn, divided the society into two segments
i.e. haves  and have nots or rich and poor.
• Indiscriminate exploitation of resources has
led to global ecological crises such as, global
warming, ozone layer depletion, environmental
pollution and land degradation.
1. Imagine, if the oil supply gets exhausted
one day, how would this affect our life style?
2. Plan a survey in your colony/village to
investigate people’s attitude towards
recycling of the domestic/agricultural
wastes. Ask questions about :
(a) What do they think about resources
they use?
(b) What is their opinion about the
wastes, and its utilisation?
(c) Collage your results.
Sustainable development
Sustainable economic development means
‘development should take place without
damaging the environment, and development
in the present should not compromise with the
needs of the future generations.’
Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit, 1992
In June 1992, more than 100 heads of states
met in Rio de Janeiro in Brazil, for the first
International Earth Summit. The Summit was
convened for addressing urgent problems of
environmental protection and socio-
economic development at the global level.
The assembled leaders signed the
Declaration on Global Climatic Change and
Biological Diversity. The Rio Convention
endorsed the global Forest Principles and
adopted Agenda 21 for achieving
Sustainable Development in the 21st century.
Agenda 21
It is the declaration signed by world leaders
in 1992 at the United Nations Conference
on Environment and Development (UNCED),
which took place at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. It
aims at achieving global sustainable
development. It is an agenda to combat
environmental damage, poverty, disease
through global co-operation on common
interests, mutual needs and shared
responsibilities. One major objective of the
Agenda 21 is that every local government
should draw its own local Agenda 21.
RESOURCE PLANNING
Planning is the widely accepted strategy for
judicious use of resources. It has importance
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
in a country like India, which has enormous
diversity in the availability of resources. There
are regions which are rich in certain types of
resources but are deficient in some other
resources. There are some regions which can
be considered self sufficient in terms of the
availability of resources and there are some
regions which have acute shortage of some vital
resources. For example, the states of
Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh and Madhya
Pradesh are rich in minerals and coal deposits.
Arunachal Pradesh has abundance of water
resources but lacks in infrastructural
development. The state of Rajasthan is very well
endowed with solar and wind energy but lacks
in water resources. The cold desert of Ladakh
is relatively isolated from the rest of the
country. It has very rich cultural heritage but
it is deficient in water, infrastructure and some
vital minerals. This calls for balanced resource
planning at the national, state, regional and
local levels.
The availability of resources is a necessary
condition for the development of any region, but
mere availability of resources in the absence of
corresponding changes in technology and
institutions may hinder development. There are
many regions in our country that are rich in
resources but these are included in economically
backward regions. On the contrary there are
some regions which have a poor resource base
but they are economically developed.
Can you name some resource rich but
economically backward regions and some
resource poor but economically developed
regions? Give reasons for such a situation.
The history  of colonisation reveals that rich
resources in colonies were the main attractions
for the foreign invaders. It was primarily the
higher level of technological development of the
colonising countries that helped them to
exploit resources of other regions and establish
their supremacy over the colonies. Therefore,
resources can contribute to development only
when they are accompanied by appropriate
technological development and institutional
changes. India has experienced all this in
different phases of colonisation. Therefore, in
India, development, in general, and resource
development in particular does not only involve
the availability of resources, but also the
technology, quality of human resources and
the historical experiences of the people.
Conservation of Resources: Resources are
vital for any developmental activity. But
irrational consumption and over-utilisation
of resources may lead to socio-economic and
environmental problems. To overcome these
problems, resource conservation at various
levels is important. This had been the main
concern of the leaders and thinkers in the
past. For example, Gandhiji was very apt in
voicing his concern about resource
conservation in these words: “There is enough
for everybody’s need and not for any body’s
greed.” He placed the greedy and selfish
individuals and exploitative nature of modern
technology as the root cause for resource
depletion at the global level. He was against
mass production and wanted to replace it with
the production by the masses.
Prepare a list of resources found in your state
and also identify the resources that are
important but deficit in your state.
What resources are being developed in your
surroundings by the community/village
panchayats/ward level communities with the
help of community participation?
Resource Planning in India
Resource planning is a complex process which
involves : (i) identification and inventory of
resources across the regions of the country.
This involves surveying, mapping and
qualitative and quantitative estimation and
measurement of the resources. (ii) Evolving a
planning structure endowed with appropriate
technology, skill and institutional set up for
implementing resource development plans. (iii)
Matching the resource development plans with
overall national development plans.
India has made concerted efforts for achieving
the goals of resource planning right from the First
Five Year Plan launched after Independence.
2015-16
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
LAND UTILISATION
Land resources are used for the following
purposes:
1. Forests
2. Land not available for cultivation
(a) Barren and waste land
(b) Land put to non-agricultural uses, e.g.
buildings, roads, factories, etc.
3. Other uncultivated land (excluding
fallow land)
(a) Permanent pastures and grazing land,
(b) Land under miscellaneous tree crops
groves (not included in net  sown area),
(c) Cultruable waste land (left uncultivated
for more than 5 agricultural years).
4. Fallow lands
(a) Current fallow-(left without cultivation for
one or less than one agricultural year),
(b) Other than current fallow-(left
uncultivated for the past 1 to 5
agricultural years).
5. Net sown area
Area sown more than once in an
agricultural year plus net sown area is
known as gross cropped area.
LAND USE PATTERN IN INDIA
The use of land is determined both by physical
factors such as topography, climate, soil types
as well as human factors such as population
density, technological capability and culture
and traditions etc.
Total geographical area of India is 3.28
million sq km. Land use data, however, is
available only for 93 per cent of the total
geographical area because the land use
reporting for most of the north-east states
except Assam has not been done fully.
Moreover, some areas of Jammu and Kashmir
occupied by Pakistan and China have also not
been surveyed.
At the international level, the Club of Rome
advocated resource conservation for the first
time in a more systematic way in 1968.
Subsequently, in 1974, Gandhian philosophy
was once again presented by Schumacher
in his book Small is Beautiful. The seminal
contribution with respect to resource
conservation at the global level was made
by the Brundtland Commission Report, 1987.
This report introduced the concept of
‘Sustainable Development’ and advocated
it as a means for resource conservation,
which was subsequently published in a book
entitled Our Common Future. Another
significant contribution was made at the Earth
Summit at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in 1992.
LAND RESOURCES
We live on land, we perform our economic
activities on land and we use it in different ways.
Thus, land is a natural resource of utmost
importance. It supports natural vegetation, wild
life, human life, economic activities, transport
and communication systems. However, land is
an asset of a finite magnitude, therefore, it is
important to use the available land for various
purposes with careful planning.
India has land under a variety of relief
features, namely; mountains, plateaus, plains
and islands. About 43 per cent of the land area
is plain, which provides facilities for agriculture
and industry. Mountains account for 30 per
cent of the total surface area of the country and
ensure perennial flow of some rivers, provide
facilities for tourism and ecological aspects.
About  27 per cent of the area of the country is
the plateau region. It possesses rich reserves
of minerals, fossil fuels and forests.
Fig 1.3: India :  Land under important Relief Features
Try to do a comparison between the two pie
charts (Fig. 1.4 ) given for land use and find
out why the net sown area and the land
under forests have changed from 1960-61
to 2008-09 very marginally.
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Find out reasons for the low proportion of
net sown area in these states.
The land under permanent pasture has
also decreased. How are we able to feed our
huge cattle population on this pasture land
and what are the consequences of it? Most of
the other than the current fallow lands are either
of poor quality or the cost of cultivation of such
land is very high. Hence, these lands are
cultivated once or twice in about two to three
years and if these are included in the net sown
area then the percentage of NSA in India comes
to  about 54 per cent of the total reporting area.
The pattern of net sown area varies greatly
from one state to another.  It is over 80 per cent
of the total area in Punjab and Haryana and less
than 10 per cent in Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram,
Manipur and Andaman Nicobar Islands.
Policy (1952). It was considered essential for
maintenance of the ecological balance. The
livelihood of millions of people who live on
the fringes of these forests depends upon it.
A part of the land is termed as waste land
and land put to other non-agricultural uses.
Waste land includes rocky, arid and desert
areas and land put to other non-agricultural
uses includes settlements, roads, railways,
industry etc. Continuous use of land over a
long period of time without taking
appropriate measures to conserve and
manage it, has resulted in land degradation.
This, in turn, has serious repercussions on
society and the environment.
LAND DEGRADATION AND CONSERVATION
MEASURES
We have shared our land with the past
generations and will have to do so with the
future generations too. Ninety-five per cent of
our basic needs for food, shelter and clothing
Fig. 1.4
Forest area in the country is far lower than
the desired 33 per cent of geographical area,
as it was outlined in the National Forest
Source : Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture, 2008-09
2015-16
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
are obtained from land. Human activities have
not only brought about degradation of land
but have also aggravated the pace of natural
forces to cause damage to land.
At present, there are about 130 million
hectares of degraded land in India.
Approximately, 28 per cent of it belongs to the
category of forest degraded area, 56 per cent
of it is water eroded area and the rest is affected
by saline and alkaline deposits. Some human
activities such as deforestation, over grazing,
mining and quarrying too have contributed
significantly in land degradation.
alkalinity in the soil. The mineral processing like
grinding of limestone for cement industry and
calcite and soapstone for ceramic industry
generate huge quantity of dust in the
atmosphere. It retards the process of infiltration
of water into the soil after it settles down on the
land. In recent years, industrial effluents as
waste have become a major source of land and
water pollution in many parts of the country.
There are many ways to solve the problems
of land degradation. Afforestation and proper
management of grazing can help to some extent.
Planting of shelter belts of plants, control on
over grazing, stabilisation of sand dunes by
growing thorny bushes are some of the
methods to check land degradation. Proper
management of waste lands, control of mining
activities, proper discharge and disposal of
industrial effluents and wastes after treatment
can reduce land and water degradation in
industrial and suburban areas.
SOIL AS A RESOURCE
Soil is the most important renewable natural
resource. It is the medium of plant growth and
supports different types of living organisms on
Fig. 1.5
Mining sites are abandoned after excavation
work is complete leaving deep scars and traces
of over-burdening. In states like Jharkhand,
Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and Odisha
deforestation due to mining have caused severe
land degradation. In states like Gujarat,
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra
overgrazing is  one of the main reasons for land
degradation. In the states of Punjab, Haryana,
western Uttar Pradesh, over irrigation is
responsible for land degradation due to water
logging leading to increase in salinity and
Fig. 1.6:  Soil Profile
Subsoil weathered
rocks sand and
silt clay
Substratum
weathered parent
rock material
Unweathered
parent bed rock
Top soil
the upper soil layer
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
the earth. The soil is a living system. It takes
millions of years to form soil upto a few cm in
depth. Relief, parent rock or bed rock, climate,
vegetation and other forms of life and time are
important factors in the formation of soil.
Various forces of nature such as change in
temperature, actions of running water, wind and
glaciers, activities of decomposers etc. contribute
to the formation of soil. Chemical and organic
changes which take place in the soil are equally
important. Soil also consists of organic (humus)
and inorganic materials (Fig. 1.6).
On the basis of the factors responsible for
soil formation, colour, thickness, texture, age,
chemical and physical properties, the soils of
India can be classified in different types.
Classification of Soils
India has varied relief features, landforms,
climatic realms and vegetation types. These
have contributed in the development of various
types of soils.
Alluvial Soils
This is the most widely spread and important
soil. In fact, the entire northern plains are made
of alluvial soil. These have been deposited by
three important Himalayan river systems– the
Indus, the Ganga and the Brahmaputra. These
soils also extend in Rajasthan and Gujarat
through a narrow corridor. Alluvial soil is also
found in the eastern coastal plains particularly
in the deltas of the Mahanadi, the Godavari,
the Krishna and the Kaveri rivers.
reaches of the river valley i.e. near the place of
the break of slope, the soils are coarse. Such
soils are more common in piedmont plains
such as Duars, Chos and Terai.
Apart from the size of their grains or
components, soils are also described on the
basis of their age. According to their age alluvial
soils can be classified as old alluvial (Bangar)
and new alluvial (Khadar). The bangar soil has
higher concentration of kanker nodules than
the Khadar. It has more fine particles and is
more fertile than the bangar.
Alluvial soils as a whole are very fertile.
Mostly these soils contain adequate proportion
of potash, phosphoric acid and lime which are
ideal for the growth of sugarcane, paddy, wheat
and other cereal and pulse crops. Due to its high
fertility, regions of alluvial soils are intensively
cultivated and densely populated. Soils in the
drier areas are more alkaline and can be
productive after proper treatment and irrigation.
Black Soil
These soils are black in colour and are also
known as regur soils. Black soil is ideal for
growing cotton and is also known as black
cotton soil. It is believed that climatic condition
along with the parent rock material are the
important factors for the formation of black soil.
This type of soil is typical of the Deccan trap
(Basalt) region spread over northwest Deccan
plateau and is made up of lava flows. They
cover the plateaus of Maharashtra, Saurashtra,
The alluvial soil consists of various
proportions of sand, silt and clay. As we move
inlands towards the river valleys, soil particles
appear some what bigger in size. In the upper
Fig. 1.7:  Alluvial Soil
Fig. 1.8:  Black Soil
2015-16
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
India:  Major Soil Types
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Malwa, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh and
extend in the south east direction along the
Godavari and the Krishna valleys.
The black soils are made up of extremely
fine i.e. clayey material. They are well-known
for their capacity to hold moisture. In addition,
they are rich in soil nutrients, such as calcium
carbonate, magnesium, potash and lime. These
soils are generally poor in phosphoric contents.
They develop deep cracks during hot weather,
which helps in the proper aeration of the soil.
These soils are sticky when wet and difficult to
work on unless tilled immediately after the first
shower or during the pre-monsoon period.
Red and Yellow Soils
Red soil develops on crystalline igneous rocks
in areas of low rainfall in the eastern and
southern parts of the Deccan plateau. Yelllow
and red soils are also found in parts of Odisha,
Chhattisgarh, southern parts of the middle
Ganga plain and along the piedmont zone of
the Western Ghats. These soils develop a
reddish colour due to diffusion of iron in
crystalline and metamorphic rocks. It looks
yellow when it occurs in a hydrated form.
Laterite Soil
Laterite has been derived from the Latin word
‘later’ which means brick.  The laterite soil
develops in areas with high temperature and
heavy rainfall.  This is the result of intense
leaching  due to heavy rain. Humus content of
the soil is low because most of the micro
organisms, particularly the decomposers, like
bacteria, get destroyed due to high
temperature. Laterite soils are suitable for
cultivation with adequate doses of manures
and fertilizers. These soils are mainly found in
Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Madhya
Pradesh, and the hilly areas of Odisha and
Assam. After adopting appropriate soil
conservation techniques particularly in the hilly
areas of Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu,
this soil is very useful for growing tea and
coffee. Red laterite soils in Tamil Nadu, Andhra
Pradesh and Kerala are more suitable for crops
like cashew nut.
Arid Soils
Arid soils range from red to brown in colour.  They
are generally sandy in texture and saline in
nature.  In some areas the salt content is very
high and common salt is obtained by evaporating
the water.  Due to the dry climate, high
temperature, evaporation is faster and the soil
lacks humus and moisture. The lower horizons
of the soil are occupied by Kankar because of
the increasing calcium content downwards. The
Kankar layer formations in the bottom horizons
restrict the infiltration of water. After proper
irrigation these soils become cultivable as has
been in the case of western Rajasthan.
Fig. 1.9:  Laterite Soil
Fig. 1.10:  Arid Soil
Forest Soils
These soils are found in the hilly and
mountainous areas where sufficient rain
forests are available.  The soils texture varies
2015-16
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
according to the mountain environment where
they are formed.  They are loamy and silty in
valley sides and coarse grained in the upper
slopes. In the snow covered areas of
Himalayas, these soils experience denudation
and are acidic with low humus content.  The
soils found in the lower parts of the valleys
particularly on the river terraces and alluvial
fans are fertile.
Soil Erosion and Soil Conservation
The denudation of the soil cover and
subsequent washing down is described as soil
erosion. The processes of soil formation and
erosion, go on simultaneously and generally
there is a balance between the two. Sometimes,
this balance is disturbed due to human
activities like deforestation, over-grazing,
construction and mining etc., while natural
forces like wind, glacier and water lead to soil
erosion. The running water cuts through the
clayey soils and makes deep channels as
gullies. The land becomes unfit for cultivation
and is known as bad land. In the Chambal
basin such lands are called ravines. Sometimes
Fig. 1.11:  Soil Erosion
Fig. 1.12:  Gully Erosion
water flows as a sheet over large areas down a
slope. In such cases the top soil is washed away.
This is known as sheet erosion. Wind blows
loose soil off flat or sloping land known as wind
erosion. Soil erosion is also caused due to
defective methods of farming. Ploughing in a
wrong way i.e. up and down the slope form
channels for the quick flow of water leading to
soil erosion.
Ploughing along the contour lines can
decelerate the flow of water down the slopes.
This is called contour ploughing. Steps can be
cut out on the slopes making terraces. Terrace
cultivation restricts erosion. Western and
central Himalayas have well developed terrace
farming. Large fields can be divided into strips.
Strips of grass are left to grow between the
crops. This breaks up the force of the wind.
This method is known as strip cropping.
Planting lines of trees to create shelter also
works in a similar way. Rows of such trees are
called shelter belts. These shelter belts have
contributed significantly to the stabilisation of
sand dunes and in stabilising the desert in
western India.
State of India’s Environment
• The village of Sukhomajri and the district of Jhabua have shown that it is possible
to reverse land degradation. Tree density in Sukhomajri increased from 13 per
hectare in 1976 to 1,272 per hectare in 1992;
• Regeneration of the environment leads to economic well-being, as a result
of greater resource availability, improved agriculture and animal care, and
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
consequently, increased incomes. Average annual household income in
Sukhomajri ranged from Rs 10,000-15,000 between 1979 and 1984;
• People’s management is essential for ecological restoration.  With people
being made the decision-makers by the Madhya Pradesh government, 2.9
million hectares or about 1 per cent of India’s land area, are being greened
across the state through watershed management.
Source:  The Citizens’ Fifth Report,1999 Centre of Science and Environment (CSE), New Delhi
EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES
Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which one of the following type of resource is iron ore?
Renewable
(c) Flow
Biotic
(d) Non-renewable
(ii) Under which of the following type of resource can tidal energy be put?
Replenishable
(c) Abiotic
Human-made
(d) Non-recyclable
(iii) Which one of the following is the main cause of land degradation in Punjab?
Intensive cultivation
(c) Over irrigation
Deforestation
(d) Overgrazing
(iv) In which one of the following states is terrace cultivation practised?
Punjab
(c) Haryana
Plains of Uttar Pradesh
(d) Uttarakhand
(v) In which of the following states is black soil found?
Jammu and Kashmir
(c) Rajasthan
Gujarat
(d) Jharkhand
2015-16
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) Name three states having black soil and the crop which is mainly grown in it.
(ii) What type of soil is found in the river deltas of the eastern coast? Give three
main features of this type of soil.
(iii) What steps can be taken to control soil erosion in the hilly areas?
(iv) What are the biotic and abiotic resources? Give some examples.
Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Explain land use pattern in India and why has the land under forest not
increased much since 1960-61?
(ii) How have technical and economic development led to more consumption of
resources?
PROJECT/ACTIVITY
Make a project showing consumption and conservation of resources in your locality.
Have a discussion in the class – how to conserve various resources used in
your school.
Imagine if oil supplies get exhausted, how will this affect our life style?
Solve the puzzle by following your search horizontally and vertically to find the
hidden answers.
Natural endowments in the form of land, water, vegetation and minerals.
A type of  non-renewable resource.
(iii)
Soil with high water retaining capacity.
Intensively leached soils of the monsoon climate.
Plantation  of trees on a large scale to check soil erosion.
The Great Plains of India are made up of these soils.
2015-16
We share this planet with millions of other
living beings, starting from micro-organisms
and bacteria, lichens to banyan trees,
elephants and blue whales. This entire
habitat that we live in has immense
biodiversity. We humans along with all living
organisms form a complex web of ecological
system in which we are only a part and very
much dependent on this system for our own
existence. For example, the plants, animals
and micro-organisms re-create the quality of
the air we breathe, the water we drink and
the soil that produces our food without which
we cannot survive. Forests play a key role in
the ecological system as these are also the
primary producers on which all other living
beings depend.
Flora and Fauna in India
If you look around, you will be able to find
that there are some animals and plants which
are unique in your area. In fact, India is one
of the world’s richest countries in terms of
its vast array of biological diversity, and has
nearly 8 per cent of the total number of
species in the world (estimated to be 1.6
million). This is possibly twice or thrice the
number yet to be discovered. You have
already studied in detail about the extent
and variety of forest and wildlife resources
in India. You may have realised the
importance of these resources in our daily
life. These diverse flora and fauna are so
well integrated in our daily life that we take
these for granted. But, lately, they are under
great stress mainy due to insensitivity to
our environment.
Narak! My Lord, you are the creator of music
in the world of Lepchas
Oh Narak! My Lord, let me dedicate
myself to you
Let me gather your music from the
springs, the rivers, the mountains, the forests,
the insects and the animals
Let me gather your music from the sweet
breeze and offer it to you
Source: Lepcha folk song from northern part of
West Bengal
Biodiversity or Biological Diversity is
immensely rich in wildlife and cultivated
species, diverse in form and function but
closely integrated in a system through
multiple network of interdependencies.
Over 81,000 species of fauna and 47,000
species of flora are found in this country
so far? Of the estimated 47,000 plant
species, about 15,000 flowering species
are endemic (indigenous) to India.
Find out stories prevalent in your region
which are about the harmonious relationship
between human beings and nature.
Some estimates suggest that at least 10
per cent of India’s recorded wild flora and
20 per cent of its mammals are on the
threatened list. Many of these would now be
categorised as ‘critical’, that is on the verge
of extinction like the cheetah, pink-headed
duck, mountain quail, forest spotted owlet,
and plants like madhuca insignis (a wild
2015-16
variety of mahua) and
hubbardia
heptaneuron,(a species of grass). In fact, no
one can say how many species may have
already been lost. Today, we only talk of the
larger and more visible animals and plants
that have become extinct but what about
smaller animals like insects and plants?
Let us now understand the different
categories of existing plants and animal
species. Based on the International Union
for Conservation of Nature and Natural
Resources (IUCN), we can classify as
follows–
Normal Species: Species whose population
levels are considered to be normal for
their survival, such as cattle, sal, pine,
rodents, etc.
Endangered Species: These are species
which are in danger of extinction. The
survival of such species is difficult if the
negative factors that have led to a decline in
their population continue to operate. The
examples of such species are black buck,
crocodile, Indian wild ass, Indian rhino, lion
tailed macaque, sangai (brow anter deer in
Manipur), etc.
Vulnerable Species: These are species
whose population has declined to levels from
where it is likely to move into the endangered
category in the near future if the negative
factors continue to operate. The examples of
such species are blue sheep, Asiatic elephant,
Gangetic dolphin, etc.
Rare Species:  Species with small
population may move into the endangered
or vulnerable category if the negative factors
affecting them continue to operate. The
examples of such species are the Himalayan
brown bear, wild Asiatic buffalo, desert fox
and hornbill, etc.
Endemic Species: These are species which
are only found in some particular areas
usually isolated by natural or geographical
barriers. Examples of such species are the
Andaman teal, Nicobar pigeon, Andaman
wild pig, mithun in Arunchal Pradesh.
Extinct Species: These are species which
are not found after searches of known or
likely areas where they may occur. A species
may be extinct from a local area, region,
country, continent or the entire earth.
Examples of such species are the Asiatic
cheetah, pink head duck.
Do you know that among the larger
animals in India, 79 species of mammals,
44 of birds, 15 of reptiles, and 3 of
amphibians are threatened? Nearly 1,500
plant species are considered endangered.
Flowering plants and vertebrate animals
have recently become extinct at a rate
estimated to be 50 to 100 times the
average expected natural rate.
Vanishing Forests
The dimensions of deforestation in India are
staggering. The forest and tree cover in the
country is estimated at 78.92 million hectare,
which is 24.01 per cent of the total
geographical area (dense forest 12.24 per
cent; open forest 8.99 per cent; and
mangrove 0.14 per cent). According to the
State of Forest Report (2013), the dense forest
cover has increased by 10,098 sq km since
1997. However, this apparent increase in the
forest cover is due to plantation by different
agencies.
FOREST AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES
Fig. 2.1
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
depleted our forests and wildlife. The greatest
damage inflicted on Indian forests was during
the colonial period due to the expansion of the
railways, agriculture, commercial and scientific
forestry and mining activities. Even after
Independence, agricultural expansion
continues to be one of the major causes of
depletion of forest resources. Between 1951 and
1980, according to the Forest Survey of India,
over 26,200 sq. km. of forest area was converted
into agricultural land all over India. Substantial
parts of the tribal belts, especially in the north-
eastern and central India, have been deforested
or degraded by shifting cultivation (jhum), a type
of ‘slash and burn’ agriculture.
Fig. 2.2:  A few extinct, rare and endangered species
Asiatic Cheetah: where did they go?
The world’s fastest land mammal, the
cheetah (Acinonyx jubantus), is a unique and
specialised member of the cat family and
can move at the speed of 112 km./hr. The
cheetah is often mistaken for a leopard. Its
distinguishing marks are the long teardrop-
shaped lines on each side of the nose from
the corner of its eyes to its mouth. Prior to
the 20th century, cheetahs were widely
distributed throughout Africa and Asia.
Today, the Asian cheetah is nearly extinct
due to a decline of available habitat and
prey. The species was declared extinct in
India long back in 1952.
What are the negative factors that cause such
fearful depletion of the flora and fauna?
If you look around, you will be able to find
out how we have transformed nature into a
resource obtaining directly and indirectly from
the forests and wildlife – wood, barks, leaves,
rubber, medicines, dyes, food, fuel, fodder,
manure, etc. So it is we ourselves who have
Are colonial forest policies
to be blamed?
Some of our environmental activists say that
the promotion of a few favoured species, in
many parts of India, has been carried
through the ironically-termed “enrichment
plantation”, in which a single commercially
valuable species was extensively planted
and other species eliminated. For instance,
2015-16
FOREST AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES
Large-scale development projects have also
contributed significantly to the loss of forests.
Since 1951, over 5,000 sq km of forest was
cleared for river valley projects. Clearing of
forests is still continuing with projects like the
Narmada Sagar Project in Madhya Pradesh,
which would inundate 40,000 hectares of
forest. Mining is another important factor
behind deforestation. The Buxa Tiger Reserve
in West Bengal is seriously threatened by the
ongoing dolomite mining. It has disturbed the
natural habitat of many species and blocked
the migration route of several others, including
the great Indian elephant.
Many foresters and environmentalists hold
the view that the greatest degrading factors
behind the depletion of forest resources are
grazing and fuel-wood collection. Though, there
may be some substance in their argument, yet,
the fact remains that a substantial part of the
fuel-fodder demand is met by lopping rather
than by felling entire trees. The forest
ecosystems are repositories of some of the
country’s most valuable forest products,
minerals and other resources that meet the
demands of the rapidly expanding industrial-
urban economy. These protected areas, thus
mean different things to different people, and
therein lies the fertile ground for conflicts.
teak monoculture has damaged the natural
forest in South India and Chir Pine (Pinus
roxburghii) plantations in the Himalayas
have replaced the Himalayan oak (Quercius
spp.) and Rhododendron forests.
Fig. 2.3
The Himalayan Yew in trouble
The Himalayan Yew (Taxus wallachiana) is a
medicinal plant found in various parts of
Himachal Pradesh and Arunachal Pradesh.
A chemical compound called ‘taxol’ is
extracted from the bark, needles, twigs and
roots of this tree, and it has been successfully
used to treat some cancers – the drug is now
the biggest selling anti-cancer drug in the
world. The species is under great threat due
to over-exploitation. In the last one decade,
thousands of yew trees have dried up in
various parts of Himachal Pradesh and
Arunachal Pradesh.
Tribal girls using bamboo saplings in a
nursery at Mukhali near Silent Valley
Tribal women selling minor forest produce
Leaf litter collection by women folk
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Habitat destruction, hunting, poaching,
over-exploitation, environmental pollution,
poisoning and forest fires are factors, which
have led to the decline in India’s biodiversity.
Other important causes of environmental
destruction are unequal access, inequitable
consumption of resources and differential
sharing of responsibility for environmental
well-being. Over-population in third world
countries is often cited as the cause of
environmental degradation. However, an
average American consumes 40 times more
resources than an average Somalian. Similarly,
the richest five per cent of Indian society
probably cause more ecological damage
because of the amount they consume than the
poorest 25 per cent. The former shares
minimum responsibilities for environmental
well-being. The question is: who is consuming
what, from where and how much?
men. In many societies, women bear the major
responsibility of collection of fuel, fodder, water
and other basic subsistence needs. As these
resources are depleted, the drudgery of women
increases and sometimes they have to walk for
more than 10 km to collect these resources.
This causes serious health problems for women
and negligence of home and children because
of the increased hours of work, which often has
serious social implications. The indirect impact
of degradation such as severe drought or
deforestation-induced floods, etc. also hits the
poor the hardest. Poverty in these cases is a
direct outcome of environmental destruction.
Therefore, forest and wildlife, are vital to the
quality of life and environment in the
subcontinent. It is imperative to adapt to sound
forest and wildlife conservation strategies.
Conservation of Forest and Wildlife in India
Conservation in the background of rapid
decline in wildlife population and forestry has
become essential. But why do we need to
conserve our forests and wildlife? Conservation
preserves the ecological diversity and our life
support systems – water, air and soil. It also
preserves the genetic diversity of plants and
animals for better growth of species and
breeding. For example, in agriculture, we are
still dependent on traditional crop varieties.
Fisheries too are heavily dependent on the
maintenance of aquatic biodiversity.
In the 1960s and 1970s, conservationists
demanded a national wildlife protection
programme. The Indian Wildlife (Protection)
Act was implemented in 1972, with various
provisions for protecting habitats. An all-India
list of protected species was also published.
The thrust of the programme was towards
protecting the remaining population of certain
endangered species by banning hunting,
giving legal protection to their habitats, and
restricting trade in wildlife. Subsequently,
central and many state governments
established national parks and wildlife
sanctuaries about which you have already
studied. The central government also
announced several projects for protecting
specific animals, which were gravely
threatened, including the tiger, the one-
Do you know that over half of India’s
natural forests are gone, one-third of its
wetlands drained out, 70 per cent of its
surface water bodies polluted, 40 per cent
of its mangroves wiped out, and with
continued hunting and trade of wild
animals and commercially valuable
plants, thousands of plant and animal
species are heading towards extinction?
The destruction of forests and wildlife is not
just a biological issue. The biological loss is
strongly correlated with the loss of cultural
diversity. Such losses have increasingly
marginalised and impoverished many
indigenous and other forest-dependent
communities, who directly depend on various
components of the forest and wildlife for food,
drink, medicine, culture, spirituality, etc.
Within the poor, women are affected more than
Have you noticed any activity which leads
to the loss of biodiversity around you? Write
a note on it and suggest some measures to
prevent it.
2015-16
FOREST AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES
horned rhinoceros, the Kashmir stag or
hangul, three types of crocodiles – fresh water
crocodile, saltwater crocodile and the Gharial,
the Asiatic lion, and others. Most recently, the
Indian elephant, black buck (chinkara), the
great Indian bustard (godawan) and the snow
leopard, etc. have been given full or partial
legal protection against hunting and trade
throughout India.
Fig. 2.4:  Rhino and deer in Kaziranga National Park
Project Tiger
Tiger is one of the key wildlife species in
the faunal web. In 1973, the authorities
realised that the tiger population had
dwindled to 1,827 from an estimated
55,000 at the turn of the century. The major
threats to tiger population are numerous,
such as poaching for trade, shrinking
habitat, depletion of prey base species,
growing human population, etc. The trade
of tiger skins and the use of their bones in
traditional medicines, especially in the
Asian countries left the tiger population on
the verge of extinction. Since India and
Nepal provide habitat to about two-thirds
of the surviving tiger population in the
world, these two nations became prime
targets for poaching and illegal trading.
“Project Tiger”, one of the well-
publicised wildlife campaigns in the world,
was launched in 1973. Initially, it showed
success as the tiger population went up to
4,002 in 1985 and 4,334 in 1989. But in
1993, the population of the tiger had
dropped to 3,600. There were 39 tiger
reserves in India covering an area of
32137.14 sq km* Tiger conservation has
been viewed not only as an effort to save
an endangered species, but with equal
importance as a means of preserving
biotypes of sizeable magnitude. Corbett
National Park in Uttarakhand, Sunderbans
National Park in West Bengal, Bandhavgarh
National Park in Madhya Pradesh, Sariska
Wildlife Sanctuary in Rajasthan, Manas
Tiger Reserve in Assam and Periyar Tiger
Reserve in Kerala are some of the tiger
reserves of India.
The conservation projects are now focusing
on biodiversity rather than on a few of its
components. There is now a more intensive
search for different conservation measures.
Increasingly, even insects are beginning to find
a place in conservation planning. In the
notification under Wildlife Act of 1980 and
1986, several hundred butterflies, moths,
beetles, and one dragonfly have been added to
the list of protected species. In 1991, for the
first time plants were also added to the list,
starting with six species.
Collect more information on the wildlife
sanctuaries and national parks of India and
cite their locations on the map of India.
Source :
*Natinal Tiger Coservation Authority, Ministry of Environment Forest, Govternment of India, 2009-10
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Types and Distribution of Forest and
Wildlife Resources
Even if we want to conserve our vast forest and
wildlife resources, it is rather difficult to
manage, control and regulate them. In India,
much of its forest and wildlife resources are
either owned or managed by the government
through the Forest Department or other
government departments. These are classified
under the following categories.
(i) Reserved Forests: More than half of the
total forest land has been declared
reserved forests. Reserved forests are
regarded as the most valuable as far as the
conservation of forest and wildlife resources
are concerned.
(ii) Protected Forests: Almost one-third of the
total forest area is protected forest, as declared
by the Forest Department. This forest land are
protected from any further depletion.
(iii) Unclassed Forests: These are other
forests and wastelands belonging to
both government and private individuals
and communities.
Reserved and protected forests are also
referred to as permanent forest estates
maintained for the purpose of producing
timber and other forest produce, and for
protective reasons. Madhya Pradesh has the
largest area under permanent forests,
constituting 75 per cent of its total forest area.
Jammu and Kashmir, Andhra Pradesh,
Uttarakhand, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, West
Bengal, and Maharashtra have large
percentages of reserved forests of its total forest
area whereas Bihar, Haryana, Punjab,
Himachal Pradesh, Odisha and Rajasthan have
a bulk of it under protected forests. All North-
eastern states and parts of Gujarat have a very
high percentage of their forests as unclassed
forests managed by local communities.
Can you find out the reasons for the above mentioned problems?
2015-16
FOREST AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES
Community and Conservation
Conservation strategies are not new in our
country. We often ignore that in India, forests
are also home to some of the traditional
communities. In some areas of India, local
communities are struggling to conserve these
habitats along with government officials,
recognising that only this will secure their own
long-term livelihood. In Sariska Tiger Reserve,
Rajasthan, villagers have fought against
mining by citing the Wildlife Protection Act. In
many areas, villagers themselves are protecting
habitats and explicitly rejecting government
involvement. The inhabitants of five villages in
the Alwar district of Rajasthan have declared
1,200 hectares of forest as the Bhairodev
Dakav ‘Sonchuri’, declaring their own set of
rules and regulations which do not allow
hunting, and are protecting the wildlife against
any outside encroachments.
Sacred groves - a wealth of diverse
and rare species
Nature worship is an age old tribal belief
based on the premise that all creations of
nature have to be protected. Such beliefs
have preserved several virgin forests in
pristine form called Sacred Groves (the
forests of God and Goddesses). These
patches of forest or parts of large forests have
been left untouched by the local people and
any interference with them is banned.
Certain societies revere a particular tree
which they have preserved from time
immemorial. The Mundas and the Santhal of
Chota Nagpur region worship mahua (Bassia
latifolia) and kadamba (Anthocaphalus
cadamba) trees, and the tribals of Odisha and
Bihar worship the tamarind (Tamarindus
indica) and mango (Mangifera indica) trees
during weddings. To many of us, peepal and
banyan trees are considered sacred.
Indian society comprises several
cultures, each with its own set of traditional
methods of conserving nature and its
creations. Sacred qualities are often
ascribed to springs, mountain peaks, plants
and animals which are closely protected. You
will find troops of macaques and langurs
around many temples. They are fed daily
and treated as a part of temple devotees. In
and around Bishnoi villages in Rajasthan,
herds of blackbuck, (chinkara), nilgai and
peacocks can be seen as an integral part of
the community and nobody harms them.
The famous Chipko movement in the
Himalayas has not only successfully resisted
deforestation in several areas but has also shown
that community afforestation with indigenous
species can be enormously successful.
Attempts to revive the traditional conservation
methods or developing new methods of
ecological farming are now widespread. Farmers
and citizen’s groups like the Beej Bachao
Andolan in Tehri and Navdanya have shown
that adequate levels of diversified crop
production without the use of synthetic
chemicals are possible and economically viable.
In India joint forest management (JFM)
programme furnishes a good example for
involving local communities in the
management and restoration of degraded
forests. The programme has been in formal
existence since 1988 when the state of Odisha
passed the first resolution for joint forest
management. JFM depends on the formation
of local (village) institutions that undertake
protection activities mostly on degraded forest
land managed by the forest department. In
return, the members of these communities are
entitled to intermediary benefits like non-timber
forest produces and share in the timber
harvested by ‘successful protection’.
The clear lesson from the dynamics of both
environmental destruction and reconstruction
in India is that local communities everywhere
have to be involved in some kind of natural
resource management. But there is still a long
way to go before local communities are at the
centre-stage in decision-making. Accept only
those economic or developmental activities,
that are people centric, environment-friendly
and economically rewarding.
Write a short essay on any practices which
you may have observed and practised in
your everyday lives that conserve and protect
the environment around you.
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
“The tree is a peculiar organism of unlimited kindness and benevolence and
makes no demand for its sustenance, and extends generously the products of its
life activity. It affords protection to all beings, offering shade even to the axemen
who destroy it”.
Gautama Buddha (487 B.C.)
EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES
Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which of these statements is not a valid reason for the depletion of flora
and fauna?
(a) Agricultural expansion.
(b) Large scale developmental projects.
(c) Grazing and fuel wood collection.
(d) Rapid industrialisation and urbanisation.
(ii) Which of the following conservation strategies do not directly involve
community participation?
(a) Joint forest management
(c) Chipko Movement
(b) Beej Bachao Andolan
(d) Demarcation of Wildlife sanctuaries
Match the following animals with their category of existence.
Animals/Plants
Category of existence
Black buck
Extinct
Asiatic elephant
Andaman wild pig
Endangered
Himalayan brown bear
Vulnerable
Pink head duck
Endemic
Match the following.
Reserved forests
other forests and wastelands belonging to both
government and private individuals and
communities
Protected forests
forests are regarded as most valuable as far as the
conservation of forest and wildlife resources
Unclassed forests
forest lands are protected from any further depletion
Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) What is biodiversity? Why is biodiversity important for human lives?
(ii) How have human activities affected the depletion of flora and fauna? Explain.
Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Describe how communities have conserved and protected forests and wildlife
in India?
(ii) Write a note on good practices towards conserving forest and wildlife.
2015-16
You already know that three-fourth of the
earth’s surface is covered with water, but only
a small proportion of it accounts for freshwater
that can be put to use. This freshwater is mainly
obtained from surface run off and ground water
that is continually being renewed and
recharged through the hydrological cycle. All
water moves within the hydrological cycle
ensuring that water is a renewable resource.
You might wonder that if three-fourth of
the world is covered with water and water is a
renewable resource, then how is it that
countries and regions around the globe suffer
from water scarcity? Why is it predicted that
by 2025, nearly two billion people will live in
absolute water scarcity?
Water: Some facts and figures
• 96.5 per cent of the total volume of world’s
water is estimated to exist as oceans and
only 2.5 per cent as freshwater. Nearly
70 per cent of this freshwater occurs as
ice sheets and glaciers in Antarctica,
Greenland and the mountainous regions
of the world, while a little less than 30
per cent is stored as groundwater in the
world’s aquifers.
• India receives nearly 4 per cent of the
global precipitation and ranks 133 in the
world in terms of water availability per
person per annum.
• The total renewable water resources of India
are estimated at 1,897 sq km per annum.
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
associate it with regions having low rainfall
or those that are drought prone. We
instantaneously visualise the deserts of
Rajasthan and women balancing many
‘matkas’ (earthen pots) used for collecting and
storing water and travelling long distances to
get water. True, the availability of water
resources varies over space and time, mainly
due to the variations in seasonal and annual
precipitation, but water scarcity in most cases
is caused by over- exploitation, excessive use
and unequal access to water among different
social groups.
Fig. 3.1:  Water Scarcity
• By 2025, it is predicted that large parts of
India will join countries or regions having
absolute water scarcity.
Source: The UN World Water Development
Report, 2003
WATER SCARCITY AND THE NEED FOR WATER
CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT
Given the abundance and renewability of
water, it is difficult to imagine that we may
suffer from water scarcity. The moment we
speak of water shortages, we immediately
Water, Water Everywhere, Not a Drop to Drink:
After a heavy downpour, a boy collects drinking
water in Kolkata. Life in the city and its adjacent
districts was paralysed as incessant overnight rain,
meaning a record 180 mm, flooded vast area and
disruted traffic.
A Kashmiri earthquake survivor carries water in
the snow in a devastated village.
2015-16
WATER RESOURCES
requirements but have further aggravated the
problem. If you look into the housing
societies or colonies in the cities, you would
find that most of these have their own
groundwater pumping devices to meet their
water needs. Not surprisingly, we find that
fragile water resources are being over -
exploited and have caused their depletion in
several of these cities.
So far we have focused on the quantitative
aspects of water scarcity. Now, let us consider
another situation where water is sufficiently
available to meet the needs of the people,
but, the area still suffers from water scarcity.
This scarcity may be due to bad quality of
water. Lately, there has been a growing
concern that even if there is ample water to
meet the needs of the people, much of it may
be polluted by domestic and industrial
wastes, chemicals, pesticides and fertilisers
used in agriculture, thus, making it
hazardous for human use.
Where is then water scarcity likely to
occur? As you have read in the hydrological
cycle, freshwater can be obtained directly
from precipitation, surface run off and
groundwater.
Is it possible that an area or region may
have ample water resources but is still facing
water scarcity? Many of our cities are such
examples. Thus, water scarcity may be an
outcome of large and growing population and
consequent greater demands for water, and
unequal access to it. A large population means
more water not only for domestic use but also
to produce more food. Hence, to facilitate
higher food-grain production, water resources
are being over-exploited to expand irrigated
areas and dry-season agriculture. You may
have seen in many television advertisements
that most farmers have their own wells and
tube-wells in their farms for irrigation to
increase their produce. But have you ever
wondered what this could result in? That it
may lead to falling groundwater levels,
adversely affecting water availability and food
security of the people.
Post-independent India witnessed
intensive industrialisation and urbanisation,
creating vast opportunities for us. Today,
large industrial houses are as commonplace
as the industrial units of many MNCs
(Multinational Corporations). The ever-
increasing number of industries has made
matters worse by exerting pressure on
existing freshwater resources. Industries,
apart from being heavy users of water, also
require power to run them. Much of this
energy comes from hydroelectric power.
Today, in India hydroeclectric power
contributes approximately 22 per cent of the
total electricity produced. Moreover,
multiplying urban centres with large and
dense populations and urban lifestyles have
not only added to water and energy
According to Falkenmark, a Swedish expert,
water stress occurs when water availability
is between 1,000 and 1,600 cubic metre per
person per year.
India’s rivers, especially the smaller ones,
have all turned into toxic streams. And even
the big ones like the Ganga and Yamuna
are far from being pure. The assault on
India’s rivers – from population growth,
agricultural modernisation, urbanisation and
industrialisation – is enormous and growing
by the day….. This entire life stands
threatened.
Source: The Citizens’ Fifth Report, CSE, 1999.
You may have already realised that the
need of the hour is to conserve and manage
our water resources, to safeguard ourselves
from health hazards, to ensure food security,
continuation of our livelihoods and
productive activities and also to prevent
degradation of our natural ecosystems. Over
exploitation and mismanagement of water
resources will impoverish this resource and
cause ecological crisis that may have
profound impact on our lives.
From your everyday experiences, write a short
proposal on how you can conserve water.
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
MULTI-PURPOSE RIVER PROJECTS AND
INTEGRATED WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
But, how do we conserve and manage water?
Archaeological and historical records show that
from ancient times we have been constructing
sophisticated hydraulic structures like dams
built of stone rubble, reservoirs or lakes,
embankments and canals for irrigation. Not
surprisingly, we have continued this tradition
in modern India by building dams in most of
our river basins.
What are dams and how do they help us
in conserving and managing water? Dams
were traditionally built to impound rivers and
rainwater that could be used later to irrigate
agricultural fields. Today, dams are built not
just for irrigation but for electricity generation,
water supply for domestic and industrial
uses, flood control, recreation, inland
navigation and fish breeding. Hence, dams are
now referred to as multi-purpose projects
where the many uses of the impounded water
are integrated with one another. For example,
in the Sutluj-Beas river basin, the Bhakra –
Nangal project water is being used both for
hydel power production and irrigation.
Similarly, the Hirakud project in the
Mahanadi basin integrates conservation of
water with flood control.
Hydraulic Structures in Ancient India
• In the first century B.C., Sringaverapura
near Allahabad had sophisticated water
harvesting system channelling the flood
water of the river Ganga.
• During the time of Chandragupta Maurya,
dams, lakes and irrigation systems were
extensively built.
• Evidences of sophisticated irrigation works
have also been found in Kalinga,
(Odisha), Nagarjunakonda (Andhra
Pradesh), Bennur (Karnataka), Kolhapur
(Maharashtra), etc.
• In the 11th Century, Bhopal Lake, one of the
largest artificial lakes of its time was built.
• In the 14th Century, the tank in Hauz Khas,
Delhi was constructed by Iltutmish for
supplying water to Siri Fort area.
Source: Dying Wisdom, CSE, 1997.
Fig. 3.2: Hirakud Dam
A dam is a barrier across flowing water that
obstructs, directs or retards the flow, often
creating a reservoir, lake or impoundment.
“Dam” refers to the reservoir rather than the
structure. Most dams have a section called a
spillway or weir over which or through which
it is intended that water will flow either
intermittently or continuously. Dams are
classified according to structure, intended
purpose or height. Based on structure and
the materials used, dams are classified as
timber dams, embankment dams or masonry
dams, with several subtypes. According to
the height, dams can be categorised as large
dams and major dams or alternatively as low
dams, medium height dams and high dams.
Multi-purpose projects, launched after
Independence with their integrated water
resources management approach, were
thought of as the vehicle that would lead the
nation to development and progress,
overcoming the handicap of its colonial past.
Jawaharlal Nehru proudly proclaimed the
dams as the ‘temples of modern India’; the
reason being that it would integrate
development of agriculture and the village
economy with rapid industrialisation and
growth of the urban economy.
2015-16
WATER RESOURCES
In recent years, multi-purpose projects and
large dams have come under great scrutiny
and opposition for a variety of reasons.
Regulating and damming of rivers affect their
natural flow causing poor sediment flow and
excessive sedimentation at the bottom of the
reservoir, resulting in rockier stream beds and
poorer habitats for the rivers’ aquatic life. Dams
also fragment rivers making it difficult for
aquatic fauna to migrate, especially for
spawning. The reservoirs that are created on
the floodplains also submerge the existing
vegetation and soil leading to its decomposition
over a period of time.
Multi-purpose projects and large dams
have also been the cause of many new social
movements like the ‘Narmada Bachao Andolan’
and the ‘Tehri Dam Andolan’ etc. Resistance
to these projects has primarily been due to the
large-scale displacement of local communities.
Local people often had to give up their land,
livelihood and their meagre access and control
over resources for the greater good of the
nation. So, if the local people are not benefiting
from such projects then who is benefited?
Perhaps, the landowners and large farmers,
industrialists and few urban centres. Take the
case of the landless in a village – does he really
gain from such a project?
Irrigation has also changed the cropping
pattern of many regions with farmers shifting
to water intensive and commercial crops. This
has great ecological consequences like
salinisation of the soil. At the same time, it has
transformed the social landscape i.e.
increasing the social gap between the richer
landowners and the landless poor. As we can
see, the dams did create conflicts between
people wanting different uses and benefits from
the same water resources. In Gujarat, the
Sabarmati-basin farmers were agitated and
almost caused a riot over the higher priority
given to water supply in urban areas,
particularly during droughts. Inter-state water
disputes are also becoming common with
regard to sharing the costs and benefits of the
multi-purpose project.
Find out more about any one traditional
method of building dams and irrigation works.
We have sown the crops in Asar
We will bring Bhadu in Bhadra
Floods have swollen the Damodar
The sailing boats cannot sail
Oh! Damodar, we fall at your feet
Reduce the floods a little
Bhadu will come a year later
Let the boats sail on your surface
(This popular Bhadu song in the Damodar valley
region narrates the troubles faced by people
owing to the flooding of Damodar river known
as the river of sorrow.)
Narmada Bachao Andolan or Save
Narmada
Movement
Governmental Organisation (NGO) that
mobilised tribal people, farmers,
environmentalists and human rights
activists against the Sardar Sarovar Dam
being built across the Narmada river in
Gujarat. It originally focused on the
environmental issues related to trees that
would be submerged under the dam
water. Recently it has re-focused the
aim to enable poor citizens, especially
the oustees (displaced people) to get
full rehabilitation facilities from
the government.
People felt that their suffering would not
be in vain… accepted the trauma of
displacement believing in the promise of
irrigated fields and plentiful harvests. So,
often the survivors of Rihand told us that they
accepted their sufferings as sacrifice for the
sake of their nation. But now, after thirty bitter
years of being adrift, their livelihood having
even being more precarious, they keep
asking: “Are we the only ones chosen to
make sacrifices for the nation?”
Source: S. Sharma, quoted in In the Belly of the
River. Tribal conflicts over development in Narmada
valley, A. Baviskar, 1995.
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
India:  Major Rivers and Dams
2015-16
WATER RESOURCES
Most of the objections to the projects arose
due to their failure to achieve the purposes for
which they were built. Ironically, the dams that
were constructed to control floods have
Make a list of inter-state water disputes.
Do you know that the Krishna-Godavari
dispute is due to the objections raised by
Karnataka
Andhra
Pradesh
governments? It is regarding the diversion
of more water at Koyna by the Maharashtra
government for a multipurpose project. This
would reduce downstream flow in their
states with adverse consequences for
agriculture and industry.
triggered floods due to sedimentation in the
reservoir. Moreover, the big dams have mostly
been unsuccessful in controlling floods at the
time of excessive rainfall. You may have seen
or read how the release of water from dams
during heavy rains aggravated the flood
situation in Maharashtra and Gujarat in 2006.
The floods have not only devastated life and
property but also caused extensive soil erosion.
Sedimentation also meant that the flood plains
were deprived of silt, a natural fertiliser, further
adding on to the problem of land degradation.
It was also observed that the multi-purpose
projects induced earthquakes, caused water-
borne diseases and pests and pollution
resulting from excessive use of water.
RAINWATER HARVESTING
Many thought that given the disadvantages
and rising resistance against the multi-
Collect information about flood prone areas of the country
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Roof top rain water is collected using a PVC pipe
Filtered using sand and bricks
Underground pipe takes water to sump for
immediate usage
Excess water from the sump is taken to the well
Water from the well recharges the underground
Take water from the well (later)
(b) Recharge through Abandoned Dugwell
Fig 3.4:  Rooftop Rainwater Harvesting
purpose projects, water harvesting system
was a viable alternative, both socio-
economically and environmentally. In ancient
India, along with the sophisticated hydraulic
structures, there existed an extraordinary
tradition of water-harvesting system. People
had in-depth knowledge of rainfall regimes
and soil types and developed wide ranging
techniques to harvest rainwater, groundwater,
river water and flood water in keeping with
the local ecological conditions and their water
needs. In hill and mountainous regions,
people built diversion channels like the ‘guls’
or ‘kuls’ of the Western Himalayas for
agriculture. ‘Rooftop rain water harvesting’
was commonly practised to store drinking
water, particularly in Rajasthan. In the flood
plains of Bengal, people developed inundation
channels to irrigate their fields. In arid and
semi-arid regions, agricultural fields were
converted into rain fed storage structures that
allowed the water to stand and moisten the
soil like the ‘khadins’ in Jaisalmer and ‘Johads’
in other parts of Rajasthan.
Fig. 3.3
(a) Recharge through Hand Pump
2015-16
WATER RESOURCES
Fig 3.5:  Traditional method of rain water harvesting
A kul leads to a circular village tank, as the above
in the Kaza village, from which water is released as
and when required.
In the semi-arid and arid regions of
Rajasthan, particularly in Bikaner, Phalodi and
Barmer, almost all the houses traditionally had
underground tanks or tankas for storing
drinking water. The tanks could be as large as
a big room; one household in Phalodi had a tank
that was 6.1 metres deep, 4.27 metres long and
2.44 metres wide. The tankas were part of the
well-developed rooftop rainwater harvesting
system and were built inside the main house or
the courtyard. They were connected to the
sloping roofs of the houses through a pipe. Rain
falling on the rooftops would travel down the
pipe and was stored in these underground
‘tankas’. The first spell of rain was usually not
collected as this would clean the roofs and the
pipes. The rainwater from the subsequent
showers was then collected.
The rainwater can be stored in the tankas
till the next rainfall making it an extremely
reliable source of drinking water when all other
sources are dried up, particularly in the
summers. Rainwater, or palar pani, as
commonly referred to in these parts, is
considered the purest form of natural water.
Many houses constructed underground rooms
adjoining the ‘tanka’ to beat the summer heat
as it would keep the room cool.
Roof top rain water harvesting is the most
common practice in Shillong, Meghalaya.
It is interesting because Cherapunjee and
Mawsynram  situated at a distance of 55
km. from Shillong receive the highest
rainfall in the world, yet the state capital
Shillong faces acute shortage of water.
Nearly every household in the city has a
roof top rain water harvesting structure.
Nearly 15-25 per cent of the total water
requirement of the household comes from
roof top water harvesting.
Today, in western Rajasthan, sadly the
practice of rooftop rainwater harvesting is on the
decline as plenty of water is available due to the
perennial Rajasthan Canal, though some houses
still maintain the tankas since they do not like
the taste of tap water. Fortunately, in many parts
of rural and urban India, rooftop rainwater
harvesting is being successfully adapted to store
and conserve water. In Gendathur, a remote
backward village in Mysuru, Karnataka, villagers
have installed, in their household’s rooftop,
rainwater harvesting system to meet their water
needs. Nearly 200 households have installed this
system and the village has earned the rare
distinction of being rich in rainwater. See Fig. 3.6
for a better understanding of the rooftop
Find out other rainwater harvesting systems
existing in and around your locality.
Fig. 3.6
Rooftop harvesting was common across the towns
and villages of the Thar. Rainwater that falls on
the sloping roofs of houses is taken through a pipe
into an underground tanka (circular holes in the
ground). built in the main house or in the courtyard.
The picture above shows water being taken from a
neighbour’s roof through a long pipe. Here the
neighbour’s rooftop has been used for collection of
rainwater. The picture shows a hole through which
rainwater flows down into an underground tanka.
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Fig 3.7
BAMBOO DRIP IRRIGATION SYSTEM
In Meghalaya, a 200-year-old system of tapping stream
and spring water by using bamboo pipes, is prevalent.
About 18-20 litres of water enters the bamboo pipe system,
gets transported over hundreds of metres, and finally
reduces to 20-80 drops per minute at the site of the plant.
Picture 2 and 3: The channel sections, made of bamboo, divert water
to the plant site where it is distributed into branches, again made and
laid out with different forms of bamboo pipes. The flow of water into
the pipes is controlled by manipulating the pipe positions.
Picture 1: Bamboo pipes are used to divert perennial springs on
the hilltops to the lower reaches by gravity.
Picture 5 and 6
Reduced channel sections
and diversion units are
used at the last stage of
water application. The last
channel section enables
water to be dropped near
the roots of the plant.
Picture 4: If the pipes pass a road,
they are taken high above the land.
Tamil Nadu is the first state in India which
has made roof top rainwater harvesting
structure compulsory to all the houses
across the state. There are legal provisions
to punish the defaulters.
rainwater harvesting system which is adapted
here. Gendathur receives an annual precipitation
of 1,000 mm, and with 80 per cent of collection
efficiency and of about 10 fillings, every house
can collect and use about 50,000 litres of water
annually. From the 20 houses, the net amount
of rainwater harvested annually amounts to
1,00,000 litres.
2015-16
WATER RESOURCES
EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES
Multiple choice questions.
(i) Based on the information given below classify each of the situations as
‘suffering from water scarcity’ or ‘not suffering from water scarcity’.
(a) Region with high annual rainfall.
(b) Region having high annual rainfall and large population.
(c) Region having high annual rainfall but water is highly polluted.
(d) Region having low rainfall and low population.
(ii) Which one of the following statements is not an argument in favour of multi-
purpose river projects?
(a) Multi-purpose projects bring water to those areas which suffer from
water scarcity.
(b) Multi-purpose projects by regulating water flow helps to control floods.
(c) Multi-purpose projects lead to large scale displacements and loss of
livelihood.
(d) Multi-purpose projects generate electricity for our industries and our
homes.
(iii) Here are some false statements. Identify the mistakes and rewrite them
correctly.
(a) Multiplying urban centres with large and dense populations and urban
lifestyles have helped in proper utilisation of water resources.
(b) Regulating and damming of rivers does not affect the river’s natural
flow and its sediment flow.
(c) In Gujarat, the Sabarmati basin farmers were not agitated when higher
priority was given to water supply in urban areas, particularly during
droughts.
(d) Today in Rajasthan, the practice of rooftop rainwater water harvesting
has gained popularity despite high water availability due to the
Rajasthan Canal.
Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) Explain how water becomes a renewable resource.
(ii) What is water scarcity and what are its main causes?
(iii) Compare the advantages and disadvantages of multi-purpose river projects.
Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Discuss how rainwater harvesting in semi-arid regions of Rajasthan is
carried out.
(ii) Describe how modern adaptations of traditional rainwater harvesting
methods are being carried out to conserve and store water.
1. Collect information on how industries are polluting our water resources.
2. Enact with your classmates a scene of water dispute in your locality.
2015-16
India is an agriculturally important country.
Two-thirds of its population is engaged in
agricultural activities. Agriculture is a primary
activity, which produces most of the food that
we consume. Besides food grains, it also
produces raw material for various industries.
Can you name some industries based on
agricultural raw material?
Moreover, some agricultural products like
tea, coffee, spices, etc. are also exported.
TYPES OF FARMING
Agriculture is an age-old economic activity in
our country. Over these years, cultivation
methods have changed significantly depending
upon the characteristics of physical
environment, technological know-how and
socio-cultural practices. Farming varies from
subsistence to commercial type. At present, in
different parts of India, the following farming
systems are practised.
Primitive Subsistence Farming
This type of farming is still practised in few
pockets of India. Primitive subsistence
agriculture is practised on small patches of
land with the help of primitive tools like hoe,
dao and digging sticks, and family/community
labour. This type of farming depends upon
monsoon, natural fertility of the soil and
suitability of other environmental conditions
to the crops grown.
It is a ‘slash and burn’ agriculture.
Farmers clear a patch of land and produce
cereals and other food crops to sustain their
family. When the soil fertility decreases, the
farmers shift and clear a fresh patch of land
for cultivation. This type of shifting allows
Nature to replenish the fertility of the soil
through natural processes; land productivity
in this type of agriculture is low as the farmer
does not use fertilisers or other modern
inputs. It is known by different names in
different parts of the country.
Can you name  some such types of farmings?
It is jhumming in north-eastern states like
Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland;
Pamlou in Manipur, Dipa in Bastar district of
Chhattishgarh, and in Andaman and Nicobar
Islands.
Jhumming: The ‘slash and burn’ agriculture
is known as ‘Milpa’ in Mexico and Central
America, ‘Conuco’ in Venzuela, ‘Roca’ in
Brazil, ‘Masole’ in Central Africa, ‘Ladang’
in Indonesia, ‘Ray’ in Vietnam.
In India, this primitive form of cultivation
is called ‘Bewar’ or ‘Dahiya’ in Madhya
Pradesh, ‘Podu’ or ‘Penda’ in Andhra Pradesh,
‘Pama Dabi’ or ‘Koman’ or Bringa’ in Odisha,
‘Kumari’ in Western Ghats, ‘Valre’ or ‘Waltre’
in South-eastern Rajasthan, ‘Khil’ in the
Himalayan belt, ‘Kuruwa’ in Jharkhand, and
‘Jhumming’ in the North-eastern region.
Fig. 4.1
2015-16
Fig. 4.2:  Banana plantation in Southern
part of India
Fig. 4.3:  Bamboo plantation in North-east
Can you name the type of farming Rinjha’s
family is engaged in?
Can you enlist some crops which are grown
in such farming?
Intensive Subsistence Farming
This type of farming is practised in areas of
high population pressure on land. It is labour-
intensive farming, where high doses of
biochemical inputs and irrigation are used for
obtaining higher production.
Can you name some of the states of India
where such farming is practised?
Though the ‘right of inheritance’ leading to
the division of land among successive
generations has rendered land-holding size
uneconomical, the farmers continue to take
maximum output from the limited land in the
absence of alternative source of livelihood.
Thus, there is enormous pressure on
agricultural land.
Commercial Farming
The main characteristic of this type of farming
is the use of higher doses of modern inputs,
e.g. high yielding variety (HYV) seeds, chemical
fertilisers, insecticides and pesticides in order
to obtain higher productivity. The degree of
commercialisation of agriculture varies from
one region to another. For example, rice is a
commercial crop in Haryana and Punjab, but
in Odisha, it is a subsistence crop.
Can you give some more examples of crops
which may be commercial in one region and
may provide subsistence in another region?
Plantation is also a type of commercial
farming. In this type of farming, a single crop
is grown on a large area. The plantation has
an interface of agriculture and industry.
Plantations cover large tracts of land, using
capital intensive inputs, with the help of
migrant labourers. All the produce is used as
raw material in respective industries.
In India, tea, coffee, rubber, sugarcane,
banana, etc.. are important plantation crops.
Tea in Assam and North Bengal coffee in
Rinjha lived with her family in a small village
at the outskirts of Diphu in Assam. She enjoys
watching her family members clearing,
slashing and burning a patch of land for
cultivation. She often helps them in irrigating
the fields with water running through a
bamboo canal from the nearby spring. She
loves the surroundings and wants to stay
here as long as she can, but this little girl
has no idea about the declining fertility of
the soil and her family’s search for fresh a
patch of land in the next season.
Karnataka are some of the important plantation
crops grown in these states. Since the
production is mainly for market, a well-
developed network of transport and
communication connecting the plantation
areas, processing industries and markets plays
an important role in the development of
plantations.
AGRICULTURE
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
CROPPING PATTERN
You have studied the physical diversities and
plurality of cultures in India. These are also
reflected in agricultural practices and
cropping patterns in the country. Various
types of food and fibre crops, vegetables and
fruits, spices and condiments, etc. constitute
some of the important crops grown in the
country. India has three cropping seasons —
rabi, kharif and zaid.
Rabi crops are sown in winter from October
to December and harvested in summer from
April to June. Some of the important rabi crops
are wheat, barley, peas, gram and mustard.
Though, these crops are grown in large parts
of India, states from the north and north-
western parts such as Punjab, Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir,
Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh are important
for the production of wheat and other rabi
crops. Availability of precipitation during
winter months due to the western temperate
cyclones helps in the success of these crops.
However, the success of the green revolution
in Punjab, Haryana, western Uttar Pradesh
and parts of Rajasthan has also been an
important factor in the growth of the above-
mentioned rabi crops.
Kharif crops are grown with the onset of
monsoon in different parts of the country and
these are harvested in September-October.
Important crops grown during this season are
paddy, maize, jowar, bajra, tur (arhar), moong,
urad, cotton, jute, groundnut and soyabean.
Some of the most important rice-growing
regions are Assam, West Bengal, coastal regions
of Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil
Nadu, Kerala and Maharashtra,  particularly
the (Konkan coast) along with Uttar Pradesh
and Bihar. Recently, paddy has also become
an important crop of Punjab and Haryana. In
states like Assam, West Bengal and Odisha,
three crops of paddy are grown in a year. These
are Aus, Aman and Boro.
In between the rabi and the kharif seasons,
there is a short season during the summer
months known as the Zaid season. Some of
the crops produced during ‘zaid’ are
watermelon, muskmelon, cucumber,
vegetables and fodder crops. Sugarcane takes
almost a year to grow.
Major Crops
A variety of food and non food crops are grown
in different parts of the country depending
upon the variations in soil, climate and
cultivation practices. Major crops grown in
India are rice, wheat, millets, pulses, tea, coffee,
sugarcane, oil seeds, cotton and jute, etc.
Rice: It is the staple food crop of a majority of
the people in India. Our country is the second
largest producer of rice in the world after China.
It is a kharif crop which requires high
temperature, (above 25°C) and high humidity
with annual rainfall above 100 cm. In the areas
of less rainfall, it grows with the help of irrigation.
Rice is grown in the plains of north and
north-eastern India, coastal areas and the
deltaic regions. Development of dense network
Fig. 4.4 (b):  Rice is ready to be harvested in the field
Fig. 4.4 (a):  Rice Cultivation
2015-16
AGRICULTURE
India:  Distribution of Rice
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
of canal irrigation and tubewells have made it
possible to grow rice in areas of less rainfall
such as Punjab, Haryana and western Uttar
Pradesh and parts of Rajasthan.
Wheat: This is the second most important
cereal crop. It is the main food crop, in north
and north-western part of the country. This
rabi crop requires a cool growing season and
a bright sunshine at the time of ripening. It
requires 50 to 75 cm of annual rainfall evenly-
distributed over the growing season. There are
two important wheat-growing zones in the
country – the Ganga-Satluj plains in the north-
west and black soil region of the Deccan. The
major wheat-producing states are Punjab,
Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Rajasthan and
parts of Madhya Pradesh.
Fig. 4.5:  Wheat Cultivation
Millets: Jowar, bajra and ragi are the
important millets grown in India. Though,
these are known as coarse grains, they have
very high nutritional value. For example, ragi
is very rich in iron, calcium, other micro
nutrients and roughage. Jowar is the third
most important food crop with respect to area
and production. It is a rain-fed crop mostly
grown in the moist areas which hardly needs
irrigation. Major Jowar producing States were
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and
Madhya Pradesh in 2011-12.
Bajra grows well on sandy soils and shallow
black soil. Major Bajra producing States were:
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Gujarat and Haryana in 2011-12. Ragi is a
Fig. 4.6:  Bajra Cultivation
crop of dry regions and grows well on red,
black, sandy, loamy and shallow black soils.
Major ragi producing states are: Karnataka,
Tamil Nadu, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand,
Sikkim, Jharkhand and Arunachal Pradesh.
Maize: It is a crop which is used both as food
and fodder. It is a kharif crop which requires
temperature between 21°C to 27°C and grows
well in old alluvial soil. In some states like Bihar
Fig. 4.7:  Maize Cultivation
maize is grown in rabi season also. Use of modern
inputs such as HYV seeds, fertilisers and irrigation
have contributed to the increasing production of
maize. Major maize-producing states are
Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Andhra
Pradesh, Telangana and Madhya Pradesh.
Pulses: India is the largest producer as well
as the consumer of pulses in the world. These
are the major source of protein in a vegetarian
diet. Major pulses that are grown in India are
tur (arhar), urad, moong, masur, peas and
2015-16
AGRICULTURE
India:  Distribution of Wheat
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
states are Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh,
Telangana, Bihar, Punjab and Haryana.
Oil Seeds: In 2008 India was the second
largest producer of groundnut in the world
after china. In rape seed production India was
third largest producer in the world after
Canada and China in 2008. Different oil seeds
are grown covering approximately 12 per cent
of the total cropped area of the country. Main
oil-seeds produced in India are groundnut,
mustard, coconut, sesamum (til), soyabean,
castor seeds, cotton seeds, linseed and
sunflower. Most of these are edible and used
as cooking mediums. However, some of these
are also used as raw material in the production
of soap, cosmetics and ointments.
Groundnut is a kharif crop and accounts
for about half of the major oilseeds produced in
the country. Gujarat was the largest producer
of groundnut followed by Andhra Pradesh and
Tamil Nadu in 2011-12. Linseed and mustard
are rabi crops. Sesamum is a kharif crop in north
and rabi crop in south India. Castor seed is
grown both as rabi and kharif crop.
Tea: Tea cultivation is an example of
plantation agriculture. It is also an important
beverage crop introduced in India initially by
the British. Today, most of the tea plantations
are owned by Indians. The tea plant grows well
in tropical and sub-tropical climates endowed
with deep and fertile well-drained soil, rich in
humus and organic matter. Tea bushes
require warm and moist frost-free climate all
through the year. Frequent showers evenly
distributed over the year ensure continuous
growth of tender leaves. Tea is a labour-
intensive industry. It requires abundant,
Fig. 4.8:  Sugarcane Cultivation
Fig. 4.9:  Groundnut, sunflower and mustard are ready to be harvested in the field
gram. Can you distinguish which of these
pulses are grown in the kharif season and
which are grown in the rabi season? Pulses
need less moisture and survive even in dry
conditions. Being leguminous crops, all these
crops except arhar help in restoring soil fertility
by fixing nitrogen from the air. Therefore, these
are mostly grown in rotation with other crops.
Major pulse producing states in India  are
Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan,
Maharashtra and Karnataka.
Food Crops other than Grains
Sugarcane: It is a tropical as well as a
subtropical crop. It grows well in hot and
humid climate with a temperature of 21°C to
27°C and an annual rainfall between 75cm.
and 100cm. Irrigation is required in the regions
of low rainfall. It can be grown on a variety of
soils and needs manual labour from sowing to
harvesting. India is the second largest producer
of sugarcane only after Brazil. It is the main
source of sugar, gur (jaggary), khandsari and
molasses. The major sugarcane-producing
2015-16
AGRICULTURE
cheap and skilled labour.
Tea is processed within
the tea garden to restore
its freshness. Major tea-
producing states are
Assam, hills of Darjeeling
and Jalpaiguri districts,
West Bengal, Tamil Nadu
and Kerala. Apart from
these, Himachal Pradesh,
Uttarakhand, Meghalaya,
Andhra Pradesh and
Tripura are also tea-producing states in the
country. In 2008 India was the third largest
producer of tea after China and Turkey.
Coffee: In 2008 India produced 3.2 per cent
of the world coffee production. Indian coffee is
known in the world for its good quality. The
Arabica variety initially brought from Yemen is
produced in the country. This variety is in great
demand all over the world. Intially its cultivation
was introduced on the Baba Budan Hills and
even today its cultivation is confined to the Nilgiri
in Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu.
tropical as well as temperate fruits. Mangoes
of Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana,
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, oranges of
Nagpur and Cherrapunjee (Meghalaya),
bananas of Kerala, Mizoram, Maharashtra and
Tamil Nadu, lichi and guava of Uttar Pradesh
and Bihar, pineapples of Meghalaya, grapes of
Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Maharashtra,
apples, pears, apricots and walnuts of Jammu
and Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh are in
great demand the world over.
Fig. 4.12:  Apricots, apple and pomegranate
Fig. 4.13:  Cultivation of vegetables – peas, cauliflower, tomato and brinjal
Horticulture Crops: In 2008 India was the
second largest producer of fruits and vegetables
in the world after China. India is a producer of
Fig. 4.10:  Tea Cultivation
India produces about 13 per cent of the
world’s vegetables. It is an important
producer of pea, cauliflower, onion, cabbage,
tomato, brinjal and potato.
Fig. 4.11:  Tea-leaves Harvesting
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Fig. 4.14:  Consumption of natural rubber - 2010-11
Non-Food Crops
Rubber: It is an equatorial crop, but under
special conditions, it is also grown in tropical
and sub-tropical areas. It requires moist and
humid climate with rainfall of more than 200
cm. and temperature above 25°C.
Rubber is an important industrial raw
material. It is mainly grown in Kerala, Tamil
Nadu, Karnataka and Andaman and Nicobar
islands and Garo hills of Meghalaya. In 2010-11
India ranked fourth among the world’s natural
rubber producers.
plateau. It requires high temperature, light
rainfall or irrigation, 210 frost-free days and
bright sun-shine for its growth. It is a kharif
crop and requires 6 to 8 months to mature.
Major cotton-producing states are–
Maharashtra,  Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh,
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil
Nadu, Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh.
Jute: It is known as the golden fibre. Jute
grows well on well-drained fertile soils in the
flood plains where soils are renewed every
year. High temperature is required during the
time of growth. West Bengal, Bihar, Assam,
Odisha and Meghalaya are the major jute
producing states. It is used in making gunny
bags, mats, ropes, yarn, carpets and other
artefacts. Due to its high cost, it is losing
market to synthetic fibres and packing
materials, particularly the nylon.
Technological and Institutional Reforms
It was mentioned in the previous pages that
agriculture has been practised in India for
thousands of years. Sustained uses of land
without compatible techno-institutional
changes have hindered the pace of
agricultural development. Inspite of
development of sources of irrigation most of
the farmers in large parts of the country still
depend upon monsoon and natural fertility
in order to carry on their agriculture. For a
growing population, this poses a serious
challenge. Agriculture which provides
livelihood for more than 60 per cent of its
population, needs some serious technical and
List the items which are made of rubber and
are used by us.
Fig. 4.15:  Cotton Cultivation
Fibre Crops: Cotton, jute, hemp and natural
silk are the four major fibre crops grown in India.
The first three are derived from the crops grown
in the soil, the latter is obtained from cocoons of
the silkworms fed on green leaves specially
mulberry. Rearing of silk worms for the
production of silk fibre is known as sericulture.
Cotton: India is believed to be the original
home of the cotton plant. Cotton is one of the
main raw materials for cotton textile industry.
In 2008 India was second largest producer of
cotton after China. Cotton grows well in drier
parts of the black cotton soil of the Deccan
Source : Statistics and Planning Department Rubber
Board, Kottayam, Kerala
62.2%
Auto Tyres
and Tubes
Others
Dipped
Goods
Latex Foam
Belts and
Hoses
Footwears
Camel Back
Cycle Tyres
and Tubes
2015-16
AGRICULTURE
Fig. 4.16:  Modern technological equipments used in agriculture
Bhoodan – Gramdan
Mahatma Gandhi declared Vinoba Bhave as
his spiritual heir. He also participated in
Satyagraha as one of the foremost
satyagrahis. He was one of the votaries of
Gandhi’s concept of gram swarajya. After
Gandhiji’s martyrdom, Vinoba Bhave
undertook padyatra to spread Gandhiji’s
message covered almost the entire country.
Once, when he was delivering a lecture at
Pochampalli in Andhra Pradesh, some poor
landless villagers demanded some land for
their economic well-being. Vinoba Bhave
could not promise it to them immediately
but assured them to talk to the Government
of India regarding provision of land for them
if they undertook cooperative farming.
Suddenly, Shri Ram Chandra Reddy stood
up and offered 80 acres of land to be
distributed among 80 land-less villagers.
This act was known as ‘Bhoodan’. Later he
travelled and introduced his ideas widely all
over India. Some zamindars, owners of
many villages offered to distribute some
villages among the landless. It was known
as Gramdan. However, many land-owners
chose to provide some part of their land to
institutional reforms. Thus, collectivisation,
consolidation of holdings, cooperation and
abolition of zamindari, etc. were given priority
to bring about institutional reforms in the
country after Independence. ‘Land reform’ was
the main focus of our First Five Year Plan. The
right of inheritance had already lead to
fragmentation of land holdings necessitating
consolidation of holdings.
The laws of land reforms were enacted but
the laws of implementation was lacking or
lukewarm. The Government of India
embarked upon introducing agricultural
reforms to improve Indian agriculture in the
1960s and 1970s. The Green Revolution
based on the use of package technology and
the White Revolution (Operation Flood) were
some of the strategies initiated to improve the
lot of Indian agriculture. But, this too led to
the concentration of development in few
selected areas. Therefore, in the 1980s and
1990s, a comprehensive land development
programme was initiated, which included both
institutional and technical reforms. Provision
for crop insurance against drought, flood,
cyclone, fire and disease, establishment of
Grameen banks, cooperative societies and
banks for providing loan facilities to the
farmers at lower rates of interest were some
important steps in this direction.
Kissan Credit Card (KCC), Personal
Accident Insurance Scheme (PAIS) are some
other schemes introduced by the Government
of  India for the benefit of the farmers. Moreover,
special weather bulletins and agricultural
programmes for farmers were introduced on
the radio and television. The government also
announces minimum support price,
remunerative and procurement prices for
important crops to check the exploitation of
farmers by speculators and middlemen.
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
mechanisation. Subsidy on fertilisers is
decreased leading to increase in the cost of
production. Moreover, reduction in import
duties on agricultural products have proved
detrimental to agriculture in the country.
Farmers are withdrawing their investment
from agriculture causing a downfall in the
employment in agriculture.
Contribution of agriculture to the national
economy, employment and output
Agriculture has been the backbone of the
Indian economy though its share in the Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) has registered a
declining trend from 1951 onwards; in
2010-11 about 52 per cent of the total work
force was employed by the farm sector which
makes more than half of the Indian Population
dependent on agriculture for sustenance.
The declining share of agriculture in the
GDP is a matter of serious concern because
any decline and stagnation in agriculture will
lead to a decline in other spheres of the
economy having wider implications for society.
Considering the importance of agriculture
in India, the Government of India made
concerted efforts to modernise agriculture.
Establishment of Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR), agricultural universities,
veterinary services and animal breeding
centres, horticulture development, research
and development in the field of meteorology and
weather forecast, etc. were given priority for
improving Indian agriculture. Apart from this,
improving the rural infrastructure was also
considered essential for the same.
Find out why an Indian farmer does not want
his son to become a farmer.
When farmers have been facing so many
problems and land under agriculture is
decreasing, can we think of alternative
employment opportunities in the agriculture
sector?
Why are farmers committing suicides in
several states of the country?
FOOD SECURITY
You know that food is a basic need and every
citizen of the country should have access to
food which provides minimum nutritional level.
If any segment of our population does not have
this access, that segment suffers from lack of
food security. The number of people who do
not have food security is disproportionately
large in some regions of our country,
particularly in economically less developed
states with higher incidence of poverty. The
remote areas of the country are more prone to
natural disasters and uncertain food supply.
In order to ensure availability of food to all
sections of society our government carefully
designed a national food security system. It
consists of two components (a) buffer stock and
(b) public distribution system (PDS).
the poor farmers due to the fear of land
ceiling act. This Bhoodan-Gramdan
movement initiated by Vinoba Bhave is also
known as the Blood-less Revolution.
Table 4.1: India: Growth of GDP and
major sectors (in %)
Sector
Tenth Five 11th Five
2012-17
Year Plan
Year Plan Target I Target II
(2002-07) (2007-12)
Agriculture
Industries
Services
Source: Faster, Sustainable and more Inclusive:
An approach to the 12th Five Year Plan, Planning
Commission, Government of India–2011.
From the Table 4.1, it is clear that though
the GDP growth rate is increasing over the
years, it is not generating sufficient
employment opportunities in the country. The
growth rate in agriculture is decelerating
which is an alarming situation. Today, Indian
farmers are facing a big challenge from
international competition and our government
is going ahead with reduction in the public
investment in agriculture sector particularly
in irrigation, power, rural roads, market and
2015-16
AGRICULTURE
As you know, PDS is a programme which
provides food grains and other essential
commodities at subsidised prices in rural and
urban areas.
India’s food security policy has a primary
objective to ensure availability of foodgrains
to the common people at an affordable price.
It has enabled the poor to have access to food.
The focus of the policy is on growth in
agriculture production and on fixing the
support price for procurement of wheat and
rice, to maintain their stocks. Food
Corporation of India (FCI) is responsible for
procuring and stocking foodgrains, whereas
distribution is ensured by public distribution
system (PDS).
The FCI procures foodgrains from the
farmers at the government announced
minimum support price (MSP). The
government used to provide subsidies on
agriculture inputs such as fertilizers, power
and water. These subsidies have now reached
unsustainable levels and have  also led to large
scale inefficiencies in the use of these scarce
inputs. Excessive and imprudent use of
fertilizers and water has led to waterlogging,
salinity and depletion of essential
micronutrients in the soil. The high MSP,
subsidies in input and committed FCI
purchases have distorted the cropping pattern.
Wheat and paddy crops are being grown more
for the MSP they get. Punjab and Haryana are
foremost examples. This has also created a
serious imbalance in inter-crop parities.
You already know that the consumers are
divided into two categories : below poverty line
(BPL) and above poverty line (APL), with the
issue price being different for each category.
However, this categorisation is not perfect and
a number of deserving poor have been
excluded from the BPL category. Moreover,
some of the so called APL slip back to BPL,
because of the failure of even one crop and it
is administratively difficult to accommodate
such shifts.
Each district and block can be made self
sufficient in foodgrain production if government
provides proper agricultural infrastructure,
credit linkages and also encourages the use of
latest techniques. Instead of concentrating only
on rice or wheat, the food crop with a better
growth potential in that particular area must
be encouraged. Creation of necessary
infrastructure like irrigation facilities,
availability of electricity etc. may also attract
private investments in agriculture.
The focus on increasing foodgrain
production which should be on a sustainable
basis and also free trade in grains will create
massive employment and reduce poverty in
rural areas.
There has been a gradual shift from
cultivation of food crops to cultivation of fruits,
vegetables, oil-seeds and industrial crops. This
has led to the reduction in net sown area under
cereals and pulses. With the growing
population of India, the declining food
production puts a big question mark over the
country’s future food security. The competition
for land between non-agricultural uses such
as housing etc. and agriculture has resulted
in reduction in the net sown area. The
productivity of land has started showing a
declining trend. Fertilisers, pesticides and
insecticides, which once showed dramatic
results, are now being held responsible for
degrading the soils. Periodic scarcity of water
has led to reduction in area under irrigation.
Inefficient water management has led to water
logging and salinity.
Table 4.2: India: Foodgrains production
(million tonnes)
Cereals 2006- 2007-
2008-
2009- 2010-11
(Provisional)
89.10
Wheat
80.80
Coarse
grains
Jowar & 18.0
Bajra)
Pulses
14.70
Total
201.4 207.5
210.8
201.2
215.8
Source: Directorate of Economics and Statistics,
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation,
Economic Survey, 2011-12.
Draw bar diagram showing the trend of food
grain production in India during last five years.
Find out the reason of this trend.
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
One important reason is land degradation.
Free power to a section of farmers has
encouraged them to pump groundwater to
grow water-intensive crops in low-rainfall
areas (rice in Punjab, sugarcane in
Maharashtra). This unsustainable pumping
has reduced water storage in aquifers.
Consequently, many wells and tubewells have
run dry. This has pushed the marginal and
small farmers out of cultivation.
The big farmers with deeper tubewells still
have water, but many others face a water crisis.
Inadequate storage and marketing facilities also
act as a disincentive to the farmer. Thus, the
farmers are badly affected by the uncertainties
of production and market. They suffer from a
double disadvantage as they pay high prices
for inputs such as HYV seeds, fertilisers etc. but
lack the bargaining power to fix prices in their
favour. All the production reaches the market
simultaneously. The higher the supply the
lower is the demand. This causes distress sale
also. Therefore, there can be no food security
without the security of the small farmers.
Impact of Globalisation on Agriculture
Globalisation is not a new phenomenon. It was
there at the time of colonisation. In the
nineteenth century when European traders
came to India, at that time too, Indian spices
were exported to different countries of the world
and farmers of south India were encouraged
to grow these crops. Till today it is one of the
important items of export from India.
During the British period cotton belts of
India attracted the British and ultimately
cotton was exported to Britain as a raw material
for their textile industries. Cotton textile
industry in Manchester and Liverpool
flourished due to the availability of good
Organise a debate on food security of India, its need and efforts
2015-16
AGRICULTURE
quality cotton from India. You have read about
the Champaran movement which started in
1917 in Bihar. This was started because
farmers of that region were forced to grow
indigo on their land because it was necessary
for the textile industries which were located in
Britain. They were unable to grow foodgrains
to sustain their families.
Under globalisation, particularly after
1990, the farmers in India have been exposed
to new challenges. Despite being an important
producer of rice, cotton, rubber, tea, coffee, jute
and spices our agricultural products are not
able to compete with the developed countries
because of the highly subsidised agriculture
in those countries.
Fig. 4.17:  Tissue culture of teak clones
Genetic engineering is  recognised as a
powerful supplement in inventing new
hybrid varieties of seeds.
Fig. 4.18:  Problems associated with heavy pesticide
use are widely recognised in developed and
developing countries
Change in cropping pattern for example from cereals to high-value crops will
mean that India will have to import food. During 1960’s this would have been
seen as a disaster. But if India imports cereals while exporting high-value
commodities, it will be following successful economies like Italy, Israel and Chile.
These countries exports farm products (fruits, olives, speciality seeds and wine)
and import cereals.  Are we ready to take this risk? Debate the issue.
Today, Indian agriculture finds itself at the
crossroads. To make agriculture successful and
profitable, proper thrust should be given to the
improvement of the condition of marginal and
small farmers. The green revolution promised
much. But today it’s under controversies. It is
being alleged that it has caused land
degradation due to overuse of chemicals, drying
aquifers and vanishing biodiversity. The
keyword today is “gene revolution”. Which
includes genetic engineering.
Can you name any gene modified seed used
vastly in India?
Infact organic farming is much in vogue
today because it is practised without factory
made chemicals such as fertilisers and
pesticides. Hence, it does not affect environment
in a negative manner.
A few economists think that Indian farmers
have a bleak future if they continue growing
foodgrains on the holdings that grow smaller
and smaller as the population rises. India’s
rural population is about 600 million which
depends upon 250 million (approximate)
hectares of agricultural land, an average of less
than half a hectare per person.
Indian farmers should diversify their
cropping pattern from cereals to high-value
crops. This will increase incomes and reduce
environmental degradation simultaneously.
Because fruits, medicinal herbs, flowers,
vegetables, bio-diesel crops like jatropha
and jojoba need much less irrigation than
rice or sugarcane. India’s diverse climate
can be harnessed to grow a wide range of
high-value crops.
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES
Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which one of the following describes a system of agriculture where a single
crop is grown on a large area?
(a) Shifting Agriculture
(b) Plantation Agriculture
(c) Horticulture
(d) Intensive Agriculture
(ii) Which one of the following is a rabi crop?
(a) Rice
(c) Millets
(b) Gram
(d) Cotton
(iii) Which one of the following is a leguminous crop?
(a) Pulses
(c) Millets
(b) Jawar
(d) Sesamum
(iv) Which one of the following is announced by the government in support of
a crop?
(a) Maximum support price
(b) Minimum support price
(c) Moderate support price
(d) Influential support price
Answer the following questions in 30 words.
(i) Name one important beverage crop and specify the geographical conditions
required for its growth.
(ii) Name one staple crop of India and the regions where it is produced.
(iii) Enlist the various institutional reform programmes introduced by the
government in the interest of farmers.
(iv) The land under cultivation has got reduced day by day. Can you imagine
its consequences?
Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Suggest the initiative taken by the government to ensure the increase in
agricultural production.
(ii) Describe the impact of globalisation on Indian agriculture.
(iii) Describe the geographical conditions required for the growth of rice.
PROJECT WORK
Group discussion on the necessity of literacy among farmers.
On an outline map of India show wheat producing areas.
2015-16
AGRICULTURE
ACTIVITY
Solve the puzzle by following your search horizontally and vertically to find the
hidden answers.
The two staple food crops of India.
This is the summer cropping season of India.
Pulses like arhar, moong, gram, urad contain…
It is a coarse grain.
The two important beverages in India are…
One of the four major fibers grown on black soils.
2015-16
We use different things in our daily life made
from metal. Can you list a number of items
used in your house made of metals. Where do
these metals come from?
You have studied that the earth’s crust is
made up of different minerals embedded in the
rocks. Various metals are extracted from these
minerals after proper refinement.
Minerals are an indispensable part of our
lives. Almost everything we use, from a tiny pin
to a towering building or a big ship, all are
made from minerals. The railway lines and the
tarmac (paving) of the roads, our implements
and machinery too are made from minerals.
Cars, buses, trains, aeroplanes are
manufactured from minerals and run on
power resources derived from the earth. Even
the food that we eat contains minerals. In all
stages of development, human beings have
used minerals for their livelihood, decoration,
festivities, religious and ceremonial rites.
Haban comes to Guwahati with his father
from a remote village.
He sees people getting into strange
house like objects which move along the
road. He also sees a “kitchen” dragging a
number of house along with it. He is amazed
and asked his father “Why don’t our houses
move like the one we saw in Guwahati, Ba?”
Ba replies, “These are not houses, they
are buses and trains. Unlike our houses these
are not made of bricks and stones, metal like
iron and alluminium are used in making
these. They do not move on their own. They
are driven by an engine which needs energy
to work.”
A bright smile from toothpaste
and minerals
Toothpaste cleans your teeth. Abrasive
minerals like silica, limestone, aluminium
oxide and various phosphate minerals do the
cleaning. Fluoride which is used to reduce
cavities, comes from a mineral fluorite. Most
toothpaste are made white with titanium
oxide, which comes from minerals called
rutile, ilmenite and anatase. The sparkle in
some  toothpastes comes from mica. The
toothbrush and tube containing the paste are
made of plastics from petroleum.  Find out
where these minerals are found?
Dig a little deeper and find out how many
minerals are used to make a light bulb?
All living things need minerals
Life processes cannot occur without minerals.
Although our mineral intake represents only
about 0.3 per cent of our total intake of
nutrients, they are so potent and so important
that without them we would not be able to
utilise the other 99.7 per cent of foodstuffs.
Dig a little deeper and collect “Nutritional
Facts” printed on food labels.
What is a mineral?
Geologists define mineral as a “homogenous,
naturally occurring substance with a definable
internal structure.” Minerals are found in
varied forms in nature, ranging from the
hardest diamond to the softest talc. Why are
they so varied?
2015-16
You have already learnt about rocks. Rocks
are combinations of homogenous substances
called minerals. Some rocks, for instance
limestone, consist of a single mineral only, but
majority of the rock consist of several minerals
in varying proportions. Although, over 2000
minerals have been identified, only a few are
abundantly found in most of the rocks.
A particular mineral that will be formed
from a certain combination of elements
depends upon the physical and chemical
conditions under which the material forms.
This, in turn, results in a wide range of colours,
hardness, crystal forms, lustre and density that
a particular mineral possesses. Geologists use
these properties to classify the minerals.
Study of Minerals by Geographers
and Geologists
Geographers study minerals as part of the
earth’s crust for a better understanding of
landforms. The distribution of mineral
resources and associated  economic activities
are of interest to geographers. A geologist,
however, is interested in the formation of
minerals, their age and physical and
chemical composition.
However, for general and commercial
purposes minerals can be classified as under.
MODE OF OCCURRENCE OF MINERALS
Where are these minerals found?
Minerals are usually found in “ores”. The
term ore is used to describe an accumulation
of any mineral mixed with other elements. The
mineral content of the ore must be in sufficient
concentration to make its extraction
commercially viable. The type of formation or
structure in which they are found determines
the relative ease with which mineral ores may
be mined. This also determines the cost of
extraction. It is, therefore, important for us to
understand the main types of formations in
which minerals occur.
Minerals generally occur in these forms:
(i) In igneous and metamorphic rocks
minerals may occur in the cracks,
crevices, faults or joints. The smaller
occurrences are called veins and the
larger are called lodes. In most cases,
they are formed when minerals in liquid/
molten and gaseous forms are forced
upward through cavities towards the
earth’s surface. They cool and solidify as
they rise. Major metallic minerals like tin,
copper, zinc and lead etc. are obtained
from veins and lodes.
(ii) In sedimentary rocks a number of minerals
occur in beds or layers. They have been
formed as a result of deposition,
accumulation and concentration in
horizontal strata. Coal and some forms of
iron ore have been concentrated as a result
of long periods under great heat and
pressure. Another group of sedimentary
minerals include gypsum, potash salt and
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
Fig. 5.1
sodium salt. These are formed as a result
of evaporation especially in arid regions.
(iii) Another mode of formation involves the
decomposition of surface rocks, and the
removal of soluble constituents, leaving a
residual mass of weathered material
containing ores. Bauxite is formed this way.
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rat-Hole Mining. Do you know that most
of the minerals in India are nationalised
and their extraction is possible only after
obtaining due permission from the
government? But in most of the tribal areas
of the north-east India, minerals are
owned by individuals or communities. In
Meghalaya, there are large deposits of coal,
iron ore, limestone and dolomite etc. Coal
mining in Jowai and Cherapunjee is done
by family member in the form of a long
narrow tunnel, known as ‘Rat hole’ mining.
(iv) Certain minerals may occur as alluvial
deposits in sands of valley floors and the
base of hills. These deposits are called
‘placer deposits’ and generally contain
minerals, which are not corroded by water.
Gold, silver, tin and platinum are most
important among such minerals.
(v) The ocean waters contain vast quantities
of minerals, but most of these are too widely
diffused to be of economic significance.
However, common salt, magnesium and
bromine are largely derived from ocean
waters. The ocean beds, too, are rich in
manganese nodules.
Let us now study the distribution of a few
major minerals in India. Always remember that
the concentration of mineral in the ore, the ease
of extraction and closeness to the market play
an important role in affecting the economic
viability of a reserve. Thus, to meet the demand,
a choice has to be made between a number of
possible options. When this is done a mineral
‘deposit’ or ‘reserve’ turns into a mine.
Ferrous Minerals
Ferrous minerals account for about three-
fourths of the total value of the production of
metallic minerals. They provide a strong base
for the development of metallurgical
industries. India exports substantial
quantities of ferrous minerals after meeting
her internal demands.
Iron Ore
Iron ore is the basic mineral and the backbone
of industrial development. India is endowed
with fairly abundant resources of iron ore. India
is rich in good quality iron ores. Magnetite is
the finest iron ore with a very high content of
iron up to 70 per cent. It has excellent magnetic
qualities, especially valuable in the electrical
industry. Hematite ore is the most important
industrial iron ore in terms of the quantity
used, but has a slightly lower iron content than
magnetite. (50-60 per cent).
Dig a little deeper: What is the difference
between an open pit mine, a quarry and an
underground mine with shafts?
India is fortunate to have fairly rich and varied
mineral resources. However, these are unevenly
distributed. Broadly speaking, peninsular rocks
contain most of the reserves of coal, metallic
minerals, mica and many other non-metallic
minerals. Sedimentary rocks on the western and
eastern flanks of the peninsula, in Gujarat and
Assam have most of the petroleum deposits.
Rajasthan with the rock systems of the peninsula,
has reserves of many non-ferrous minerals. The
vast alluvial plains of north India are almost
devoid of economic minerals. These variations
exist largely because of the differences in the
geological structure, processes and time involved
in the formation of minerals.
Fig. 5.2:  Production of iron ore showing
statewise share in per cent, 2009-10
2015-16
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
The major iron ore belts in India are:
Odisha-Jharkhand belt: In Odisha high
grade hematite ore is found in Badampahar
mines in the Mayurbhanj and Kendujhar
districts. In the adjoining Singbhum
district of Jharkhand haematite iron ore is
mined in Gua and Noamundi.
Durg-Bastar-Chandrapur belt lies in
Chhattisgarh and Maharashtra. Very high
grade hematites are found in the famous
Bailadila range of hills in the Bastar district
of  Chhattisgarh. The range of hills
comprise of 14 deposits of super high grade
hematite iron ore. It has the best physical
properties needed for steel making. Iron ore
from these mines is exported to Japan and
South Korea via Vishakhapatnam port.
Ballari-Chitradurga-Chikkamagaluru-
Tumakuru belt in Karnataka has large
reserves of iron ore. The Kudremukh mines
located in the Western Ghats of Karnataka
are a 100 per cent export unit. Kudremukh
deposits are known to be one of the largest
in the world. The ore is transported as slurry
through a pipeline to a port near Mangaluru.
Maharashtra-Goa belt includes the state
of Goa and Ratnagiri district of
Maharashtra. Though, the ores are not of
very high quality, yet they are efficiently
exploited. Iron ore is exported through
Marmagao port.
Manganese
Manganese is mainly used in the
manufacturing of steel and ferro-manganese
alloy. Nearly 10 kg of manganese is required
to manufacture one tonne of steel. It is also
used in manufacturing bleaching powder,
insecticides and paints.
Odisha is the largest producer of manganese
ores in India. It accounted for one-third of the
country’s total production in 2000-01.
Dig a little deeper: Superimpose the maps
showing distribution of iron ore, manganese,
coal and iron and steel industry. Do you see
any correlation. Why?
Non-Ferrous Minerals
India’s reserves and production of non- ferrous
minerals is not very satisfactory. However, these
minerals, which include copper, bauxite, lead,
zinc and gold play a vital role in a number of
metallurgical, engineering and electrical
industries. Let us study the distribution of
copper and bauxite.
Kudre in Kannada means horse. The
highest peak in the western ghats of
Karnataka resembles the face of a horse.
The Bailadila hills look like the hump of
an ox, and hence its name.
Fig. 5.3:  Iron ore mine
Fig. 5.4:  Production of Manganese showing
statewise share in per cent, 2009-2010
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
India:  Distribution of Iron Ore, Manganese, Bauxite and Mica
2015-16
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
Copper
India is critically deficient in the reserve and
production of copper. Being malleable, ductile
and a good conductor, copper is mainly used
in electrical cables, electronics  and chemical
Fig. 5.5:  Copper mines at Malanjkhand
Fig. 5.6:  Production of Copper showing state-wise
share in per cent, 2009-10
industries. The Balaghat mines in Madhya
Pradesh, Khetri mines in Rajasthan and
Singhbhum district of Jharkhand are leading
producers of copper.
Bauxite
Though, several ores
contain aluminium, it
is from bauxite, a
clay-like substance
that alumina and
later aluminium is
obtained. Bauxite
deposits are formed
by the decomposition
of a wide variety of
rocks
aluminium silicates.
Aluminium is an
important
metal
because it combines
the strength of metals
such as iron, with
extreme lightness
and also with good
conductivity and
great malleability.
India’s bauxite
deposits are mainly
found
Amarkantak plateau, Maikal hills and the
plateau region of Bilaspur-Katni.
Odisha was the largest bauxite producing
state in India with 34.97 per cent of the
country’s total production in 2009-10.
Panchpatmali deposits in Koraput district are
the most important bauxite deposits in the
state.
Dig a little deeper: Locate the mines of
Bauxite on the physical map of India.
Fig.5.7:  Bauxite Mine
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Non-Metallic Minerals
Mica is a mineral made up of a series of plates
or leaves. It splits easily into thin sheets. These
sheets can be so thin that a thousand can be
layered into a mica sheet of a few centimeters
high. Mica can be clear, black, green, red yellow
or brown. Due to its excellent di-electric
strength, low power loss factor, insulating
properties and resistance to high voltage, mica
is one of the most indispensable minerals used
in electric and electronic industries.
Mica deposits are found in the northern
edge of the Chota Nagpur plateau. Koderma
Gaya – Hazaribagh belt of Jharkhand is the
leading producer.
In Rajasthan, the major mica producing
area is around Ajmer. Nellore mica belt of
Andhra Pradesh is also an important producer
in the country.
Fig. 5.8:  Production of Limestone showing
state-wise share in per cent, 2009-10
Rock Minerals
Limestone is found in association with rocks
composed of calcium carbonates or calcium
and magnesium carbonates. It is found in
sedimentary rocks of most geological
formations. Limestone is the basic raw material
for the cement industry and essential for
smelting iron ore in the blast furnace.
Dig a little deeper: Study the maps to explain
why Chota Nagpur is a storehouse of minerals.
Hazards of Mining
Have you ever wondered about the efforts the miners make in making life comfortable
for you? What are the impacts of mining on
the health of the miners and the environment?
The dust and noxious fumes inhaled by
miners make them vulnerable to pulmonary
diseases. The risk of collapsing mine roofs,
inundation and fires in coalmines are a
constant threat to miners.
The water sources in the region get
contaminated due to mining. Dumping of waste
and slurry leads to degradation of land, soil,
and increase in stream and river pollution.
Fig. 5.9:  Air pollution due to
generation of dust in mining areas
After the discovery of aluminium Emperor
Napoleon III wore buttons and hooks on
his clothes made of aluminium and served
food to his more illustrious guests in
aluminium utensils and the less
honourable ones were served in gold and
silver utensils. Thirty years after this
incident aluminium bowls were most
common with the beggars in Paris.
2015-16
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
Stricter
safety
regulations
implementation of environmental laws are
essential to prevent mining from becoming a
“killer industry”.
CONSERVATION OF MINERALS
We all appreciate the strong dependence of
industry and agriculture upon mineral
deposits and the substances manufactured
from them. The total volume of workable
mineral deposits is an insignificant fraction
i.e. one per cent of the earth’s crust. We are
rapidly consuming mineral resources that
required millions of years to be created and
concentrated. The geological processes of
mineral formation are so slow that the rates
of replenishment are infinitely small in
comparison to the present rates of
consumption. Mineral resources are,
therefore, finite and non-renewable. Rich
mineral deposits are our country’s extremely
valuable but short-lived possessions.
Continued extraction of ores leads to
increasing costs as mineral extraction comes
from greater depths along with decrease
in quality.
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
A concerted effort has to be made in order
to use our mineral resources in a planned and
sustainable manner. Improved technologies
need to be constantly evolved to allow use of
low grade ores at low costs. Recycling of metals,
using scrap metals and other substitutes are
steps in conserving our mineral resources for
the future.
Dig a little deeper: Make a list of items where
substitutes  are being used instead of minerals.
Where are these substitutes obtained from?
Energy Resources
Energy is required for all activities. It is needed
to cook, to provide light and heat, to propel
vehicles and to drive machinery in industries.
Energy can be generated from fuel minerals
like coal, petroleum, natural gas, uranium and
from electricity. Energy resources can be
classified as conventional and non-
conventional sources. Conventional sources
include: firewood, cattle dung cake, coal,
petroleum, natural gas and electricity (both
hydel and thermal). Non-conventional sources
include solar, wind, tidal, geothermal, biogas
and atomic energy. Firewood and cattle dung
cake are most common in rural India.
According to one estimate more than 70 per
cent energy requirement in rural households
is met by these two ; continuation of these is
increasingly becoming difficult due to
decreasing forest area. Moreover, using dung
cake too is being discouraged because it
consumes most valuable manure which could
be used in agriculture.
Conventional Sources of Energy
Coal: In India, coal is the most abundantly
available fossil fuel. It provides a substantial
part of the nation’s energy needs. It is used for
power generation, to supply energy to industry
as well as for domestic needs. India is highly
dependent on coal for meeting its commercial
energy requirements.
As you are already aware that coal is
formed due the compression of plant
material over millions of years. Coal,
therefore, is found in a variety of forms
depending on the degrees of compression
Fig. 5.10 (a):  A view from inside of a coal mine
Fig. 5.10 (b):  A view from outside of a coal mine
and the depth and time of burial. Decaying
plants in swamps produce peat. Which has
a low carbon and high moisture contents
and low heating capacity. Lignite is a low
grade brown coal, which is soft with high
moisture content. The principal lignite
reserves are in Neyveli in Tamil Nadu and
are used for generation of electricity. Coal
that has been buried deep and subjected to
increased temperatures is bituminous coal.
It is the most popular coal in commercial
use. Metallurgical coal is high grade
bituminous coal which has a special value
for smelting iron in blast furnaces.
Anthracite is the highest quality hard coal.
In India coal occurs in rock series of two
main geological ages, namely Gondwana, a little
over 200 million years in age and in tertiary
deposits which are only about 55 million years
old. The major resources of Gondwana coal,
which are metallurgical coal, are located in
2015-16
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
India:  Distribution of Coal, Oil and Natural Gas
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Damodar valley (West Bengal-Jharkhand).
Jharia, Raniganj, Bokaro are important
coalfields. The Godavari, Mahanadi, Son and
Wardha valleys also contain coal deposits.
Tertiary coals occur in the north eastern
states of Meghalaya, Assam, Arunachal
Pradesh and Nagaland.
Remember coal is a bulky material, which
loses weight on use as it is reduced to ash.
Hence, heavy industries and thermal power
stations are located on or near the coalfields.
Petroleum
Petroleum or mineral oil is the next major
energy source in India after coal. It provides
fuel for heat and lighting, lubricants for
machinery and raw materials for a number of
manufacturing industries. Petroleum
refineries act as a “nodal industry” for
synthetic textile, fertiliser and numerous
chemical industries.
Most of the petroleum occurrences in India
are associated with anticlines and fault traps
in the rock formations of the tertiary age. In
regions of folding, anticlines or domes, it  occurs
where oil is trapped in the crest of the upfold.
The oil bearing layer is a porous limestone or
sandstone through which oil may flow. The oil
is prevented from rising or sinking by
intervening non-porous layers.
Petroleum is also found in fault traps
between porous and non-porous rocks. Gas,
being lighter  usually occurs above the oil.
About 63 per cent of India’s petroleum
production is from Mumbai High, 18 per cent
from Gujarat and 16 per cent from Assam.
From the map locate the 3 major off shore fields
of western India. Ankeleshwar is the most
important field of Gujarat. Assam is the oldest
oil producing state of India. Digboi,
Naharkatiya and Moran-Hugrijan are the
important oil fields in the state.
Natural Gas
Natural gas is an important clean energy
resource found in association with or without
petroleum. It is used as a source of energy as
well as an industrial raw material in the
petrochemical industry.
Natural gas is considered an environment
friendly fuel because of low carbon dioxide
emissions and is, therefore, the fuel for the
present century.
Large reserves of natural gas have been
discovered in the Krishna- Godavari basin.
Along the west coast the reserves of the Mumbai
High and allied fields are supplemented by
finds in the Gulf of Cambay. Andaman and
Nicobar islands are also important areas
having large reserves of natural gas.
The 1700 km long Hazira-Vijaipur -
Jagdishpur cross country gas pipeline links
Mumbai High and Bassien with the fertilizer,
power and industrial complexes in western and
northern India. This artery has provided an
impetus to India’s gas production. The power
and fertilizer industries are the key users of
natural gas. Use of Compressed Natural Gas
(CNG ) for vehicles to replace liquid fuels is
gaining wide popularity in the country.
Electricity
Electricity has such a wide range of
applications in today’s world that, its percapita
consumption is considered as an index of
development. Electricity is generated mainly in
two  ways: by running water which drives hydro
turbines to generate hydro electricity; and by
burning other fuels such as coal, petroleum
and natural gas to drive turbines to produce
thermal power. Once generated the electricity
is exactly the same.
Name some river valley projects and write
the names of the dams built on these rivers.
Hydro electricity is generated by fast
flowing water, which is a renewable resource.
India has a number of multi-purpose projects
like the Bhakra Nangal, Damodar Valley
corporation, the Kopili Hydel Project etc.
producing hydroelectric power.
Thermal electricity is generated by using
coal, petroleum and natural gas. The thermal
power stations use non-renewable fossil fuels
for generating electricity. There are over 310
thermal power plants in India.
2015-16
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
India:  Distribution of Nuclear and Thermal Power Plants
Rawat Bhata
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Collect information about thermal/hydel
power plants located in your state. Show
them on the map of India.
Non-Conventional Sources of Energy
The growing consumption of energy has
resulted in the country becoming
increasingly dependent on fossil fuels such
as coal, oil and gas.  Rising prices of oil and
gas and their potential shortages have raised
uncertainties about the security of energy
supply in future, which in turn has serious
repercussions on the growth of the national
economy. Moreover, increasing use of fossil
fuels also causes serious environmental
problems. Hence, there is a pressing need to
use renewable energy sources like solar
energy, wind, tide, biomass and energy from
waste material. These are called non-
conventional energy sources.
India is blessed with an abundance of
sunlight, water, wind and biomass. It has the
largest programmes for the development of
these renewable energy resources.
Nuclear or Atomic Energy
It is obtained by altering the structure of
atoms. When such an alteration is made, much
energy is released in the form of heat and this
is used to generate electric power. Uranium and
Thorium, which are available in Jharkhand and
the Aravalli ranges of Rajasthan are used
for generating atomic or nuclear power.
The Monazite sands of Kerala is also rich in
Thorium.
Locate the 6 nuclear power stations and find
out the state in which they are located.
Solar Energy
India is a tropical country. It has enormous
possibilities of tapping solar energy.
Photovoltaic technology converts sunlight
directly into electricity. Solar energy is fast
becoming popular in rural and remote areas.
Some big solar power plants are being
established in different parts of India which will
minimise the dependence of rural households
on firewood and dung cakes, which in turn will
contribute to environmental conservation and
adequate supply of manure in agriculture.
Fig. 5.11:  Solar operated electronic milk
testing equipment
Fig. 5.12:  Wind mills – Nagarcoil
Wind power
India has great potential of wind power. The
largest wind farm cluster is located in Tamil
Nadu from Nagarcoil to Madurai. Apart from
these, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Gujarat,
Kerala, Maharashtra and Lakshadweep have
important wind farms. Nagarcoil and Jaisalmer
are well known for effective use of wind energy
in the country.
Biogas
Shrubs, farm waste, animal and human waste
are used to produce biogas for domestic
consumption in rural areas. Decomposition of
organic matter yields gas, which has higher
thermal efficiency in comparison to kerosene,
dung cake and charcoal. Biogas plants are set
up at municipal, cooperative and individual
levels. The plants using cattle dung are known
as ‘Gobar gas plants’ in rural India. These
provide twin benefits to the farmer in the form
of energy and improved quality of manure.
Collect information about newly established
solar power plants in India.
2015-16
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
Biogas is by far the most efficient use of cattle
dung. It improves the quality of manure and
also prevents the loss of trees and manure due
to burning of fuel wood and cow dung cakes.
gradient is high, high temperatures are found
at shallow depths. Groundwater in such areas
absorbs heat from the rocks and becomes hot.
It is so hot that when it rises to the earth’s
surface, it turns into steam. This steam is used
to drive turbines and generate electricity.
There are several hundred hot springs in
India, which could be used to generate
electricity. Two experimental projects have been
set up in India to harness geothermal energy.
One is located in the Parvati valley near
Manikarn in Himachal Pradesh and the other
is located in the Puga Valley, Ladakh.
Conservation of Energy Resources
Energy is a basic requirement for economic
development.  Every sector of the national
economy – agriculture, industry, transport,
commercial and domestic – needs inputs of
energy. The economic development plans
implemented since Independence necessarily
required increasing amounts of energy to
remain operational.  As a result, consumption
of energy in all forms has been steadily rising
all over the country.
In this background, there is an urgent need
to develop a sustainable path of energy
development. Promotion of energy conservation
and increased use of renewable energy sources
are the twin planks of sustainable energy.
India is presently one of the least energy
efficient countries in the world. We have to
adopt a cautious approach for the judicious
use of our limited energy resources. For
example, as concerned citizens we can do our
bit by using public transport systems instead
of individual vehicles; switching off electricity
when not in use, using power-saving devices
and using non-conventional sources of energy.
After all, “energy saved is energy produced”.
Fig. 5.13:  Biogas Plant
Tidal Energy
Oceanic tides can be used to generate
electricity. Floodgate dams are built across
inlets. During high tide water flows into the
inlet and gets trapped when the gate is closed.
After the tide falls outside the flood gate, the
water retained by the floodgate flows back to
the sea via a pipe that carries it through a
power-generating turbine.
In India the Gulf of Khambhat, the Gulf of
Kuchchh in Gujarat on the western coast and
Gangetic delta in Sunderban regions of West
Bengal provide ideal conditions for utilising
tidal energy.
Geo Thermal Energy
Geo thermal energy refers to the heat and
electricity produced by using the heat from the
interior of the Earth. Geothermal energy exists
because, the Earth grows progressively hotter
with increasing depth. Where the geothermal
EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES
Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which one of the following minerals is formed by decomposition of rocks,
leaving a residual mass of weathered material?
(a) coal
(b) bauxite
(c) gold
(d) zinc
(ii) Koderma, in Jharkhand is the leading producer of which one of the following
minerals?
(a) bauxite
(b) mica
(c) iron ore
(d) copper
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
(iii) Minerals are deposited and accumulated in the stratas of which of the
following rocks?
(a) sedimentary rocks
(c) igneous rocks
(b) metamorphic rocks
(d) none of the above
(iv) Which one of the following minerals is contained in the Monazite sand?
(a) oil
(b) uranium
(c) thorium
(d) coal
Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) Distinguish between the following in not more than 30 words.
(a) ferrous and non-ferrous minerals
(b) conventional and non-conventional sources of energy
(ii) What is a mineral?
(iii) How are minerals formed in igneous and metamorphic rocks?
(iv) Why do we need to conserve mineral resources ?
Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Describe the distribution of coal in India.
(ii) Why do you think that solar energy has a bright future in India?
ACTIVITY
Fill the name of the correct mineral in the crossword below:
Found in placer deposit (4)
Iron ore mined in Bailadila (8)
Indispensable for electrical industry (4)
Geological Age of coal found in north east
India (8)
Formed in veins and lodes (3)
ACROSS
A ferrous mineral (9)
Raw material for cement industry (9)
Finest iron ore with magnetic properties (9)
Highest quality hard coal (10)
Aluminium is obtained from this ore (7)
Khetri mines are famous for this mineral (6)
Formed due to evaporation (6)
2015-16
Production of goods in large quantities after
processing from raw materials to more
valuable products is called manufacturing. Do
you know that paper is manufactured from
wood, sugar from sugarcane, iron and steel
from iron ore and aluminium from bauxite?
Do you also know that some types of clothes
are manufactured from yarn which itself is an
industrial product?
People employed in the secondary activities
manufacture the primary materials into
finished goods. The workers employed in steel
factories, car, breweries, textile industries,
bakeries etc. fall into this category. Some people
are employed in providing services. In this
chapter, we are mainly concer ned with
manufacturing industries which fall in the
secondary sector.
The economic strength of a country is
measured
development
manufacturing industries.
IMPORTANCE OF MANUFACTURING
Manufacturing sector is considered the backbone
of development in general and economic
development in particular mainly because–
• Manufacturing industries not only help in
modernising agriculture, which forms the
backbone of our economy, they also reduce
the heavy dependence of people on
agricultural income by providing them jobs
in secondary and tertiary sectors.
• Industrial development is a precondition for
eradication of unemployment and poverty
from our country. This was the main
philosophy behind public sector industries
and joint sector ventures in India. It was also
aimed at bringing down regional disparities
by establishing industries in tribal and
backward areas.
• Export of manufactured goods expands
trade and commerce, and brings in much
needed foreign exchange.
• Countries that transform their raw
materials into a wide variety of furnished
goods of higher value are prosperous.
India’s prosperity lies in increasing and
diversifying its manufacturing industries as
quickly as possible.
Agriculture and industry are not exclusive
of each other. They move hand in hand.  For
instance, the agro-industries in India have given
a major boost to agriculture by raising its
productivity. They depend on the latter for raw
materials and sell their products such as
irrigation pumps, fertilisers, insecticides,
pesticides, plastic and PVC pipes, machines and
tools, etc. to the farmers. Thus, development and
competitiveness of manufacturing industry has
not only assisted agriculturists in increasing
On the occassion of Diwali, Harish went to
a market with his parents. They purchased
shoes and clothes for him. His mother
purchased utensils, sugar, tea and diyas
(earthen lamps). Harish observed that the
shops in the market were flooded with
items for sale. He wondered how so many
items could be made in such large
quantities. His father explained that shoes,
clothes, sugar etc. are manufactured by
machines in large industries, some utensils
are manufactured in small industries, while
items like diyas are made by individual
artisans in household industry.
Do you have some ideas about these
industries?
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
their production but also made the production
processes very efficient.
In the present day world of globalisation,
our industry needs to be more efficient and
competitive. Self-sufficiency alone is not
enough. Our manufactured goods must be at
par in quality with those in the international
market. Only then, will we be able to compete
in the international market.
Contribution of Industry to National
Economy
Over the last two decades, the share of
manufacturing sector has stagnated at 17 per
cent of GDP – out of a total of 27 per cent for
the industry which includes 10 per cent for
mining, quarrying, electricity and gas.
This is much lower in comparison to some
East Asian economies, where it is 25 to 35 per
cent. The trend of growth rate in manufacturing
over the last decade has been around 7 per
cent per annum.  The desired growth rate over
the next decade is 12 per cent.  Since 2003,
manufacturing is once again growing at the
rate of 9 to 10 per cent per annum.  With
appropriate policy interventions by the
government and renewed efforts by the
industry to improve productivity, economists
predict that manufacturing can achieve its
target over the next decade.  The National
Manufacturing Competitiveness Council
(NMCC) has been set up with this objective.
Industrial Location
Industrial locations are complex in nature.
These are influenced by availability of raw
material, labour, capital, power and market,
etc. It is rarely possible to find all these factors
available at one place. Consequently,
manufacturing activity tends to locate at the
most appropriate place where all the factors of
industrial location are either available or can
be arranged at lower cost. After an industrial
activity starts, urbanisation follows. Sometimes,
industries are located in or near the cities.
Thus, industrialisation and urbanisation go
hand in hand. Cities provide markets and also
provide services such as banking, insurance,
transport, labour, consultants and financial
advice, etc. to the industry. Many industries
tend to come together to make use of the
advantages offered by the urban centres known
as agglomeration economies. Gradually, a
large industrial agglomeration takes place.
In the pre-Independence period, most
manufacturing units were located in places
from the point of view of overseas trade such as
Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, etc. Consequently,
there emerged certain pockets of industrially
developed urban centres surrounded by a huge
agricultural rural hinterland.
Industry – Market Linkage
The key to decision of the factory location
is the least cost. Government policies and
specialised labour also influence the location
of industry.
Fig. 6.1
Fig. 6.2
2015-16
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
Classification of Industries
List the various manufactured products you
use in your daily life such as – transistors,
electric bulbs, vegetable oil, cement,
glassware, petrol, matches, scooters,
automobiles, medicines and so on. If we
classify the various industries based on a
particular criterion then we would be
able to understand their manufacturing
better.  Industries may be classified as
follows:
On the basis of source of raw materials
used:
• Agro based: cotton, woollen, jute, silk
textile, rubber and sugar, tea, coffee,
edible oil.
• Mineral based: iron and steel, cement,
aluminium,
machine
tools,
petrochemicals.
According to their main role:
• Basic or key industries which supply their
products or raw materials to manufacture
other goods e.g. iron and steel and copper
smelting, aluminum smelting.
• Consumer industries that produce goods
for direct use by consumers – sugar,
toothpaste, paper, sewing machines,
fans etc.
On the basis of capital investment:
• A small scale industry is defined with
reference to the maximum investment
allowed on the assets of a unit. This limit
has changed over a period of time. At
present the maximum investment allowed
is rupees one crore.
On the basis of ownership:
• Public sector, owned and operated by
government agencies – BHEL, SAIL etc.
• Private sector industries owned and
operated by individuals or a group of
individuals –TISCO, Bajaj Auto Ltd.,
Dabur Industries.
• Joint sector industries which are jointly run
by the state and individuals or a group of
individuals. Oil India Ltd. (OIL) is jointly
owned by public and private sector.
• Cooperative sector industries are owned
and operated by the producers or
suppliers of raw materials, workers or
both.  They pool in the resources and share
the profits or losses proportionately such
as the sugar industry in Maharashtra, the
coir industry in Kerala.
Based on the bulk and weight of raw material
and finished goods:
• Heavy industries such as iron and steel
• Light industries that use light raw
materials and produce light goods such
as electrical industries.
Classify the following into two groups on the
basis of bulk and weight of raw material and
finished goods.
(i) Oil
(vi) Sewing Machines
(ii) Knitting needles
(vii) Shipbuilding
(iii) Brassware
(viii) Electric Bulbs
(iv) Fuse wires
(ix) Paint brushes
(v) Watches
(x) Automobiles
Agro Based Industries
Cotton, jute, silk, woollen textiles, sugar and
edible oil, etc. industries are  based on
agricultural raw materials.
Textile Industry: The textile industry
occupies unique position in the Indian
economy, because it contributes significantly
to industrial production (14 per cent),
employment generation (35 million persons
directly – the second largest after agriculture)
and foreign exchange earnings (about 24.6
per cent).  It contributes 4 per cent towards
GDP.  It is the only industry in the country,
which is self-reliant and complete in the value
chain i.e., from raw material to the highest
value added products.
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Cotton Textiles: In ancient India, cotton
textiles were produced with hand spinning
and handloom weaving techniques. After the
18th century, power-looms came into use.
Our traditional industries suffered a setback
during the colonial period because they
could not compete with the mill-made cloth
from England.
While spinning continues to be centralised
in Maharashtra, Gujarat and Tamil Nadu,
weaving is highly decentralised to provide
scope for incorporating traditional skills and
designs of weaving in cotton, silk, zari,
embroidery, etc. India has world class
production in spinning, but weaving supplies
low quality of fabric as it cannot use much of
the high quality yarn produced in the country.
Weaving is done by handloom, powerloom and
in mills.
The handspun khadi provides large scale
employment to weavers in their homes as a
cottage industry.
Why did Mahatma Gandhi lay emphasis on
spinning yarn and weaving khadi?
Fig. 6.3:  Value addition in the textile industry
• The first successful textile mill was
established in Mumbai in 1854.
• The two world wars were fought in Europe,
India was a British colony. There was a
demand for cloth in U.K. hence, they gave
a boost to the development of the cotton
textile industry.
As on 30 November 2011, there were 1946
cotton and human-made fibre textile milk in
the country. About 80 per cent of these are
in the private sector and the rest in the public
and cooperative sectors. Apart from these,
there are several thousand small factories
with four to ten looms.
In the early years, the cotton textile
industry was concentrated in the cotton
growing belt of Maharashtra and Gujarat.
Availability of raw cotton, market, transport
including accessible port facilities, labour,
moist climate, etc. contributed towards its
localisation.  This industry has close links
with agriculture and provides a living to
farmers, cotton boll pluckers and workers
engaged in ginning, spinning, weaving,
dyeing, designing, packaging, tailoring and
sewing. The industry by creating demands
supports many other industries, such as,
chemicals and dyes, mill stores, packaging
materials and engineering works.
Study the figures above and note the share
of mills in the production of fabric.
Why is it important for our country to keep
the mill sector loomage lower than power
loom and handloom?
India exports yarn to Japan.  Other
importers of cotton goods from India are
U.S.A., U.K., Russia, France, East European
countries, Nepal, Singapore, Sri Lanka, and
African countries.
Table 4.2: India: Production of Fabrics in India
Sector
2009-10
2010-11*
(Provisional)
Mill Sector
Powerlooms (in Hosiery)
Handlooms
Others
Total
Source: Office of Textile Commissioner, Mumbai,
Economic Survey, 2011-12.
Note: 90 per cent of the weaving, cutting and
processing is in decentralised sector.
2015-16
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
India:  Distribution of cotton, woollen and silk industries
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
India has the second largest installed
capacity of spindles in the world, with 43.13
million spindles (2011-12) after China. Since
the mid-eighties, the spinning sector has
received a lot of attention.
We have a large share in the world trade
of cotton yarn, accounting for one fourth of
the total trade. However, our trade in
garments is only 4 per cent of the world’s
total. Our spinning mills are competitive at
the global level and capable of using all the
fibres we produce. The weaving, knitting and
processing units cannot use much of the high
quality yarn that is produced in the country.
There are some large and modern factories
in these segments, but most of the
production is in fragmented small units,
which cater to the local market. This
mismatch is a major drawback for the
industry. As a result, many of our spinners
export cotton yarn while apparel/garment
manufactures have to import fabric.
banks of the Hugli river, in a narrow belt (98
km long and 3 km wide).
Yarn is sold at Rs. 85 per kg.  If it is sold as a
trouser it fetches Rs 800 per kg. Value is
added at every stage from fibre to yarn to
fabric and to garment.
Why is it important for us to improve our
weaving sector instead of exporting yarn in
large quantities?
Although, we have made significant
increase in the production of good quality long
staple cotton (356 lakh bales of 170 kgs each
during 2011-12), the need to import is still felt.
Power supply is erratic and machinery needs
to be upgraded in the weaving and processing
sectors in particular. Other problems are the
low output of labour and stiff competition with
the synthetic fibre industry.
Jute Textiles
India is the largest producer of raw jute and
jute goods and stands at second place as an
exporter after Bangladesh. There were about
80 jute mills in India in 2010-11.  Most of these
are located in West Bengal, mainly along the
The first jute mill was set up near Kolkata in
1859 at Rishra.  After Partition in 1947, the
jute mills remained in India but three-fourth
of the jute producing area went to
Bangladesh (erstwhile East Pakistan).
Factors responsible for their location in
the Hugli basin are: proximity of the jute
producing areas, inexpensive water
transport, supported by a good network of
railways, roadways and waterways to
facilitate movement of raw material to the
mills, abundant water for processing raw
jute, cheap labour from West Bengal and
adjoining states of Bihar, Orissa and Uttar
Pradesh. Kolkata as a large urban centre
provides banking, insurance and port
facilities for export of jute goods.
In 2010-11 the jute industry was
supporting 3.7 lakh workers directly and
another 40 lakhs small and marginal farmers
who were engaged in cultivation of jute and
mesta. Many more people were associated
indirectly.
Challenges faced by the industry include
stiff competition in the international market from
synthetic substitutes and from other
competitors  like Bangladesh, Brazil,
Philippines, Egypt and Thailand. However, the
internal demand has been on the increase due
to the Government policy of mandatory use of
jute packaging. To stimulate demand, the
products need to be diversified.  In 2005,
National Jute Policy was formulated with the
objective of increasing productivity, improving
quality, ensuring good prices to the jute farmers
and enhancing the yield per hectare. The main
markets are U.S.A., Canada, Russia, United
Arab Republic, U.K. and Australia.  The growing
global concern for environment friendly,
biodegradable materials, has once again opened
the opportunity for jute products.
Sugar Industry
India stands second as a world producer of
sugar but occupies the first place in the
2015-16
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
production of gur and khandsari. The raw
material used in this industry is bulky, and
in haulage its sucrose content reduces. Where
should the mills be ideally located? In
2010-11 there were over 662 sugar mills in
the country spread over Uttar Pradesh, Bihar,
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu,
Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat along with
Punjab, Haryana and Madhya Pradesh. Sixty
per cent mills are in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar.
This industry is seasonal in nature so, it is
ideally suited to the cooperative sector. Can
you explain why this is so?
In recent years, there is a tendency for the
mills to shift and concentrate in the southern
and western states, especially in Maharashtra,
This is because the cane produced here has a
higher sucrose content. The cooler climate
also ensures a longer crushing season.
Moreover, the cooperatives are more
successful in these states.
Major challenges include the seasonal
nature of the industry, old and inefficient
methods of production, transport delay in
reaching cane to factories and the need to
maximise the use of baggase.
Mineral based Industries
Industries that use minerals and metals as raw
materials are called mineral based industries.
Can you name some industries that would fall
in this category?
Iron and Steel Industry
The iron and steel Industry is the basic
industry since all the other industries — heavy,
medium and light, depend on it for their
machinery.  Steel is needed to manufacture a
variety of engineering goods, construction
material, defence, medical, telephonic, scientific
equipment and a variety of  consumer goods.
Make a list of all such goods made of steel
that you can think of.
Production and consumption of steel is often
regarded as the index of a country’s
development. Iron and steel is a heavy industry
because all the raw materials as well as finished
goods are heavy and bulky entailing heavy
transportation costs. Iron ore, coking coal and
lime stone are required in the ratio of
approximately 4 : 2 : 1. Some quantities of
manganese, are also required to harden the steel.
Where should the steel plants be ideally
located?  Remember that the finished products
also need an efficient transport network for their
distribution to the markets and consumers.
In 2010-11 with 72.2 million tonnes of steel
production, India ranked 4th among the world
crude steel producers. It is  the largest producer
of sponge iron. In 2010-11 per capita cosumption
of steel in the country was only around 49 kg per
annum against the world average of 182 kg.
Fig. 6.4
Processes of Manufacture of Steel
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
India:  Iron and Steel Plants
2015-16
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
Most of the public sector undertakings
market their steel through Steel Authority of
India Ltd. (SAIL).
In the 1950s China and India produced
almost the same quantity of steel. Today, China
is the largest producer of steel. China is also the
world’s largest consumer of steel.  In 2004, India
was the largest exporter of steel which accounted
for 2.25 per cent of the global steel trade.
Chotanagpur plateau region has the maximum
concentration of iron and steel industries. It is
largely, because of the relative advantages this
region has for the development of this industry.
These include, low cost of iron ore, high grade
raw materials in proximity, cheap labour and
vast growth potential in the home market.
Though, India is an important iron and steel
producing country in the world yet, we are not
able to perform to our full potential largely due
to: (a) High costs and limited availability of coking
Table 5.2: Total finished steel production
in India
Production
(In million tonnes per annum)
Source: Ministry of Steel, Govternment of India
Why is the per capita consumption of steel
so low in India?
Mini steel plants are smaller, have electric
furnaces, use steel scrap and sponge iron.
They have re-rollers that use steel ingots as
well. They produce mild and alloy steel of
given specifications.
An integrated steel plant is large, handles
everything in one complex – from putting
together raw material to steel making, rolling
and shaping.
China
India
Production in Million Tonnes
683.2
637.4
512.3
489.7
355.7
Fig. 6.5:  Steel Production in India and China
Collect information about steel plants
located in your own State and show them
on the map of India.
Source : World Steel Association, website : www.worldsteel.org
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
coal  (b) Lower productivity of labour (c) Irregular
supply of energy and (d) Poor infrastructure.
We also import good quality steel from other
countries. However, the overall production of
steel is sufficient to meet our domestic demand.
Liberalisation and Foreign Direct
Investment have given a boost to the industry
with the efforts of private entrepreneurs.
There is a need to allocate resources for
research and development to produce steel
more computatitively.
Nadu. In 2008-09 India produced over 15.29
lakh million tonnes of aluminium.
Bauxite, the raw material used in the
smelters is a very bulky, dark reddish coloured
rock. The flow chart given below shows the
process of manufacturing aluminium.  Regular
supply of electricity and an assured source of
raw material at minimum cost are the two
prime factors for location of the industry.
Have you read about the Kalinganagar
controversy? Collect information from
different sources and discuss.
Aluminium Smelting
Aluminium smelting is the second most
important metallurgical industry in India.  It is
light, resistant to corrosion, a good conductor
of heat, mallable and becomes strong when it is
mixed with other metals. It is used to
manufacture aircraft, utensils and wires. It has
gained popularity as a substitute of steel,
copper, zinc and lead in a number of industries.
Aluminium smelting plants in the country
are located in Odisha, West Bengal, Kerala, Uttar
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,  Maharashtra and Tamil
Fig. 6.6: Strip coasting mill at smelter of NALCO
Fig. 6.8
Fig. 6.7
A factory produces aluminium saucepans with
plastic handles. It obtains aluminium from a
smelter and a plastic component from
2015-16
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
entirely imported as the country does not have
any reserves of commercially usable potash or
potassium compounds in any form. India is
the third largest producer of nitrogenous
fertilisers. There are 57 fertiliser units
manufacturing nitrogenous and complex
nitrogenous fertilisers, 29 for urea and 9 for
producing ammonium sulphate as a by-
product and 68 other small units produce
single superphosphate. At present, there are
10 public sector undertakings and one in
cooperative sector at Hazira in Gujarat under
the Fertiliser Corporation of India.
After the Green Revolution the industry
expanded to several other parts of the country.
Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab
and Kerala contribute towards half the fertiliser
production.  Other significant producers are
Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan, Bihar,
Maharashtra, Assam, West Bengal, Goa, Delhi,
Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka.
Cement Industry
Cement is essential for construction activity
such as building houses, factories, bridges,
roads, airports, dams and for other commercial
establishments. This industry requires bulky
and heavy raw materials like limestone, silica,
alumina and gypsum. Coal and electric power
are needed apart from rail transportation.
Chemical Industries
The Chemical industry in India is fast growing
and diversifying. It contributes approximately
3 per cent of the GDP. It is the third largest in
Asia and occupies the twelfth place in the world
in term of its size. It comprises both large and
small scale manufacturing units. Rapid growth
has been recorded in both inorganic and
organic sectors.  Inorganic chemicals include
sulphuric acid (used to manufacture fertilisers,
synthetic fibres, plastics, adhesives, paints,
dyes stuffs), nitric acid, alkalies, soda ash (used
to make glass, soaps and detergents, paper)
and caustic soda.  These industries are widely
spread over the country.
Why do you think it is so?
Organic chemicals include petrochemicals,
which are used for manufacturing of synthetic
fibers, synthetic rubber, plastics, dye-stuffs,
drugs and pharmaceuticals. Organic chemical
plants are located near oil refineries or
petrochemical plants.
The chemical industry is its own largest
consumer. Basic chemicals undergo processing
to further produce other chemicals that are
used for industrial application, agriculture or
directly for consumer markets.  Make a list of
the products you are aware of.
Fertiliser Industry
The fertiliser industry is centred around the
production of nitrogenous fertilisers  (mainly
urea), phosphatic fertilisers and ammonium
phosphate (DAP) and complex fertilisers which
have a combination of nitrogen (N), phosphate
(P), and potash (K). The third, i.e. potash is
Where would it be economically viable to
set up the cement manufacturing units?
The industry has strategically located
plants in Gujarat that have suitable access to
the market in the Gulf countries.
Find out where the plants are located in other
States of India. Find their names.
another factory. All the manufactured
saucepans are sent to a warehouse:
1. (a) Which raw material is likely to be most
expensive to transport and why?
(b) Which raw material is likely to be
the cheapest to transport and why?
2. Do you think the cost of transporting the
finished products after packaging is likely
to be cheaper or more expensive than the
cost of transporting aluminium and
plastic? Why?
The first cement plant was set up in
Chennai in 1904. After Independence the
industry expanded. Decontrol of price and
distribution since 1989 and other policy
reforms led the cement industry to make rapid
strides in capacity, process, technology and
production. There are 128 large plants and
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
332 mini cement plants in the country.  India
produces a variety of cement.
Improvement in the quality has found the
produce a readily available market in East
Asia, Middle East, Africa and South Asia apart
from a large demand within the country. This
industry is doing well in terms of production
as well as export. Efforts are being made to
generate adequate domestic demand and
supply in order to sustain this industry.
Automobile Industry
Automobiles provide vehicle for quick
transport of good services and passengers.
Trucks, buses, cars, motor cycles, scooters,
three-wheelers and multi-utility vehicles are
manufactured in India at various centres.
After the liberalisation, the coming in of new
and contemporary models stimulated the
demand for vehicles in the market, which led
to the healthy growth of the industry
including passenger cars, two and three-
wheelers. This industry had experienced a
quantum jump in less than 15 years. Foreign
Direct Investment brought in new technology
and aligned the industry with global
developments.  At present, there are 15
manufacturers of passenger cars and multi-
utility vehicles, 9 of commercial vehicles, 14
of the two and three-wheelers. The industry
is located around Delhi, Gurgaon, Mumbai,
Pune, Chennai, Kolkata, Lucknow, Indore,
Hyderabad, Jamshedpur and Bengaluru.
Information Technology and
Electronics Industry
The electronics industry covers a wide range
of products from transistor sets to television,
telephones, cellular telecom, pagers, telephone
exchange, radars, computers and many
other equipments required by the
telecommunication industry. Bangalore has
emerged as the electronic capital of India. Other
important centres for electronic goods are
Mumbai, Delhi, Hyderabad, Pune, Chennai,
Kolkata, Lucknow and Coimbatore. By
2010-11 (STPI) Software Technology Parks of
India have come up across 46 locations at
different centres of India. However, the major
industry concentration is at Bangalore, Noida,
Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad and Pune.  A
major impact of this industry has been on
employment generation. It is encouraging to
know that 30 per cent of the people employed
in this sector are women. This industry has
been a major foreign exchange earner in the
last two or three years because of its fast
growing Business Processes Outsourcing
(BPO) sector. The continuing growth in the
hardware and software is the key to the success
of IT industry in India.
Fig. 6.9:  Cable manufacturing facilities at HCL,
Rupnarainpur (West Bengal)
Fig. 6.10:  Gas turbine rotor an assembly bed
at BHEL, Hyderabad
Industrial Pollution and Environmental
Degradation
Although industries contribute significantly to
India’s economic growth and development, the
increase in pollution of land, water, air, noise
and resulting degradation of environment that
they have caused, cannot be overlooked.
Industries are responsible for four types of
2015-16
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
India:  Some Software Technology Parks
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
pollution: (a) Air  (b) Water (c) Land (d) Noise.
The polluting industries also include thermal
power plants.
Air pollution is caused by the presence of high
proportion of undesirable gases, such as
sulphur dioxide and carbon monoxide. Air-
borne particulate materials contain both solid
and liquid particles like dust, sprays mist and
smoke. Smoke is emitted by chemical and paper
factories, brick kilns, refineries and smelting
plants, and burning of fossil fuels in big and
small factories that ignore pollution norms.
Toxic gas leaks can be very hazardous with
long-term effects. Are you aware of the Bhopal
Gas tragedy that occurred? Air pollution
adversely affects human health, animals, plants,
buildings and the atmosphere as a whole.
Water pollution is caused by organic and
inorganic industrial wastes and affluents
discharged into rivers. The main culprits in this
regard are paper, pulp, chemical, textile and
dyeing, petroleum refineries, tanneries and
electroplating industries that let out dyes,
detergents, acids, salts and heavy metals like
lead and mercury pesticides, fertilisers,
synthetic chemicals with carbon, plastics and
rubber, etc. into the water bodies. Fly ash,
phospo- gypsum and iron and steel slags are
the major solid wastes in India.
Thermal pollution of water occurs when hot
water from factories and thermal plants is
drained into rivers and ponds before cooling.
What would be the effect on aquatic life?
Wastes from nuclear power plants, nuclear
and weapon production facilities cause
cancers, birth defects and miscarriages. Soil
and water pollution are closely related.
Dumping of wastes specially glass, harmful
chemicals, industrial effluents, packaging, salts
and garbage renders the soil useless. Rain
water percolates to the soil carrying the
pollutants to the ground and the ground water
also gets contaminated.
Noise pollution not only results in irritation
and anger, it can also cause hearing
impairment, increased heart rate and blood
pressure among other physiological effects.
Unwanted sound is an irritant and a source of
stress.  Industrial and construction activities,
machinery, factory equipment, generators,
saws and pneumatic and electric drills also
make a lot of noise.
Control of Environmental Degradation
Every litre of waste water discharged by our
industry pollutes eight times the quantity of
freshwater. How can the industrial pollution of
fresh water be reduced? Some suggestions are-
(i) minimising use water for processing by
reusing and recycling it in two or more
successive stages
(ii) harvesting of rainwater to meet water
requirements
(iii) treating hot water and  effluents before
releasing them in rivers and ponds.
Treatment of industrial effluents can be
done in three phases
(a) Primary treatment by mechanical means.
This involves screening, grinding,
flocculation and sedimentation.
(b) Secondary treatment by biological process
(c) Tertiary treatment by biological,
chemical and physical processes. This
involves recycling of wastewater.
Overdrawing of ground water reserves by
industry where there is a threat to ground water
resources also needs to be regulated legally.
Particulate matter in the air can be reduced by
fitting smoke stacks to factories with electrostatic
precipitators, fabric filters, scrubbers and
inertial separators. Smoke can be reduced by
using oil or gas instead of coal in factories.
Machinery and equipment can be used and
generators should be fitted with silencers.
Almost all machinery can be redesigned to
increase energy efficiency and reduce noise.
Noise absorbing material may be used apart
from personal use of earplugs and earphones.
Fig. 6.11:  Sewage Treatment plant under Yamuna
action paln at Faridabad
2015-16
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
NTPC shows the way
NTPC is a major power providing corporation
in India. It has ISO certification for EMS
(Environment Management System) 14001.
The corporation has a pro-active approach
for preserving the natural environment and
resources like water, oil and gas and fuels
in places where it is setting up power plants.
This has been possible through-
(a) Optimum utilisation of equipment
adopting latest techniques and
upgrading existing equipment.
(b) Minimising waste generation by
maximising ash utilisation.
(c) Providing green belts for nurturing ecological
balance and addressing the question of
special purpose vehicles for afforestation.
(d) Reducing environmental pollution through
ash pond management, ash water recycling
system and liquid waste management.
(e) Ecological monitoring, reviews and on-
line database management for all its
power stations.
Fig. 6.12:  Ramagundam plant
EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES
Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which one of the following industries uses limestone as a raw material.
(a) Aluminium
(b) Cement
(c) Sugar
(d) Jute
(ii) Which one of the following agencies markets steel for the public sector plants?
(a) HAIL
(b) SAIL
(c) TATA Steel
(d) MNCC
(iii) Which one of the following industries uses bauxite as a raw material?
(a) Aluminium
(b) Cement
(c) Jute
(d) Steel
(iv) Which one of the following industries manufactures telephones, computer, etc.
(a) Steel
(c) Aluminium
(b) Electronic
(d) Information Technology
Answer the following briefly in not more than 30 words.
(i) What is manufacturing?
(ii) Name any three physical factors for the location of the industry.
(iii) Name any three human factors for the location of an industry.
(iv) What are basic industries? Give an example.
(v) Name the important raw materials used in the manufacturing of cement?
Write the answers of the following questions in 120 words.
(i) How are integrated steel plants different from mini steel plants? What
problems does the industry face? What recent developments have led to a
rise in the production capacity?
(ii) How do industries pollute the environment?
(iii) Discuss the steps to be taken to minimise environmental degradation
by industry?
The challenge of sustainable development
requires integration of economic development
with environmental concerns.
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
ACTIVITY
Give one word for each of the following with regard to industry.  The number of
letters in each word are hinted in brackets.
(i) Used to drive machinery
P...........................
(ii) People who work in a factory
W..........................
(iii) Where the product is sold
M..........................
(iv) A person who sells goods
R...........................
(v) Thing produced
P...........................
(vi) To make or produce
M..........................
(vii) Land, Water and Air degraded
P...........................
PROJECT WORK
Select one agro-based and one mineral based industry in your area.
(i) What are the raw materials they use?
(ii) What are the other inputs in the process of manufacturing that involve
transportation cost?
(iii) Are these factories following environmental norms?
ACTIVITY
Solve the puzzle by following your search horizontally and vertically to find the hidden
answers.
Textiles, sugar, vegetable oil and plantation industries deriving raw materials
from agriculture are called…
The basic raw material for sugar industry.
This fibre is also known  as the ‘ Golden Fibre’.
Iron-ore, coking coal, and limestone are the chief raw materials of this industry.
A public sector steel plant located in Chhattisgarh.
Railway diesel engines are manufactured in Uttar Pradesh at this place.
2015-16
We use different materials and services in our
daily life. Some of these are available in our
immediate surroundings, while other
requirements are met by bringing things from
other places. Goods and services do not move
from supply locales to demand locales on their
own. The movement of these goods and services
from their supply locations to demand locations
necessitates the need for transport. Some people
are engaged in facilitating these movements.
These are known to be traders who make the
products come to the consumers by
transportation. Thus, the pace of development
of a country depends upon the production of
goods and services as well as their movement
over space. Therefore, efficient means of transport
are pre-requisites for fast development.
Movement of these goods and services can be
over three important domains of our earth i.e. land,
water and air. Based on these, transport can also
be classified into land, water and air transport.
expanded far and wide. Today, the world has
been converted into a large village with the help
of efficient and fast moving transport.
Transport has been able to achieve this with
the help of equally developed communication
system. Therefore, transport, communication
and trade are complementary to each other.
Today, India is well-linked with the rest of
the world despite its vast size, diversity and
linguistic and socio-cultural plurality.
Railways, airways, water ways, newspapers,
radio, television, cinema and internet, etc. have
been contributing to its socio-economic
progress in many ways. The trades from local
to international levels have added to the vitality
of its economy. It has enriched our life and
added substantially to growing amenities and
facilities for the comforts of life.
In this chapter, you will see how modern
means of transport and communication serve
as life lines of our nation and its modern
Fig. 7.1
For a long time, trade and transport were
restricted to a limited space. With the
development in science and technology, the
area of influence of trade and transport
economy. It is thus, evident that a dense and
efficient network of transport and
communication is a pre-requisite for local,
national and global trade of today.
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
TRANSPORT
Roadways
India has one of the largest road networks in
the world, aggregating to about 2.3 million km
at present. In India, roadways have preceded
railways. They still have an edge over railways
in view of the ease with which they can be built
and maintained. The growing importance of
road transport vis-à-vis rail transport is rooted
in the following reasons; (a) construction cost of
roads is much lower than that of railway lines,
(b) roads can traverse comparatively more
dissected and undulating topography, (c) roads
can negotiate higher gradients of slopes and as
such can traverse mountains such as the
Himalayas, (d) road transport is economical in
transportation of few persons and relatively
smaller amount of goods over short distances,
(e) it also provides door-to-door service, thus
the cost of loading and unloading is much lower,
(f) road transport is also used as a feeder to other
modes of transport such as they provide a link
between railway stations, air and sea ports.
In India, roads are classified in the following
six classes according to their capacity. Look at
the map of the National Highways and find out
about the significant role played by these roads.
• Golden Quadrilateral Super Highways:
The government has launched a major road
development project linking Delhi-Kolkata-
Chennai-Mumbai and Delhi by six-lane
Super Highways. The North-South corridors
linking Srinagar (Jammu & Kashmir) and
Kanyakumari (Tamil Nadu), and East-West
Corridor connecting Silcher (Assam) and
Porbander (Gujarat) are part of this project.
The major objective of these Super Highways
is to reduce the time and distance between
the mega cities of India. These highway
projects are being implemented by the
National Highway Authority of India (NHAI).
• National Highways: National Highways
link extreme parts of the country. These are
the primary road systems and are laid and
maintained by the Central Public Works
Department (CPWD). A number of major
National Highways run in North-South and
East-West directions. The historical Sher-
• State Highways: Roads linking a state
capital with different district headquarters
are known as State Highways. These roads
are constructed and maintained by the State
Public Works Department (PWD) in State
and Union Territories.
• District Roads: These roads connect the
district headquarters with other places of the
district. These roads are maintained by the
Zila Parishad.
• Other Roads: Rural roads, which link rural
areas and villages with towns, are classified
under this category. These roads received
special impetus under the Pradhan Mantri
Grameen Sadak Yojana. Under this scheme
special provisions are made so that every village
in the country is linked to a major town in the
country by an all season motorable road.
Fig.7.2:  Ahmedabad- Vadodara Expressway
Find out places linked by the National
Highway 2 and 3.
Do you know that National Highway-7
is the longest and traverses 2, 369 km
between Varanasi and Kanyakumari
via Jabalpur, Nagpur, Hyderabad,
Bangalore and Madurai. Delhi and
Mumbai are connected by National
Highway-8, while National Highway-15
covers most of Rajasthan.
Shah Suri Marg is called National Highway
No.1, between Delhi and Amritsar.
2015-16
LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY
India:  National Highways
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
• Border Roads: Apart from these, Border
Roads Organisation a Government of India
undertaking constructs and maintains
roads in the bordering areas of the country.
This organisation was established in 1960
for the development of the roads of strategic
importance in the northern and north-
eastern border areas. These roads have
improved accessibility in areas of difficult
terrain and have helped in the economic
development of these area.
The Indian Railways is the largest public
sector undertaking in the country. The first
train steamed off from Mumbai to Thane in
1853, covering a distance of 34 km.
these are all weather roads. Unmetalled roads
go out of use in the rainy season.
Road Density
The length of road per 100 sq. km of area
is known as density of roads. Distribution
of road is not uniform in the country. Density
of all roads varies from only 12.14 km in
Jammu and Kashmir to 517.77 km in Kerala
(as on 31 March 2011) with the national
average of 142.68 km (31 March 2011). Road
transportation in India faces a number of
problems. Keeping in view the volume of
traffic and passengers, the road network is
inadequate. About half of the roads are
unmetalled and this limits their usage
during the rainy season. The National
Highways are inadequate too. Moreover, the
roadways are highly congested in cities and
most of the bridges and culverts are old
and narrow. However, in recent years fast
development of road network has taken place
in different parts of the country
Railways
Railways are the principal mode of
transportation for freight and passengers in
India. Railways also make it possible to
conduct multifarious activities like business,
sightseeing, pilgrimage along with
transportation of goods over longer
distances. Apart from an important means
of transport the Indian Railways have been
a great integrating force for more than 150
years. Railways in India bind the economic
life of the country as well as accelerate the
development of the industry and agriculture.
The Indian Railway have a network of 7,133
stations spread over a route length of 64,460
km with a fleet of 9,213 locomotives, 53,220
passenger service vehicles, 6,493 other coach
vehicles and 2,29,381 wagons as on March
2011.
Fig. 7.3:  Hilly Tracts
Fig. 7.4:  Traffic on north-eastern border road
(Arunachal Pradesh)
Roads can also be classified on the basis of
the type of material used for their construction
such as metalled and unmetalled roads.
Metalled roads may be made of cement,
concrete or even bitumen of coal, therefore,
2015-16
LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY
Find out the current Railway zones and their
headquarters. Also locate the headquarters
of Railway zones on the map of India.
Source: Railway year book 2010-11, Ministry of Railways, Govt. of India.
The Indian Railway is now reorganised into
16 zones.
The distribution pattern of the Railway
network in the country has been largely
influenced by physiographic, economic and
administrative factors.  The northern plains with
their vast level land, high population density
and rich agricultural resources provided the
most favourable condition for their growth.
However, a large number of rivers requiring
construction of bridges across their wide beds
posed some obstacles.  In the hilly terrains of
the peninsular region, railway tracts are laid
through low hills, gaps or tunnels. The
Himalayan mountainous regions too are
unfavourable for the construction of railway
lines due to high relief, sparse population and
lack of economic opportunities. Likewise, it was
difficult to lay railway lines on the sandy plain
of western Rajasthan, swamps of Gujarat,
forested tracks of Madhya Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Jharkhand.  The
contiguous stretch of Sahyadri could be crossed
only through gaps or passes (Ghats). In recent
times, the development of the Konkan railway
along the west coast has facilitated the
movement of passengers and goods in this most
important economic region of India. It has also
faced a number of problem such as sinking of
track in some stretches and land slides.
Today, the railways have become more
important in our national economy than all
other means of transport put together. However,
rail transport suffers from certain problems as
well. Many passengers travel without tickets.
Thefts and damaging of railway property has
not yet stopped completely.  People stop the
trains, pull the chain unnecessarily and this
causes heavy damage to the railway. Think
over it, how we can help our railway in running
as per the scheduled time?
Pipelines
Pipeline transport network is a new arrival on
the transportation map of India.  In the past,
these were used to transport water to cities and
industries. Now, these are used for
transporting crude oil, petroleum products and
natural gas from oil and natural gas fields to
refineries, fertilizer factories and big thermal
power plants. Solids can also be transported
through a pipeline when converted into slurry.
The far inland locations of refineries like
Barauni, Mathura, Panipat and gas based
fertilizer plants could be thought of only
because of pipelines.  Initial cost of laying
pipelines is high but subsequent running
costs are minimal.  It rules out trans-shipment
losses or delays.
There are three important networks of
pipeline transportation in the country.
• From oil field in upper Assam to Kanpur
(Uttar Pradesh), via Guwahati, Barauni and
Allahabad. It has branches from Barauni to
Haldia, via Rajbandh, Rajbandh to
Maurigram and Guwahati to Siliguri.
Gauge in metres
Route (Km)
Running Track (Km)
Total Track (Km.)
Broad Gauge (1.676)
55,188
77,347
102,680
Metre Gauge (1.000)
6,809
Narrow Gauge (0.762  and 0.610)
2,463
Total
64460
87040
113994
Table 7.1: India: Railway Track
The Indian Railway network runs on multiple gauge operations
extending over 64460 km (Provisional) (excluding Metro Kolkata)
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
India:  Railways
2015-16
LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY
Fig. 7.5:  Inland waterways widely used in
north-eastern states
• From Salaya in Gujarat to Jalandhar in
Punjab, via Viramgam, Mathura, Delhi and
Sonipat. It has branches to connect Koyali
(near Vadodara, Gujarat) Chakshu and
other places.
• Gas pipeline from Hazira in Gujarat
connects Jagdishpur in Uttar Pradesh, via
Vijaipur in Madhya Pradesh. It has branches
to Kota in Rajasthan, Shahajahanpur,
Babrala and other places in Uttar Pradesh.
Waterways
Since time immemorial, India was one of the
seafaring countries.  Its seamen sailed far and
near, thus, carrying and spreading Indian
commerce and culture. Waterways are the
cheapest means of transport. They are most
suitable for carrying heavy and bulky goods.
It is a fuel-efficient and environment friendly
mode of transport. India has inland navigation
waterways of 14,500 km in length. Out of
these only 5685 km are navigable by
mechanised vessels. The following waterways
have been declared as the National Waterways
by the Government.
and Brahmani rivers and East Coast Canal
(588 km) – N.W. No.5
There are some other inland water ways on
which substantial transportation takes place.
These are Mandavi, Zuari and Cumberjua,
Sunderbans, Barak, backwaters of Kerala and
tidal stretches of some other rivers.
Apart from these, India’s trade with foreign
countries is carried from the ports located along
the coast. 95 per cent of the country’s trade
volume (68 per cent in terms of value) is moved
by sea.
Major Sea Ports
With a long coastline of 7,516.6 km, India is
dotted with 12 major and 187, notified non-
majors (minor/intermediate) ports. These
major ports handle 95 per cent of India’s foreign
trade.
Kandla in Kuchchh was the first port
developed soon after Independence to ease the
volume of trade on the Mumbai port, in the
wake of loss of Karachi port to Pakistan after
the Partition. Kandla is a tidal port. It caters to
the convenient handling of exports and imports
of highly productive granary and industrial belt
• The Ganga river between Allahabad and
Haldia (1620 km)-N.W. No.1
• The Brahmaputra river between Sadiya and
Dhubri (891 km)-N.W. No.2
• The West-Coast Canal in Kerala
(Kottapurma-Kollam, Udyogamandal and
Champakkara canals-205 km) – N.W. No.3
• Specified stretches of Godavari and Krishna
rivers along with Kakinada Puducherry
stretch of canals (1078 km) – N.W. No.4
• Specified stretches of river Brahmani along
with Matai river, delta  channels of Mahanadi
stretching across the states of Jammu and
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana,
Rajasthan and Gujarat.
Mumbai is the biggest port with a spacious
natural and well-sheltered harbour. The
Jawaharlal Nehru port was planned with a view
to decongest the Mumbai port and serve as a
hub port for this region. Marmagao port (Goa)
Fig. 7.6:  Trucks being driven into the vessel at
Mumbai port
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Airways
The air travel, today, is the fastest, most
comfortable and prestigious mode of transport.
It can cover very difficult terrains like high
mountains, dreary deserts, dense forests and
also long oceanic stretches with great ease.
Think of the north-eastern part of the country,
marked with the presence of big rivers,
dissected relief, dense forests and frequent
is the premier iron ore exporting port of the
country. This port accounts for about fifty per
cent of India’s iron ore export. New Mangalore
port, located in Karnataka caters to the export
of iron ore concentrates from Kudremukh
mines. Kochchi is the extreme south-western
port, located at the entrance of a lagoon with a
natural harbour.
Moving along the east coast, you would see
the extreme south-eastern port of Tuticorin, in
Tamil Nadu. This port has a natural harbour
and rich hinterland. Thus, it has a flourishing
trade handling of a large variety of cargoes to
even our neighbouring countries like Sri Lanka,
Maldives, etc. and the coastal regions of India.
Chennai is one of the oldest artificial ports of
the country. It is ranked next to Mumbai in terms
of the volume of trade and cargo.
Vishakhapatnam is the deepest landlocked and
well-protected port. This port was, originally,
conceived as an outlet for iron ore exports.
Paradwip port located in Odisha, specialises in
the export of iron ore. Kolkata is an inland
Fig. 7.7:  Tanker discharging crude oil at New
Mangalore port
Fig. 7.8:  Handling of oversize cargo at Tuticorin port
Fig. 7.9
floods and international frontiers, etc. in the
absence of air transport. Air travel has made
access easier.
The air transport was nationalised in 1953.
On the operational side, Indian Airlines,
Alliance Air (subsidiary of Indian Airlines),
private scheduled airlines and non- scheduled
operators provide domestic air services. Air
India provides international air services.
Pawanhans Helicopters Ltd. provides
helicopter services to Oil and Natural Gas
Corporation in its off-shore operations, to
inaccessible areas and difficult terrains like the
north-eastern states and the interior parts of
Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and
Uttarakhand. Indian Airlines operations also
extend to the neighbouring countries of South
and south-east Asia and the Middle east.
Find out the names of the countries connected
by Indian Airlines.
Air travel is not within the reach of the
common people. It is only in the north-eastern
states that special provisions are made to
extend the services to the common people.
riverine port. This port serves a very large and
rich hinterland of Ganga- Brahmaputra basin.
Being a tidal port, it requires constant dredging
of Hoogly. Haldia port was developed as a
subsidiary port, in order to relieve growing
pressure on the Kolkata port.
Why is air travel preferred in the north-
eastern states?
2015-16
LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY
India:  Major Ports and International Airports
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Communication
Ever since humans appeared on the earth, they
have used different means of communication.
But, the pace of change, has been rapid in
modern times. Long distance communication
is far easier without physical movement of the
communicator or receiver. Personal
communication and mass communication
including television, radio, press, films, etc. are
the major means of communication in the
country. The Indian postal network is the largest
in the world. It handles parcels as well as
personal written communications. Cards and
envelopes are considered first–class mail and
are airlifted between stations covering both land
and air. The second–class mail includes book
packets, registered newspapers and periodicals.
They are carried by surface mail, covering land
and water transport. To facilitate quick delivery
of mails in large towns and cities, six mail
channels have been introduced recently. They
are called Rajdhani Channel, Metro Channel,
Green Channel, Business Channel, Bulk Mail
Channel and Periodical Channel.
order to strengthen the flow of information
from the grassroot to the higher level, the
government has made special provision to
extend twenty-four hours STD facility to
every village in the country. There is a uniform
rate of STD facilities all over India. It has
been made possible by integrating the
development in space technology with
communication technology.
communication
provides
entertainment and creates awareness among
people about various national programmes and
policies. It includes radio, television,
newspapers, magazines, books and films. All
India Radio (Akashwani) broadcasts a variety
of programmes in national, regional and local
languages for various categories of people,
spread over different parts of the country.
Doordarshan, the national television channel of
India, is one of the largest terrestrial networks
in the world. It broadcasts a variety of
programmes from entertainment, educational
to sports, etc. for people of different age groups.
India publishes a large number of
newspapers and periodicals annually. They are
of different types depending upon their
periodicity. Newspapers are published in
about 100 languages and dialects. Did you
know that the largest number of newspapers
published in the country are in Hindi, followed
by English and Urdu? India is the largest
producer of feature films in the world. It
produces short films; video feature films and
video short films. The Central Board of Film
Certification is the authority to certify both
Indian and foreign films.
International Trade
The exchange of goods among people, states
and countries is referred to as trade. The market
is the place where such exchanges take place.
Trade between two countries is called
international trade. It may take place through
sea, air or land routes. While local trade is
carried in cities, towns and villages, state level
trade is carried between two or more states.
Advancement of international trade of a
country is an index to its economic prosperity.
It is, therefore, considered the economic
barometer for a country.
Till March 2010, 548.32 million mobile
connections were in India. Make a
comparison with any other country of
your choice.
Fig.7.10 : Emergency call box on NH-8
India has one of the largest telecom
networks in Asia. Excluding urban places
more than two-thirds of the villages in India
have already been covered with Subscriber
Trunk Dialling (STD) telephone facility. In
2015-16
LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY
As the resources are space bound, no
country can survive without international
trade. Export and import are the components
of trade. The balance of trade of a country is
the difference between its export and import.
When the value of export exceeds the value of
imports, it is called a favourable balance of
trade. On the contrary, if the value of imports
exceeds the value of exports, it is termed as
unfavourable balance of trade.
India has trade relations with all the major
trading blocks and all geographical regions of
the world. Among the commodities in export
the share of agriculture and allied products
has been 9.9 per cent, ores and minerals 4.0%,
gems and jewellery 14.7 per cent, petroleum
products (including coal) 16.8 per cent in
2010-11.
The commodities imported to India include
petroleum and petroleum products  (28.6 per
cent), pearls and precious stones (9.4 per cent),
chemicals (5.2 per cent), coal, coke and
briquettes (2.7 per cent), machinery (6.4 per
cent) in 2010-11. Bulk imports as a group
registered a growth accounting for 28.2 per
cent of total imports. This group includes
fertilizers (3.4 per cent), cereals (14.3 per cent),
edible oils (17.4 per cent) and newsprint (Paper
board manufacture and newsprint 40.3 per
cent) in 2010-11. International trade has
under gone a sea change in the last fifteen
years. Exchange of commodities and goods
have been superseded by the exchange of
information and knowledge. India has emerged
as a software giant at the international level
and it is earning large foreign exchange through
the export of information technology.
Tourism as a Trade
Tourism in India has grown substantially over
the last three decades. Foreign tourist’s arrivals
in the country witnessed an increase of 11.8
per cent during the year 2010 as against the
year 2009, contributing Rs 64,889 crore of
foreign exchange in 2010.
5.78 million foreign tourists visited India
in 2010. More than 15 million people are
directly engaged in the tourism industry.
Prepare a project on the heritage tourism in India
2015-16
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Tourism also promotes national integration,
provides support to local handicrafts and
cultural pursuits. It also helps in the
development of international understanding
about our culture and heritage. Foreign
tourists visit India for heritage tourism, eco
tourism, adventure tourism, cultural tourism,
medical tourism and business tourism.
There is a vast potential for development of
tourism in all parts of the country. Efforts are
being made to promote different types of
tourism for this upcoming industry.
On the map of India show important tourist
places of your State/UT and its connectivity
with other parts of the country by railways/
roadways/airways.
Discuss in the class:
• What type of tourism may be developed in
your state/UT and why?
• Which areas in your state/UT you find more
attractive for development of tourism and why?
• How tourism may be helpful for the economic
development of a region adopting sustainable
development approach?
EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES
1 . Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which two of the following extreme locations are connected by the east-
west corridor?
(a) Mumbai and Nagpur
(c) Mumbai and Kolkata
(b) Silcher and Porbandar
(d) Nagpur and Siligudi
(ii) Which mode of transportation reduces trans-shipment losses and delays?
(a) Railways
(c) Pipeline
(b) Roadways
(d) Waterways
(iii) Which one of the following states is not connected with the H.V.J. pipeline?
(a) Madhya Pradesh
(c) Gujarat
(b) Maharashtra
(d) Uttar Pradesh
(iv) Which one of the following ports is the deepest land-locked and well-
protected port along the east coast?
(a) Chennai
(c) Tuticorin
(b) Paradwip
(d) Vishakhapatnam
(v) Which one of the following is the most important modes of transportation
in India?
(a) Pipeline
(c) Roadways
(b) Railways
(d) Airways
(vi) Which one of the following terms is used to describe trade between two or
more countries?
(a) Internal trade
(c) External trade
(b) International trade
(d) Local trade
2 . Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) State any three merits of roadways.
(ii) Where and why is rail transport the most convenient means of
transportation?
(iii) What is the significance of the border roads?
(iv) What is meant by trade? What is the difference between international
and local trade?
2015-16
LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY
3 . Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Why are the means of transportation and communication called the lifelines
of a nation and its economy?
(ii) Write a note on the changing nature of the international trade in the last
fifteen years.
QUIZ DRIVE
1 . Northern terminal of the North-south corridor.
2 . The name of National Highway No.2.
3 . The headquarter of the southern railway zone.
4 . The rail gauge with a track width of 1.676 m.
The southern terminal of the National Highway No.7.
A Riverine Port.
Busiest railway junction in Northern India.
ACTIVITY
Start your search vertically, horizontally or diagonally and reach various
destinations across the country!
2015-16
