Class XI
PHYSICS
Exemplar Problems
FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF) – 2005 initiated a new phase of
development of syllabi and textbooks for all stages of school education. Conscious
effort has been made to discourage rote learning and to diffuse sharp boundaries
between different subject areas. This is well in tune with the NPE–1986 and
Learning Without Burden –1993 that recommend child-centred system of
education. The textbooks for classes IX and XI were released in 2006 and for
classes X and XII in 2007. Overall, the books have been well received by students
and teachers.
NCF–2005 notes that treating the prescribed textbooks as the sole basis of
examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning
are ignored. It further  reiterates that the methods used for teaching and evaluation
will also determine how effective  these textbooks proves for making children’s life
at school a happy experience, rather than source of stress or boredom. It calls for
reform in examination system currently prevailing in the country.
The position papers of the National Focus Groups on Teaching of Science,
Teaching of Mathematics and Examination Reform envisage that the Physics
question papers, set in annual examinations conducted by the various Boards
do not really assess  genuine understanding of the subjects. The quality of
question papers is often not up to the mark. They usually seek mere information
based on rote memorisation, and fail to test higher-order skills like reasoning
and analysis, let alone lateral thinking, creativity and judgment. Good
unconventional questions, challenging problems and experiment-based
problems rarely find a place in question papers. In order to address the issue,
and also to provide additional learning material, the Department of Education
in Science and Mathematics (DESM) has made an attempt to develop resource
book of exemplar problems in different subjects at secondary and higher
secondary stages. Each resource book contains different types of questions of
varying difficulty level. Some questions would require the students to apply
simultaneous understanding of more than one chapters/units. These problems
are not meant to serve merely as question bank for examinations but are primarily
meant to improve the quality of teaching/learning process in schools. It is
expected that these problems would encourage teachers to design quality
questions on their own. Students and teachers should always keep in mind that
examination and assessment should test comprehension, information recall, analytical
thinking and problem- solving ability, creativity and speculative ability.
A team of experts and teachers with an understanding of the subject and a proper
role of examination worked hard to accomplish this task. The material was discussed,
edited, and finally included in this resource book.
NCERT would welcome suggestions from students, teachers and parents which
would help us to further improve the quality of material in subsequent editions.
YASH PAL
Chairperson
National Steering Committee
New Delhi
National Council of Educational
21 May 2008
Research and Training
PREFACE
The Department of Education in Science and Mathematics (DESM), National
Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT), initiated the development
of ‘Exemplar Problems’ in science and mathematics for secondary and higher
secondary stages after completing the preparation of textbooks based on National
Curriculum Framework – 2005.
The main objective of the book on ‘Exemplar Problems in Physics’ is to provide the
teachers and students a large number of quality problems with varying cognitive levels
to facilitate teaching-learning of concepts in physics that are presented through the
textbook for Class XI. It is envisaged that the problems included in this volume would
help the teachers to design tasks to assess effectiveness of their teaching and to know
about the achievement of their students besides facilitating preparation of balanced
question papers for unit and terminal tests. The feedback based on the analysis of
students’ responses may help the teachers in further improving the quality of classroom
instructions. In addition, the problems given in this book are also expected to help the
teachers to perceive the basic characteristics of good quality questions and motivate
them to frame similar questions on their own. Students can benefit themselves by
attempting the exercises given in the book for self assessment and also in mastering the
basic techniques of problem solving. Some of the questions given in the book are expected
to challenge the understanding of the concepts of physics of the students and their
ability to apply them in novel situations.
The problems included in this book were prepared through a series of workshops
organised by the DESM for their development and refinement involving practicing
teachers, subject experts from universities and institutes of higher learning, and the
members of the physics group of the DESM whose names appear separately. We gratefully
acknowledge their efforts and thank them for their valuable contribution in our
endeavour to provide good quality instructional material for the school system.
I express my gratitude to Professor Krishna Kumar, Director and Professor
G.Ravindra, Joint Director, NCERT for their valuable motivation and guidiance from
time to time. Special thanks are also due to Dr. V.P.Srivastava, Reader in Physics, DESM
for coordinating the programme, taking pains in editing and refinement of problems
and for making the manuscript pressworthy.
We look forward to feedback from students, teachers and parents for further
improvement of the contents of this book.
HUKUM SINGH
Professor and Head
DESM, NCERT
New Delhi
DEVELOPMENT TEAM
MEMBER
A.W. Joshi, Professor (Retired), Department of Physics, University of Pune,  Pune.
Atul Mody, Lecturer(SG), Department of Physics, VES College of Arts,Science &
Commerce, Chembur, Mumbai.
B.K.Sharma, Professor of Physics, Department of Education in Science & Mathematics,
NCERT, New Delhi.
B.Labroo, PGT, Physics, Convent of Jesus & Mary, New Delhi.
Gagan Gupta, Reader in Physics, Department of Education in Science & Mathematics,
NCERT, New Delhi
H.S.Mani, Raja Rammana Fellow, Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Chennai.
Kiran Nayak, PGT, Physics, Apeejay School, Pitampura, New Delhi.
K.Thyagarajan, Professor, Deapartment of Physics, I.I.T.,Delhi.
M.A.H.Ahsan, Lecturer, Department of Physics, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi.
Pragya Nopany, PGT, Physics, Birla Vidya Niketan, Pushpa Vihar,New Delhi.
Pushpa Tyagi, PGT, Physics, Sanskriti School,Chanakya Puri,New Delhi.
Ravi Bhattacharjee, Reader in Physics, SGTB Khalsa College, University of Delhi, Delhi.
R.S.Dass, Vice-Principal (Retired), Balwant Ray Mehta Sr.Sec. School, Lajpat Nagar,
New Delhi.
R.Joshi, Lecturer (SG) in Physics, Department of Education in Science & Mathematics,
NCERT, New Delhi.
S.Rai Choudhury, Raja Ramanna Fellow, Centre for Theoretical Physics, Jamia Millia
Islamia,New Delhi.
S.D.Joglekar, Professor, Department of Physics, I.I.T., Kanpur.
Shashi  Prabha, Lecturer in Physics, Department of Education in Science & Mathematics,
NCERT, New Delhi.
MEMBER – COORDINATOR
V.P.Srivastava, Reader, Department of Education in Science &  Mathematics,
NCERT, New Delhi.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges the
valuable contribution of the individuals and organisations involved in the
development of Exemplar Problems in Physics for Class XI. The Council also
acknowledges the valuable contribution of the following academics for reviewing
and refining the manuscripts of this book: Aprajita, PGT(Physics), Kendriya
Vidyalaya No.3, Delhi Cantt., Naraina, New Delhi; Anu Venugopalan, Reader in
Physics, School of Basic and Applied Sciences, GGSIP University, New Delhi;
C.Kadolkar, Associate Professor, Department of Physics, I.I.T.,Guwahati; Girija
Shankar, PGT (Physics), Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Surajmal Vihar, Delhi;
Mahesh Shetti, Lecturer in Physics,Wilson College, Mumbai; R.P.Sharma,
Education Officer (Science), CBSE,New Delhi; Sangeeta Gadre,Reader in
Physics, Kirori Mal College,University of Delhi, Delhi; Sucharita Basu Kasturi,
PGT(Physics), Sardar Patel Vidyalaya,Lodi Estate, New Delhi; Shyama Rath,
Reader, Department of Physics, University of Delhi, Delhi and Yashu Kumar,
PGT (Physics), Kulachi Hans Raj Model School, Ashok Vihar,New Delhi.
Special thanks are due to Hukum Singh, Professor and  Head, DESM, NCERT
for his support. The Council also acknowledges the efforts of Deepak Kapoor,
Incharge, Computer Station; Ritu Jha, DTP Operators.
The contributions of the Publication Department in bringing out this book
are also duly acknowledged.
CONTENTS
FOREWORD
PREFACE
C H A P T E R  ONE
INTRODUCTION
C H A P T E R  TWO
UNITS AND MEASUREMENTS
C H A P T E R  THREE
MOTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE
C H A P T E R  FOUR
MOTION IN A PLANE
C H A P T E R  FIVE
LAWS OF MOTION
C H A P T E R  SIX
WORK, ENERGY AND POWER
C H A P T E R  SEVEN
SYSTEM OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION
C H A P T E R  EIGHT
GRAVITATION
C H A P T E R  NINE
MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS
C H A P T E R  TEN
MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS
C H A P T E R  ELEVEN
THERMAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER
C H A P T E R  TWELVE
THERMODYNAMICS
C H A P T E R  THIRTEEN
KINETIC THEORY
C H A P T E R  FOURTEEN
OSCILLATIONS
C H A P T E R  FIFTEEN
WAVES
ANSWERS
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPERS
Cha pte r One
INTRODUCTION
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF) – 2005 initiated a new phase
of curriculum revision. First, new syllabi for Science and Mathematics
for all stages of school education were developed. Based on these syllabi,
new textbooks were developed. As a part of this effort, Physics textbooks
for Classes XI and XII were published in 2006 and 2007, respectively.
One of the major concerns expressed in NCF–2005 is regarding
Examination Reform.
According to NCF–2005,  “A good evaluation and examination
system can become an integral part of the learning process and
benefit both the learners themselves and the educational system
by giving credible feedback”.
It further notes that,
“Education is concerned with preparing citizens for a
meaningful and productive life, and evaluation should be a way
of providing credible feedback on the extent to which we have
been successful in imparting such an education. Seen from this
perspective, current processes of evaluation, which measure and
assess a very limited range of faculties, are highly inadequate and
do not provide a complete picture of an individual’s abilitiy or
progress towards fulfilling the aims of education”.
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
The purpose of assessment is to determine the extent to which learning
has taken, on the one hand and to improve the teaching-learning process
and instructional materials, on the other. It should inter alia be able to
review the objectives that have been identified for different school stages
by gauging the extent to which the capabilities of learners have been
developed. Tests should be so designed that we must be able to gauge
what children have learnt, and their ability to use this knowledge for
problem-solving and application in the real world. In addition, they must
also be able to test the processes of thinking to gauge if the learner has
also learnt where to find information, how to use new information, and to
analyse and evaluate the same. The types of questions that are set for
assessment need to go beyond what is given in the book. Often children’s
learning is restricted as teachers do not accept their answers if they are
different from what is presented in the guidebooks. Designing good test
items and questions is an art, and teachers should spend time thinking
about and devising such questions.
Observing on the current practices of the different boards of school
education in the country, the National Focus Group paper on
Examination Reform says:
“...Because the quality of question papers is low, they usually
call for rote memorisation and fail to test higher-order skills like
reasoning and analysis, let alone lateral thinking, creativity and
judgement”.
It further advocates the inclusion of Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)-
a type of question that has great untapped potential. It also  notes the
limitation of testing through MCQ’s only.  “While MCQ can more deeply
probe the level of conceptual understanding of students and gauge a
student’s mastery of subtleties, it cannot be the only kind of question in
any examination. MCQs work best in conjunction with some open-ended
essay questions in the second part of the paper, which tests expression
and the ability to formulate an argument using relevant facts.”
In order to address to the problem, the Department of  Education in
Science and Mathematics undertook a programme, Development of
Exemplar Problems in Physics for Class XI  during 2007-08.  Problems
based on different chapters in textbook of Physics for Class XI published
by the NCERT  has been  developed. Problems have been classified broadly
into five categories:
1. Multiple Choice Questions I (MCQ I): only one correct answer.
2. Multiple Choice Questions II (MCQII): may have one or more than
one correct answer.
3. Very Short Answer Questions (VSA): may be answered in one/two
sentences.
4. Short Answer Questions (SA): require some analytical/numerical
work.
5. Long Answer Questions (LA): require detailed analytical/numerical
solution.
Introduc tion
Though most of the questions given in a particular chapter are based
on concepts covered in that chapter, some questions have been developed
which are based on concepts covered in more than one chapter.
One of the major objectives of involving learners in solving problems
in teaching-learning process is to promote a more active learning
environment, improve student learning and also support young teachers
in their professional development during their early formative teaching
experiences. For this to be achieved, problem-solving based on good
question should form an integral part of teaching-learning process. Good
questions engage students in progressively deeper levels of thinking and
reasoning. It is envisaged that the questions presented through this book
would motivate teachers to design good questions. What makes a question
good? According to Robyn L. Miller et al.1
Some characteristics of a good question are:
• stimulates students’ interest and curiosity.
• helps students monitor their understanding.
• offers students frequent opportunities to make conjectures and argue
about their validity.
• draws on students’ prior knowledge, understanding, and/or
misunderstanding.
• provides teachers a tool for frequent formative assessments of what
their students are learning.
• supports teachers’ efforts to foster an active learning environment.
A NOTE TO STUDENTS
A good number of problems have been provided in this book.  Some are
easy, some are of average difficult level, some difficult and some problems
will challenge even the best amongst you.  It is advised that you first
master the concepts covered in your textbook, solve the examples and
exercises provided in your textbook and then attempt to solve the
problems given in this book.  There is no single prescription which can
help  you in solving each and every problem in physics but still researches
in physics education show that  most of the problems can be attempted
if you follow certain steps in a sequence. The following prescription due
to Dan Styer2 presents one such set of steps :
Strategy design
(a) Classify the problem by its method of solution.
(b) Summarise the situation with a diagram.
(c) Keep the goal in sight (perhaps by writing it down).
Execution tactics
(a) Work with symbols.
(b) Keep packets of related variables together.
1 http://www. math.cornell.edu/~ maria/mathfest_education preprint.pdf
2 http://www.oberlin.edu/physics/dstyer/SolvingProblems.html
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
(c) Be neat and organised.
(d) Keep it simple.
Answer checking
(a) Dimensionally consistent?
(b) Numerically reasonable (including sign)?
(c) Algebraically possible? (Example: no imaginary or infinite
answers)
(d) Functionally reasonable? (Example: greater range with greater
initial speed)
(e) Check special cases and symmetry.
(f ) Report numbers with units specified and with reasonable
significant figures.
We would like to emphasise that the problems in this book should be
used to improve the quality of teaching-learning process of physics. Some
can be directly adopted for evaluation purpose but most of them should
be suitably adapted according to the time/marks assigned.  Most of the
problems included under SA and LA can be used to generate more
problems of VSA or SA categories, respectively.
MCQ I
The number of significant figures in 0.06900 is
(a) 5
(b) 4
(c) 2
(d) 3
The sum of the numbers 436.32, 227.2 and 0.301 in appropriate
significant figures is
(a) 663.821
(b) 664
(c) 663.8
(d) 663.82
The mass and volume of a body are 4.237 g and 2.5 cm 3,
respectively. The density of the material of the body in correct
significant figures is
Cha pte r Two
UNITS AND
MEASUREMENTS
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
(a) 1.6048 g cm–3
(b) 1.69 g cm –3
(c) 1.7 g cm –3
(d) 1.695 g cm–3
The numbers 2.745 and 2.735 on rounding off to 3 significant
figures will give
(a) 2.75 and 2.74
(b) 2.74 and 2.73
(c) 2.75 and 2.73
(d) 2.74 and 2.74
The length and breadth of a rectangular sheet are 16.2 cm and
10.1cm, respectively. The area of the sheet in appropriate significant
figures and error is
(a) 164 ± 3 cm2
(b) 163.62  ± 2.6 cm 2
(c) 163.6  ± 2.6 cm 2
(d) 163.62   ± 3 cm 2
Which of the following pairs of physical quantities does not have
same dimensional formula?
(a) Work and torque.
(b) Angular momentum and Planck’s constant.
(c) Tension and surface tension.
(d) Impulse and linear momentum.
Measure of two quantities along with the precision of respective
measuring instrument is
A = 2.5 m s–1 ±  0.5 m s–1
B = 0.10 s ± 0.01 s
The value of A B will be
(a) (0.25 ± 0.08) m
(b) (0.25 ± 0.5) m
(c) (0.25 ± 0.05) m
(d) (0.25 ± 0.135) m
You measure two quantities as A = 1.0 m ± 0.2 m, B = 2.0 m ± 0.2 m.
We should report correct value for            as:
(a) 1.4 m ± 0.4 m
(b) 1.41m ± 0.15 m
(c) 1.4m ± 0.3 m
(d) 1.4m ± 0.2 m
Units and Measurements
Which of the following measurements is most precise?
(a) 5.00 mm
(b) 5.00 cm
(c) 5.00 m
(d) 5.00 km.
The mean length of an object is 5 cm. Which of the following
measurements is most accurate?
(a) 4.9 cm
(b) 4.805 cm
(c) 5.25 cm
(d) 5.4 cm
Young’s modulus of steel is 1.9 × 1011 N/m2. When expressed
in CGS units of dynes/cm2, it will be equal to (1N = 105 dyne,
1m2 = 104 cm 2)
(a) 1.9 × 1010
(b) 1.9 × 1011
(c) 1.9 × 1012
(d) 1.9 × 1013
If momentum (P ), area (A) and time (T ) are taken to be
fundamental quantities, then energy has the dimensional formula
(a) (P1 A–1 T1)
(b) (P2 A1 T1)
(c) (P1 A–1/2 T1)
(d) (P1 A1/2 T–1)
MCQ II
On the basis of dimensions, decide which of the following relations
for the displacement of a particle undergoing simple harmonic
motion is not correct:
(a) y = a sin 2
 (b) y = a sin vt.
(c) y =
(d) y =
2 sin
If P, Q, R are physical quantities, having different dimensions, which
of the following combinations can never be a meaningful quantity?
(a) (P – Q)/R
(b) PQ – R
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
(c) PQ/R
(d) (PR – Q2)/R
(e) (R + Q)/P
Photon is quantum of radiation with energy E = h
   where
frequency and h is Planck’s constant. The dimensions of h are the
same as that of
(a) Linear impulse
(b) Angular impulse
(c) Linear momentum
(d) Angular momentum
If Planck’s constant (h ) and speed of light in vacuum (c ) are taken
as two fundamental quantities, which one of the following can, in
addition, be taken to express length, mass and time in terms of
the three chosen fundamental quantities?
(a) Mass of electron (me )
(b) Universal gravitational constant (G )
(c) Charge of electron (e )
(d) Mass of proton (mp )
Which of the following ratios express pressure?
(a) Force/ Area
(b) Energy/ Volume
(c) Energy/ Area
(d) Force/ Volume
Which of the following are not a unit of time?
(a) Second
(b) Parsec
(c) Year
(d) Light year
Why do we have different units for the same physical quantity?
The radius of atom is of the order of 1 Å and radius of nucleus is
of the order of fermi. How many magnitudes higher is the volume
of atom as compared to the volume of nucleus?
Name the device used for measuring the mass of atoms and
molecules.
Units and Measurements
Express unified atomic mass  unit in kg.
A function f (  ) is defined as:
1–  +
Why is it necessary for q to be a dimensionless quantity?
Why length, mass and time are chosen as base quantities
in mechanics?
(a) The earth-moon distance is about 60 earth radius. What will
be the diameter of the earth (approximately in degrees) as seen
from the moon?
(b) Moon is seen to be of (½)°diameter from the earth. What must
be the relative size compared to the earth?
(c) From parallax measurement, the sun is found to be at a
distance of about 400 times the earth-moon distance. Estimate
the ratio of sun-earth diameters.
Which of the following time measuring devices is most precise?
(a) A wall clock.
(b) A stop watch.
(c) A digital watch.
(d) An atomic clock.
Give reason for your answer.
The distance of a galaxy is of the order of 1025 m. Calculate the
order of magnitude of time taken by light to reach us from
the galaxy.
The vernier scale of a travelling microscope has 50 divisions which
coincide with 49 main scale divisions. If each main scale division
is 0.5 mm, calculate the minimum inaccuracy in  the measurement
of distance.
During a total solar eclipse the moon almost entirely covers the
sphere of the sun. Write the relation between the distances and
sizes of the sun and moon.
If the unit of force is 100 N, unit of length is 10 m and unit of time
is 100 s, what is the unit of mass in this system of units?
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
Give an example of
(a) a physical quantity which has a unit but no dimensions.
(b) a physical quantity which has neither unit nor dimensions.
(c) a constant which has a unit.
(d) a constant which has no unit.
Calculate the length of the arc of a circle of radius 31.0 cm which
subtends an angle of 6
  at the centre.
Calculate the solid angle subtended by the periphery of an area of
1cm2 at a point situated symmetrically at a distance of 5 cm from
the area.
The displacement of a progressive wave is represented by
y = A sin(wt – k x ), where x is distance and t is time. Write the
dimensional formula of (i)
✁ and (ii) k.
Time for 20 oscillations of a pendulum is measured as t1= 39.6 s;
t2=  39.9 s; t3= 39.5 s. What is the precision in the measurements?
What is the accuracy of the measurement?
A new system of units is proposed in which unit of mass is
unit of length
✄m and unit of time
☎ s. How much will 5 J measure
in  this new system?
The volume of a liquid flowing out per second of a pipe of length l
and radius r is written by a student as
where P is the pressure difference between the two ends of the
pipe and
✆ is coefficent of viscosity of the liquid having dimensional
formula ML–1 T –1.
Check whether the equation is dimensionally correct.
A physical quantity X is related to four measurable quantities a,
b, c and d as follows:
X = a2 b3 c5/2 d–2.
The percentage error in the measurement of a, b, c and d are 1%,
2%, 3% and 4%, respectively. What is the percentage error in
Units and Measurements
quantity X ? If the value of X calculated on the basis of the above
relation is 2.763, to what value should you round off the result.
In the expression P = E l 2 m–5 G–2, E, m, l and G denote energy,
mass, angular momentum and gravitational constant, respectively.
Show that P is a dimensionless quantity.
If velocity of light c, Planck’s constant h and gravitational contant
G are taken as fundamental quantities then express mass, length
and time in terms of dimensions of these quantities.
An artificial satellite is revolving around a planet of mass M and
radius R, in a circular orbit of radius r. From Kepler’s Third law
about the period of a satellite around a common central body,
square of the period of revolution T is proportional to the cube of
the radius of the orbit r. Show using dimensional analysis, that
where k is a dimensionless constant and g is acceleration due
to gravity.
In an experiment to estimate the size of a molecule of oleic acid
1 mL of oleic acid is dissolved in 19 mL of alcohol. Then 1 mL of
this solution is diluted to 20 mL by adding alcohol. Now 1 drop of
this diluted solution is placed on water in a shallow trough. The
solution spreads over the surface of water forming one molecule
thick layer. Now, lycopodium powder is sprinkled evenly over the
film and its diameter is measured. Knowing the volume of the drop
and area of the film we can calculate the thickness of the film which
will give us the size of oleic acid molecule.
Read the passage carefully and answer the following questions:
(a) Why do we dissolve oleic acid in alcohol?
(b) What is the role of lycopodium powder?
(c) What would be the volume of oleic acid in each mL of solution
prepared?
(d) How will you calculate the volume of  n drops of this solution
of oleic acid?
(e) What will be the volume of oleic acid in one drop of this
solution?
(a) How many astronomical units (A.U.) make 1 parsec?
(b) Consider a sunlike star at a distance of 2 parsecs. When it is
seen through a telescope with 100 magnification, what should
be the angular size of the star? Sun appears to be (1/2)° from
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
the earth. Due to atmospheric fluctuations, eye can’t resolve
objects smaller than 1 arc minute.
(c) Mars has approximately half of the earth’s diameter. When it
is closest to the earth it is at about 1/2 A.U. from the earth.
Calculate what size it will appear when seen through the same
telescope.
(Comment : This is to illustrate why a telescope can magnify planets but
not stars.)
Einstein’s mass - energy relation emerging out of his famous
theory of relativity relates mass (m ) to energy (E ) as E = mc 2,
where c is speed of light in vacuum. At the nuclear level, the
magnitudes of energy are very small. The energy at nuclear
level is usually measured in MeV, where 1 MeV= 1.6×10–13J;
the masses are measured in unified atomic mass unit (u) where
1u = 1.67 × 10–27 kg.
(a) Show that the energy equivalent of 1 u is 931.5 MeV.
(b) A student writes the relation as 1 u = 931.5 MeV. The teacher
points out that the relation is dimensionally incorrect. Write
the correct relation.
MCQ I
Among the four graphs (Fig. 3.1), there is only one graph for which
average velocity over the time intervel (0, T ) can vanish for a
suitably chosen T. Which one is it?
Cha p te r Thre e
MO TIO N IN A
STRAIG HT LINE
Fig. 3.1
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
A lift is coming from 8th floor and is just about to reach
4th floor. Taking ground floor as origin and positive
direction upwards for all quantities, which one of the
following is correct?
(a) x < 0, v < 0, a > 0
(b) x > 0, v < 0, a < 0
(c) x > 0, v < 0, a > 0
(d) x > 0, v > 0, a < 0
In one dimensional motion, instantaneous speed v satisfies
   v  <  v0.
(a) The displacement in time T must always take non-negative
values.
(b) The displacement x in time T satisfies – vo T < x < vo T.
(c) The acceleration is always a non-negative number.
(d) The motion has no turning points.
A vehicle travels half the distance L with speed V1 and the other
half with speed V2, then its average speed is
The displacement of a particle is given by x = (t – 2)2  where x is in
metres and t in seconds. The distance covered by the particle in
first 4 seconds is
(a) 4 m
(b) 8 m
(c) 12 m
(d) 16 m
At a metro station, a girl walks up a stationary escalator in time t1.
If she remains stationary on the escalator, then the escalator take
Motion in a Straight Line
her up in time t2. The time taken by her to walk up on the moving
escalator will be
(a) (t1 + t2)/2
(b) t1t2/(t2–t1)
(c) t1t2/(t2+t1)
(d) t1–t2
MCQ II
The variation of quantity A with quantity B, plotted in
Fig. 3.2 describes the motion of a particle in a straight
line.
(a) Quantity B may represent time.
(b) Quantity A is velocity if motion is uniform.
(c) Quantity A is displacement if motion is uniform.
(d) Quantity A is velocity if motion is uniformly
accelerated.
A graph of x versus t is shown in Fig. 3.3. Choose
correct alternatives from below.
(a) The particle was released from rest at t = 0.
(b) At B, the acceleration a > 0.
(c) At C, the velocity and the acceleration vanish.
(d) Average velocity for the motion between A and D is
positive.
(e) The speed at D exceeds that at E.
For the one-dimensional motion, described by x = t–sint
(a) x (t) > 0 for all t  > 0.
(b) v (t) > 0 for all t > 0.
(c) a (t) > 0 for all t > 0.
(d) v (t) lies between 0 and 2.
A spring with one end attached to a mass and the other to a rigid
support is stretched and released.
(a) Magnitude of acceleration, when just released is maximum.
(b) Magnitude of acceleration, when at equilibrium position, is
maximum.
(c) Speed is maximum when mass is at equilibrium position.
(d) Magnitude of displacement is always maximum whenever speed
is minimum.
Fig. 3.2
Fig. 3.3
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
A ball is bouncing elastically with a speed 1 m/s between walls of
a railway compartment of size 10 m in a direction perpendicular
to walls. The train is moving at a constant velocity of 10 m/s parallel
to the direction of motion of the ball. As seen from the ground,
(a) the direction of motion of the ball changes every 10 seconds.
(b) speed of ball changes every 10 seconds.
(c) average speed of ball over any 20 second interval is fixed.
(d) the acceleration of  ball is the same as from the train.
Refer to the graphs in Fig 3.1. Match the following.
Graph
Characteristic
(i) has v > 0 and a < 0 throughout.
(ii) has x > 0 throughout and has a point with
v = 0 and a point with a = 0.
(iii) has a point with zero displacement for t > 0.
(iv) has v < 0 and a > 0.
A uniformly moving cricket ball is turned back by hitting it with a
bat for a very short time interval. Show the variation of its
acceleration with time. (Take acceleration in the backward direction
as positive).
Give examples of a one-dimensional motion where
(a) the particle moving along positive x-direction comes to rest
periodically and moves forward.
(b) the particle moving along positive x-direction comes to rest
periodically and moves backward.
Give example of a motion where x > 0, v < 0, a > 0 at a particular
instant.
An object falling through a fluid is observed to have acceleration
given by a = g – bv where g = gravitational acceleration and b is
constant. After a long time of release, it is observed to fall with
constant speed. What must be the value of constant speed?
Motion in a Straight Line
A ball is dropped and its displacement vs time graph is
as shown Fig. 3.4 (displacement x  is from ground and
all quantities are +ve upwards).
(a) Plot qualitatively velocity vs time graph.
(b) Plot qualitatively acceleration vs time graph.
A particle executes the motion described by
x0 > 0.
(a) Where does the particle start and with what velocity?
(b) Find maximum and minimum values of x (t), v (t), a (t). Show that
x (t) and a (t) increase with time and v (t) decreases with time.
A bird is tossing (flying to and fro) between two cars moving
towards each other on a straight road. One car has a speed of 18
m/h while the other has the speed of 27km/h. The bird starts
moving from first car towards the other and is moving with the
speed of 36km/h and when the two cars were separted by 36 km.
What is the total distance covered by the bird? What is the total
displacement of the bird?
A man runs across the roof-top of a tall building and jumps
horizontally with the hope of landing on the roof of the next
building which is of a lower height than the first. If his speed is 9
m/s, the (horizontal) distance between the two buildings is 10 m
and the height difference is 9 m, will he be able to land on the next
building? (take g = 10 m/s2)
A ball is dropped from a building of height 45 m.
Simultaneously another ball is thrown up with a speed
40 m/s. Calculate the relative speed of the balls as a
function of time.
The velocity-displacement graph of a particle is shown
in Fig. 3.5.
(a) Write the relation between v and x.
(b) Obtain the relation between acceleration and
displacement and plot it.
Fig. 3.5
Fig. 3.4
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
It is a common observation that rain clouds can be at about a
kilometre altitude above the ground.
(a) If a rain drop falls from such a height freely under gravity, what
will be its speed? Also calculate in km/h. (g = 10m/s2)
(b) A typical rain drop is about 4mm diameter. Momentum is mass
x speed in magnitude. Estimate its momentum when it hits
ground.
(c) Estimate the time required to flatten the drop.
(d) Rate of change of momentum is force. Estimate how much force
such a drop would exert on you.
(e) Estimate the order of magnitude force on umbrella. Typical
lateral separation between two rain drops is 5 cm.
(Assume that umbrella is circular and has a diameter of 1m
and cloth is not pierced through !!)
A motor car moving at a speed of 72km/h can not come to a stop
in less than 3.0 s while for a truck this time interval is 5.0 s. On a
higway the car is behind the truck both moving at 72km/h. The
truck gives a signal that it is going to stop at emergency. At what
distance the car should be from the truck so that it does not bump
onto (collide with) the truck. Human response time is 0.5s.
(Comment : This is to illustrate why vehicles carry the message on the
rear side. “Keep safe Distance”)
A monkey climbs up a slippery pole for 3 seconds and
subsequently slips for 3 seconds. Its velocity at time t is given
by v(t) = 2t (3-t); 0< t < 3 and v (t)=–(t–3)(6–t) for 3 < t < 6 s in
m/s. It repeats this cycle till it reaches the height of 20 m.
(a) At what time is its velocity maximum?
(b) At what time is its average velocity maximum?
(c) At what time is its acceleration maximum in magnitude?
(d) How many cycles (counting fractions) are required to reach the
A man is standing on top of a building 100 m high. He throws two
balls vertically, one at t = 0 and other after a time interval (less
than 2 seconds). The later ball is thrown at a velocity of half the
first. The vertical gap between first and second ball is +15 m at
t  = 2 s. The gap is found to remain constant. Calculate the velocity
with which the balls were thrown and the exact time interval
between their throw.
✞✟✠✡✝
✕✝✎✎✫
✝✟☞✞☞✍
✝✟☞✞☞
❈✴✵✶✷
✾✿❀❁✿
❊ ✁✂✄
✁✂✡☛✞
✓✔✜✜✗✓✖✢
✲✣✮✒✛
✲✣✮✒✛
✬✣♠✗✛
✲✣✮✒✛
✲✣✮✒✛
✣✦✒✖✣
✗✘✗✓✖✜
✖✗✬✥✗✜
✗✓✖✔✜
✯✘✛✗✪
✥✔✖✗✙
✥✜✗✛✛✯
✛✒✖✒✦✗
✣✓✓✗✘
✗★✯✣✘
★✯✣✘✩
✗★✯✣✘
✒✙✖✗✜
✦✣✘✛✩
✛✒✖✒✦✗
✵✗✜✔✩
✜✖✒✓✘✗
❛✗✜✚✔
✯✙✒✕✔✜✬
▼ ✁✂ ✄
❚☛☞✌✌
✎✏✑☞✒
✢❛✣✒✌✙
❛✣✣✌✣
✣❛✕✌❞
✌✎✌✒✒
✶✗✣✛✌✒
✕✏✛✗❛
❛✣✣✌✣
☞✏✛✎✣✌✒
✒✗✌✌✖
✭✧✑✏☛
❛✎✥✏✌✤
☞✌✒✗✌
✏✛✍✌✣✵
✎✑✕✖❞
✾✌✎✏✛✑
✌✕✌☞✿✵
✎✏✛✑✕✣✌✒✒
☞✏✛✕✿
✗✑✛✕✏
✍✌☞✏✌❏
✗✑✛✕✏
✾✌✎✏✛
☞✌❛✎☛
✗✑✛✕✏
✏✑✏❛✣
✌✕✌☞✿✵
✌☞☞✌✕✏
✣❛✏✛✑
✖✛✒✗✣❛
✶✑✏✛✑✕
✿✌✕✌☞
☛✑✑✒✌
✎✑☞☞✌✎✏
❊ ✁✂✄
✁✂✡☛✞
★✫✯✫✰
s✩✰✱✸
✭✵✧✫✫
✏★✩✤✰
✏✴✦✰✱✩✰✱
✯✤✯✫✰
✯✦✱✰✩★✲
✩✥✫✏★
✴✦✰✱✩✰✱
❈P♠❍❈
✵✴✤s✰
✏✤✰✵★✦✰
✏★✩✤✰
▼ ✁✂ ✄
✓✛✌✑✛✏✑
✏✘✌✍✍
✓✛✌✑✛✏✑
✗✔✔✑☞✌
✛✍✛✓✌
✔✍✍✎✖
✤✛✍✍✎✖✚
✘✔✤✎✖✚
✛✤✛✍✍✛
✔✖✏✑✌
✗✔✔✑✙
✎✌✚✓✌
✭✾✻✬✘
❆✖✔✑✒✛✓
✎✑✑✎✖✚
✏✏✎✖✚
✔☞✏✛✓
✘✔✑✎✔✖
✭❛✿✬✘✽✒✩
✌✑✎✔✖
✛✌✍✎✖✚
✛✏✎✏✑
✎✏✑✌✖
✙✍✌✎✖
✏✙✒✛✓✛
✘✔✑✎✔✖
✭✙✛✓✎
✖✑✓✛❣
✍✌✑✎✑
✛✍✛✓✌
✔✘✙✌✓✛
❊ ✁✂✄
✁✂✡☛✞
✓✔✕✖✗
✥✦✘✔✕
✥✚✛✮✔✕✢
✮✘✔✤✢
✕✢✘✔✖✣✚
✥✚✕✕✢✥✖
✖✔✖✣✚
❉❋■❏❑▲
▼ ✁✂ ✄
✎✖✗♥✘
✗✕✙✒♥
✗✕✙✒♥
❈✛✜✢✣✤
✓✗✕✙✒♥
✛✜✢✣✤
❛✓❝✑✎✘
❊ ✁✂✄
✁✂✡☛✞
✜✑✑✖✔✖✣✓
✦✖✑✖✔
♥✖✤✓✜
✔✥♥✖✤✓✖✛
✣✕✯✖α
✥✣✓✒✯
✔✥♥✖✤✓✜✥✣
✯✜✕✗✓✫
✜✑✑✖✔
✜✣✓✖✔
✦✖❜✖❜✚
✔✥♥✖✤
✜✤★✯✒
✒✓✜✥✣
❛✜✓✙✧
✜✑✑✖✔✔✖✣✓
✖✣✛✜✤★
✖✣✛✖✣✓
✛✜✔✖✤✓
✖✯✒✢✓✜✤✒✯✯
✢✓✒✣✤✖
▼ ✁✂ ✄
✭❍☞✌✍✎
✒✓✔✕✖
✕✗✘✙✚✛✜
✢✣✖✔✏✤✥✕
✦✔✣✖✔★
✘✙✚✛✦★
✣✖✔✏✤
✢✖✘✯✕✤✔✕✛
✕✤✔✏✘✚
✖✔✏✤✣
✕✣✦✕✦
✦✢✕✕✛
✢✢✕✣✖✦
✖✔✏✤✣
✦✢✕✕✛
✕✤✔✏✘✚
✕✖✵✕✛
✖✘✙✚✛
✒✦✦✙✮✕
✤✔✏✘✚
✵✕✖✔✏✤✣
✘✤✏✔✲
✵✕✥✘✤✏✔✲
✖✘✙✚✛
✏✮✮✕✖
✏✮✮✏✚
✚✘✖✔✧✜
✕✤✔✏✘
✤✔✏✘✚
✥✔✣✚✔
✓✏✕✥✛✕✖
✖✙✚✚✏✚
✓✕✤✔✏
✢✕✤✔✣✔✘✖
✕✤✔✏✘✚
❊ ✁✂✄
✁✂✡☛✞
❢✓✔✑θ
s✗✚✛✜
✓✤✓s ✙
✢✓t ✚
✢✥✔✧✙
✭✓✓✓✒★
✑✚✙s θ
✘✗✥✔✧✙
✢✑✓✔✥
✫✙✘✕✚
✬✙✘✕✓✫
ss ✓✔✧
✫✙✘✕✚✢s
✢✑✓✔✥
✫✙✘✕✚
✙✘✕✓✚
✥s✓✔✧
✬✢✙ss
✬✙✔✑✓✘✛✜✥
( ) =
✘✙✜✙✢
✣✚✫✙★
MCQ I
A ball is travelling with uniform translatory motion. This
means that
(a) it is at rest.
(b) the path can be a straight line or circular and the ball travels
with uniform speed.
(c) all parts of the ball have the same velocity (magnitude and
direction) and the velocity is constant.
(d) the centre of the ball moves with constant velocity and the
ball spins about its centre uniformly.
A metre scale is moving with uniform velocity. This implies
(a) the force acting on the scale is zero, but a torque about the
centre of mass can act on the scale.
(b) the force acting on the scale is zero and the torque acting
about centre of  mass of the scale is also zero.
Cha p te r Five
LAWS OF MOTION
Exe mplar Proble ms–Physic s
(c) the total force acting on it need not be zero but the torque on it
is zero.
(d) neither the force nor the torque need to be zero.
A cricket ball of mass 150 g has an initial velocity
4 ) m s
and a final velocity
4 )m s
after being hit. The change
in momentum (final momentum-initial momentum) is (in kg m s1)
(a) zero
(b) –
(0.45
0.6 )
(c) –
1.2 )
(d) –
In the previous problem (5.3), the magnitude of the momentum
transferred during the hit is
(a) Zero (b) 0.75 kg m s–1  (c) 1.5 kg m s–1  (d) 14 kg m s –1.
Conservation of momentum in a collision between particles can
be understood from
(a) conservation of energy.
(b) Newton’s first law only.
(c) Newton’s second law only.
(d) both Newton’s second and third law.
A hockey player is moving northward and suddenly turns westward
with the same speed to avoid an opponent. The force that acts on
the player is
(a) frictional force along westward.
(b) muscle force along southward.
(c) frictional force along south-west.
(d) muscle force along south-west.
A body of mass 2kg travels according to the law
where
The force acting on the body at t = 2 seconds is
(a) 136 N
(b) 134 N
(c) 158 N
(d) 68 N
Laws of Motion
A body with mass 5 kg is acted upon by a force
–3 + 4
its initial velocity at t = 0 is
ˆ m s ,
6 -12
the time at which it
will just have a velocity along the y-axis is
(a) never
(b) 10 s
(c)   2 s
(d) 15 s
A car of mass m starts from rest and acquires a velocity along east
v > 0
in two seconds. Assuming the car moves with
uniform acceleration, the force exerted on the car is
eastward and is exerted by the car engine.
eastward and is due to the friction on the tyres exerted by
the road.
(c) more than
mv eastward exerted due to the engine and
overcomes the friction of the road.
mv exerted by the engine .
MCQ II
The motion of a particle of mass m is given by x = 0 for t < 0
s, x(t) = A sin4p t for 0 < t <(1/4) s (A > o), and x = 0 for
t >(1/4) s. Which of the following statements is true?
(a) The force at t = (1/8) s on the particle is –16✆2 A m.
(b) The particle is acted upon by on impulse of magnitude
✆2 A m at t = 0 s and t = (1/4) s.
(c) The particle is not acted upon by any force.
(d) The particle is not acted upon by a constant force.
(e) There is no impulse acting on the particle.
In Fig. 5.1, the co-efficient of friction between the floor
and the body B is 0.1. The co-efficient of friction between
the bodies B and A is 0.2. A force F is applied as shown
Exe mplar Proble ms–Physic s
on B. The mass of A is m/2 and of B is m. Which of the
following statements are true?
(a) The bodies will move together if F = 0.25 mg.
(b) The body A will slip with respect to B if F = 0.5 mg.
(c) The bodies will move together if F = 0.5 mg.
(d) The bodies will be at rest if F = 0.1 mg.
(e) The maximum value of F for which the two bodies will move
together is 0.45 mg.
Mass m1 moves on a slope making an angle
  with the horizontal
and is attached to mass m2 by a string passing over a frictionless
pulley as shown in Fig. 5.2. The co-efficient of friction between m1
and the sloping surface is
Which of the following statements are true?
(a) If
1 sin
, the body will move up the plane.
(b) If
1 sin
, the body will move up the plane.
(c) If
1 sin
, the body will move up the plane.
(d) If
1 sin
, the body will move down the plane.
In  Fig. 5.3, a body A of mass m  slides on plane inclined at angle
✂to the horizontal and
✝is the coefficent of friction between A
and the plane. A is connected by a light string passing over a
frictionless pulley to another body B, also of mass m, sliding on a
frictionless plane inclined at angle
✂to the horizontal. Which of
the following statements are true?
(a) A will never move up the plane.
(b) A will just start moving up the plane when
(c) For A to move up the plane,
✂ must always be greater
than 1
(d) B will always slide down with constant speed.
Two billiard balls A and B, each of mass 50g and moving in
opposite directions with speed of 5m s –1 each, collide and
rebound with the same speed. If the collision lasts for 10–3 s,
which of the following statements are true?
(a) The impulse imparted to each ball is 0.25 kg m s–1 and the force
on each ball is 250 N.
Fig. 5.3
Fig. 5.2
Fig. 5.1
Laws of Motion
(b) The impulse imparted to each ball is 0.25 kg  m s–1 and the
force exerted on each ball is 25 × 10–5 N.
(c) The impulse imparted to each ball is 0.5 Ns.
(d) The impulse and the force on each ball are equal in magnitude
and opposite in direction.
A body of mass 10kg is acted upon by two perpendicular forces,
6N and 8N. The resultant acceleration of the body is
(a) 1 m s–2 at an angle of
w.r.t. 6N force.
(b) 0.2  m s–2 at an angle of
w.r.t. 6N force.
(c) 1 m s–2 at an angle of
w.r.t.8N force.
(d) 0.2 m s–2 at an angle of
w.r.t.8N force.
A girl riding a bicycle along a straight road with a speed of 5 m s–1
throws a stone of mass 0.5 kg which has a speed of 15 m s–1 with
respect to the ground along her direction of motion. The mass of
the girl and bicycle is 50 kg. Does the speed of the bicycle change
after the stone is thrown? What is the change in speed, if so?
A person of mass 50 kg stands on a weighing scale on a lift. If the
lift is descending with a downward acceleration of
9 m s–2, what would be the reading of the weighing scale?
(g = 10 m s–2)
The position time graph of a body of mass 2 kg is as given in
Fig. 5.4. What is the impulse on the body at t = 0 s and t = 4 s.
Fig. 5.4
Exe mplar Proble ms–Physic s
A person driving a car suddenly applies the brakes on seeing a
child on the road ahead. If he is not wearing seat belt, he falls
forward and hits his head against the steering wheel. Why?
The velocity of a body of mass 2 kg as a function of t is given by
j. Find the momentum and the force acting on it, at
time t= 2s.
A block placed on a rough horizontal surface is pulled by a
horizontal force F. Let f be the force applied by the rough surface
on the block. Plot a graph of f versus F.
Why are porcelain objects wrapped in paper or straw before
packing for transportation?
Why does a child feel more pain when she falls down on a hard
cement floor, than when she falls on the soft muddy ground in the
garden?
A woman throws an object of mass 500 g with a speed of 25 m s1.
(a) What is the impulse imparted to the object?
(b) If the object hits a wall and rebounds with half the original speed,
what is the change in momentum of the object?
Why are mountain roads generally made
winding upwards rather than going straight up?
A mass of 2kg is suspended with thread AB
(Fig. 5.5). Thread CD of the same type is
attached to the other end of 2 kg mass. Lower
thread is pulled gradually, harder and
harder in the downward directon so as to
apply force on AB. Which of the threads will
break and why?
In the above given problem if the lower thread is
pulled with a jerk, what happens?
Two masses of 5 kg and 3 kg are suspended
with help of massless inextensible strings as
shown in Fig. 5.6. Calculate T1 and T2 when
whole system is going upwards with
acceleration = 2 m s2 (use g = 9.8 m s–2).
Fig. 5.6
Fig. 5.5
Laws of Motion
Block A of weight 100 N rests on a frictionless inclined
plane of slope angle 30° (Fig. 5.7). A flexible cord attached
to A passes over a frictonless pulley and is connected to
block B of weight W. Find the weight W for which the
system is in equilibrium.
A block of mass M is held against a rough vertical wall by
pressing it with a finger. If the coefficient of friction between
the block and the wall is
   and the acceleration due to
gravity is g, calculate the minimum force required to be
applied by the finger to hold the block against the wall ?
A 100 kg gun fires a ball of 1kg horizontally from a cliff of height
500m. It falls on the ground at a distance of 400m from the bottom
of the cliff. Find the recoil velocity of the gun. (acceleration due to
gravity = 10 m s–2)
Figure 5.8 shows (x, t), (y, t ) diagram of a particle moving in
2-dimensions.
Fig. 5.8
If the particle has a mass of 500 g, find the force (direction and
magnitude) acting on the particle.
A person in an elevator accelerating upwards with an acceleration
of 2 m s–2, tosses a coin vertically upwards with a speed of 20 m
s1. After how much time will the coin fall back into his hand?
( g = 10 m s–2)
There are three forces F1, F2 and F3 acting on a body, all acting on
a point P on the body. The body is found to move with uniform
speed.
(a) Show that the forces are coplanar.
(b) Show that the torque acting on the body about any point due
to these three forces is zero.
mg sin 30°
mg cos 30°
Fig. 5.7
Exe mplar Proble ms–Physic s
When a body slides down from rest along a smooth inclined plane
making an angle of 45° with the horizontal, it takes time T. When
the same body slides down from rest along a rough inclined plane
making the same angle and through the same distance, it is seen
to take time pT, where p is some number greater than 1. Calculate
the co-efficient of friction between the body and the rough plane.
Figure 5.9 shows (
, ),and(
v t diagrams for a body of unit
mass. Find the force as a function of time.
Fig. 5.9
Fig. 5.10
(m s )
(m s )
A racing car travels on a track (without banking) ABCDEFA
(Fig. 5.10). ABC is a circular arc of radius 2 R. CD and FA are
straight paths of length R and DEF is a circular arc of radius
R = 100 m. The co-effecient of friction on the road is
✂✄☎✄ The
maximum speed of the car is 50 m s–1. Find the minimum time
for completing one round.
The displacement vector of a  particle of mass m is given by
(a) Show that the trajectory is an ellipse.
(b) Show that
Laws of Motion
A cricket bowler releases the ball in two different ways
(a) giving it only horizontal velocity, and
(b) giving it horizontal velocity and a small downward velocity.
The speed vs at the time of release is the same. Both are released
at a height H from the ground. Which one will have greater speed
when the ball hits the ground? Neglect air resistance.
There are four forces acting at a point P produced by strings as
shown in Fig. 5.11, which is at rest. Find the forces F1 and F2 .
Fig. 5.11
45° 45°
A rectangular box lies on a rough inclined surface. The co-efficient
of friction between the surface and the box is
 . Let the mass of the
box be m.
(a) At what angle of inclination
✁of the plane to the horizontal will
the box just start to slide down the plane?
(b) What is the force acting on the box down the plane, if the angle
of inclination of the plane is increased to
(c) What is the force needed to be applied upwards along the plane
to make the box either remain stationary or just move up with
uniform speed?
(d) What is the force needed to be applied upwards along the plane
to make the box move up the plane with acceleration a?
A helicopter of mass 2000kg rises with a vertical acceleration of
15 m s–2. The total mass of the crew and passengers is 500 kg.
Give the magnitude and direction of the (g = 10 m s–2)
(a) force on the floor of the helicopter by the crew and passengers.
(b) action of the rotor of the helicopter on the surrounding air.
(c) force on the helicopter due to the surrounding air.
MCQ I
An electron and a proton are moving under the influence of mutual
forces. In calculating the change in the kinetic energy of the system
during motion, one ignores the magnetic force of one on another.
This is because,
(a) the two magnetic forces are equal and opposite, so they produce
no net effect.
(b) the magnetic forces do no work on each particle.
(c) the magnetic forces do equal and opposite (but non-zero) work
on each particle.
(d) the magenetic forces are necessarily negligible.
A proton is kept at rest. A positively charged particle is released
from rest at a distance d in its field. Consider two experiments;
one in which the charged particle is also a proton and in another,
a positron. In the same time t, the work done on the two moving
charged particles is
Cha pte r Six
WORK, ENERGY
AND POWER
Work, Energy and Power
(a) same as the same force  law is involved in the two experiments.
(b) less for the case of a positron, as the positron moves away
more rapidly and the force on it weakens.
(c) more for the case of a positron, as the positron moves away a
larger distance.
(d) same as the work done by charged particle on the stationary proton.
A man squatting on the ground gets straight up and stand. The
force of reaction of ground on the man during the process is
(a) constant and equal to mg in magnitude.
(b) constant and greater than mg in magnitude.
(c) variable but always greater than mg.
(d) at first greater than mg, and later becomes equal to mg.
A bicyclist comes to a skidding stop in 10 m. During this process,
the force on the bicycle due to the road is 200N and is directly
opposed to the motion. The work done by the cycle on the road is
(a) + 2000J
(b) – 200J
(c) zero
(d) – 20,000J
A body is falling freely under the action of gravity alone in vacuum.
Which of the following quantities remain constant during the fall?
(a) Kinetic energy.
(b) Potential energy.
(c) Total mechanical energy.
(d) Total linear momentum.
During inelastic collision between two bodies, which of the following
quantities always remain conserved?
(a) Total kinetic energy.
(b) Total mechanical energy.
(c) Total linear momentum.
(d) Speed of each body.
Two inclined frictionless tracks, one gradual and the other
steep meet at A from where two stones are allowed to
slide down from rest, one on each track as shown in Fig.
Which of the following statement is correct?
(a) Both the stones reach the bottom at the same time
but not with the same speed.
(b) Both the stones reach the bottom with the same speed
and stone I reaches the bottom earlier than stone II.
Fig. 6.1
Exemplar Problems–Physics
(c) Both the stones reach the bottom with the same speed and
stone II reaches the bottom  earlier than stone I.
(d) Both the stones reach the bottom at different times and with
different speeds.
The potential energy function for a particle executing linear SHM
is given by
  where k is the force constant of the
oscillator (Fig. 6.2). For k = 0.5N/m, the graph of V(x) versus x is
shown in the figure. A particle of total energy E turns back when
it reaches
. If V and K indicate the P.E. and K.E.,
respectively of the particle at x = +xm, then which of the following is
correct?
V = O,
K = E
V = E,
K = O
V < E,
K = O
V = O,
K < E.
Two identical ball bearings in contact with each other and resting
on a frictionless table are hit head-on by another ball bearing of the
same mass moving initially with a speed V as shown in Fig. 6.3.
Fig. 6.2
Fig. 6.3
Fig. 6.4
If the collision is elastic, which of the following (Fig. 6.4) is a possible
result after collision?
Work, Energy and Power
A body of mass 0.5 kg travels in a straight line with velocity v = a
x3/2 where a = 5 m–1/2s–1. The work done by the net force during its
displacement from x = 0 to x = 2 m is
(a) 1.5 J
(b) 50 J
(c) 10 J
(d) 100 J
A body is moving unidirectionally under the influence of a source of
constant power  supplying energy. Which of the diagrams shown in
Fig. 6.5 correctly shows the displacement-time curve for its motion?
Fig. 6.6
Fig. 6.5
Which of the diagrams shown in Fig. 6.6 most closely shows the
variation in kinetic energy of the earth as it moves once around
the sun in its elliptical orbit?
Exemplar Problems–Physics
Which of the diagrams shown in Fig. 6.7 represents variation of
total mechanical energy of a pendulum oscillating in air as
function of time?
Fig. 6.7
A mass of 5 kg is moving along a circular path of radius 1 m. If
the mass moves with 300 revolutions per minute, its kinetic energy
would be
(a) 250
(b) 100
(c) 5
(d) 0
A raindrop falling from a height h above ground, attains a near terminal
velocity when it has fallen through a height (3/4)h. Which of the
diagrams shown in Fig. 6.8 correctly shows the change in kinetic and
potential energy of the drop during its fall up to the ground?
Work, Energy and Power
In a shotput event an athlete throws the shotput of mass 10 kg
with an initial speed of 1m s –1 at 45° from a height 1.5 m above
ground. Assuming air resistance to be negligible and acceleration
due to gravity to be 10 m s –2 , the kinetic energy of the shotput
when it just reaches the ground will be
(a) 2.5  J
(b) 5.0  J
(c) 52.5  J
(d) 155.0 J
Which of the diagrams in Fig. 6.9 correctly shows the change in
kinetic energy of an iron sphere falling freely in a lake having
sufficient depth to impart it a terminal velocity?
Fig. 6.8
Fig. 6.9
depth
depth
depth
depth
Exemplar Problems–Physics
A cricket ball of mass 150 g moving with a speed of 126 km/h hits
at the middle of the bat, held firmly at its position by the batsman.
The ball moves straight back to the bowler after hitting the bat.
Assuming that collision between ball and bat is completely elastic
and the two remain in contact for 0.001s, the force that the batsman
had to apply to hold the bat firmly at its place would be
(a) 10.5 N
(b) 21 N
(c) 1.05 ×104 N
(d) 2.1 × 104 N
MCQ II
A man, of mass m, standing at the bottom of the staircase, of height
L climbs it and stands at its top.
(a) Work done by all forces on man is equal to the rise in potential
energy mgL.
(b) Work done by all forces on man is zero.
(c) Work done by the gravitational force on man is mgL.
(d) The reaction force from a step does not do work because the
point of application of the force does not move while the force
exists.
A bullet of mass m fired at 30° to the horizontal leaves the barrel of
the gun with a velocity v. The bullet hits a soft target at a height h
above the ground while it is moving downward and emerges out
with half the kinetic energy it had before hitting the target.
Which of the following statements are correct in respect of bullet
after it emerges out of the target?
(a) The velocity of the bullet will be reduced to half its initial
value.
(b) The velocity of the bullet will be more than half of its earlier
velocity.
(c) The bullet will continue to move along the same parabolic
path.
(d) The bullet will move in a different parabolic path.
(e) The bullet will fall vertically downward after hitting the target.
(f) The internal energy of the particles of the target will increase.
Two blocks M1 and M2 having equal mass are free to move on a
horizontal frictionless surface. M2 is attached to a massless spring
as  shown in Fig. 6.10. Iniially M2 is at rest and M1 is moving toward
M 2 with speed v and collides head-on with M2.
(a) While spring is fully compressed all the KE of M 1
is stored as PE of spring.
Work, Energy and Power
(b) While spring is fully compressed the system
momentum is not conserved, though final
momentum is equal to initial momentum.
(c) If spring is massless, the final state of the M1 is
state of rest.
(d) If the surface on which blocks are moving has
friction, then collision cannot be elastic.
A rough inclined plane is placed on a cart moving with a constant
velocity u on horizontal ground. A block of mass M rests on the
incline. Is any work done by force of friction between the block
and incline? Is there then a dissipation of energy?
Why is electrical power required at all when the elevator is
descending? Why should there be a limit on the number of
passengers in this case?
A body is being raised to a height h from the surface of earth.
What is the sign of work done by
(a) applied force
(b) gravitational force?
Calculate the work done by a car against gravity in moving along
a straight horizontal road. The mass of the car is 400 kg and the
distance moved is 2m.
A body falls towards earth in air. Will its total mechanical energy
be conserved during the fall? Justify.
A body is moved along a closed loop. Is the work done in moving
the body necessarily zero? If not, state the condition under which
work done over a closed path is always zero.
In an elastic collision of two billiard balls, which of the following
quantities remain conserved during the short time of collision of
the balls (i.e., when they are in contact).
(a) Kinetic energy.
(b) Total linear momentum?
Give reason for your answer in each case.
Calculate the power of a crane in watts, which lifts a mass of
100 kg to a height of 10 m in 20s.
Fig. 6.10
Exemplar Problems–Physics
The average work done by a human heart while it beats once is 0.5
J. Calculate the power used by heart if it beats 72 times in a minute.
Give example of a situation in which an applied force does not
result in a change in kinetic energy.
Two bodies of unequal mass are moving in the same direction
with equal kinetic energy. The two bodies are brought to rest by
applying retarding force of same magnitude. How would the
distance moved by them before coming to rest compare?
A bob of mass m suspended by a light string of length L is whirled
into a vertical circle as shown in Fig. 6.11. What will be the
trajectory of the particle if the string is cut at
(a) Point B?
(b) Point C?
(c)  Point X?
Fig. 6.11
Fig. 6.12
A graph of potential energy V ( x )
verses x is shown in Fig. 6.12.
A particle of energy E0 is executing
motion in it. Draw graph of velocity
and kinetic energy versus x for one
complete cycle AFA.
A ball of mass m, moving with a speed
2v0, collides inelastically (e > 0) with an identical ball  at rest. Show
(a) For head-on collision, both the balls move forward.
(b) For a general collision, the angle between the two velocities of
scattered balls is less than 90°.
Consider a one-dimensional motion of a particle with total energy
E. There are four regions A, B, C and D in which  the relation
between potential energy V, kinetic energy (K) and total energy
E is as given below:
Region A : V > E
Region B : V < E
Region C : K > E
Region D : V > K
State with reason in each case whether a particle can be found in
the given region or not.
Work, Energy and Power
The bob A of a pendulum released from horizontal to
the vertical hits another bob B of the same mass at
rest on a table as shown in Fig. 6.13.
If the length of the pendulum is 1m, calculate
(a) the height to which bob A will rise after collision.
(b) the speed with which bob B starts moving.
Neglect the size of the bobs and assume the collision
to be elastic.
A raindrop of mass 1.00 g falling from a height of 1 km hits the
ground with a speed of 50 m s–1. Calculate
(a) the loss of P.E. of the drop.
(b) the gain in K.E. of the drop.
(c) Is the gain in K.E. equal to loss of P.E.? If not why.
= 10 m s
Two pendulums with identical bobs and lengths  are suspended
from a common support such that in rest position the two bobs
are in contact (Fig. 6.14). One of the bobs is released after being
displaced by 10o so that it collides elastically head-on with the
other bob.
(a) Describe the motion of two bobs.
(b) Draw a graph showing variation in energy of either pendulum
with time, for 0
T , where T is the period of each
pendulum.
Suppose the average mass of raindrops is 3.0 × 10-5kg and their
average terminal velocity 9 m s-1. Calculate the energy transferred
by rain to each square metre of the surface at a place which receives
100 cm of rain in a year.
An engine is attached to a wagon through a shock absorber of length
1.5m. The system with a total mass of 50,000 kg is moving with a
speed of 36 km h-1 when the brakes are applied to bring it to rest. In
the process of the system being brought to rest, the spring of the
shock absorber gets compressed by 1.0 m. If 90% of energy of the
wagon is lost due to friction, calculate the spring constant.
An adult weighing 600N raises the centre of gravity of his body by
0.25 m while taking each step of 1 m length in jogging. If  he jogs
for 6 km, calculate the energy utilised by him in jogging assuming
that there is no energy loss due to friction of ground and air.
Assuming that the body of the adult is capable of converting 10%
of energy intake in the form of food, calculate the energy equivalents
Fig. 6.14
Fig. 6.13
Exemplar Problems–Physics
of food that would be required to compensate energy utilised for
jogging.
On complete combustion a litre of petrol gives off  heat equivalent
to 3×107 J. In a test drive a car weighing 1200 kg. including the
mass of driver, runs 15 km per litre while moving with a uniform
speed on a straight track. Assuming that friction offered by the
road surface and air to be uniform, calculate the force of friction
acting on the car during the test drive, if the efficiency of the car
engine were 0.5.
A block of mass 1 kg is pushed up a surface inclined to horizontal
at an angle of 30° by a force of 10 N parallel  to the inclined
surface (Fig. 6.15).The coefficient of friction between block and
the incline is 0.1. If the block is pushed up by 10 m along the
incline, calulate
(a) work done against gravity
(b) work done against force of friction
(c) increase in potential energy
(d) increase in kinetic energy
(e) work done by applied force.
A curved surface is shown in Fig. 6.16. The portion BCD is free
of friction. There are three spherical balls of identical radii and
masses. Balls are released from rest one by one from A which is
at a slightly greater height than C.
Fig. 6.16
Fig. 6.15
With the surface AB, ball 1 has large enough friction to cause
rolling down without slipping; ball 2 has a small friction and ball
3 has a negligible friction.
(a) For which balls is total mechanical energy conserved?
(b) Which ball (s) can reach D?
(c) For balls which do not reach D, which of the balls can reach
back A?
Work, Energy and Power
A rocket accelerates straight up by ejecting gas downwards. In a
small time interval
 t, it ejects a gas of mass
 m at a relative
speed u. Calculate KE of the entire system at t +
 t and t and
show that the device that ejects gas does work =
this time interval (neglect gravity).
Two identical steel cubes (masses 50g, side 1cm) collide
head-on face to face with a speed of 10cm/s each. Find
the maximum compression of each. Young’s modulus for
steel = Y= 2 × 10 11 N/m 2.
A baloon filled with helium rises against gravity increasing its
potential energy. The speed of the baloon also increases as it
rises. How do you reconcile this with the law of conservation of
mechanical energy? You can neglect viscous drag of air and
assume that density of air is constant.
Hollow
sphere
MCQ I
For which of the following does the centre of mass lie outside the
body ?
(a) A pencil
(b) A shotput
(c) A dice
(d) A bangle
Which of the following points is the likely position of the centre of
mass of the system shown in Fig. 7.1?
(a) A
(b) B
(c) C
(d) D
A particle of mass m is moving in yz-plane with a uniform velocity v
with its trajectory running parallel to +ve y-axis and intersecting
C ha p te r Se ve n
SYSTEM O F
PARTIC LES AND
ROTATIONAL MOTION
Fig. 7.1
Syste m of Partic le s and
Rotational Motion
z-axis at z = a (Fig. 7.2). The change in its angular momentum about
the origin as it bounces elastically from a wall at y = constant is:
(a) mva êx
(b) 2mva êx
(c) ymv êx
(d) 2ymv êx
When a disc rotates with uniform angular velocity, which of the
following is not true?
(a) The sense of rotation remains same.
(b) The orientation of the axis of rotation remains same.
(c) The speed of rotation is non-zero and remains same.
(d) The angular acceleration is non-zero and remains same.
A uniform square plate has a small piece Q of an irregular
shape removed and glued to the centre of the plate leaving
a hole behind (Fig. 7.3). The moment of inertia about the
z-axis is then
(a) increased
(b) decreased
(c) the same
(d) changed in unpredicted manner.
In problem 7.5, the CM of the plate is now in the following quadrant
of x-y plane,
(a) I
(b) II
(c) III
(d) IV
The density of a non-uniform rod of length 1m is given by
 (x) = a(1+bx 2)
where a and b are constants and
The centre of mass of the rod will be at
Fig. 7.2
Fig. 7.3
Exe mplar Proble ms–Physic s
A Merry-go-round, made of a ring-like platform of radius R and
mass M, is revolving with angular speed   . A person of mass M is
standing on it. At one instant, the person jumps off the round,
radially away from the centre of the round (as seen from the round).
The speed of the round afterwards is
(a) 2
(c) 2
(d) 0
MCQ II
Choose the correct alternatives:
(a) For a general rotational motion, angular momentum L and
angular velocity
need not be parallel.
(b) For a rotational motion about a fixed axis, angular momentum
L and angular velocity
are always parallel.
(c) For a general translational motion , momentum p and  velocity
v are always parallel.
(d) For a general translational motion, acceleration  a and  velocity
v are always parallel.
7.10 Figure 7.4 shows two identical particles 1 and 2, each of mass m,
moving in opposite directions with same speed v along parallel lines.
At a particular instant, r1 and r2 are their respective position vectors
drawn from point A which is in the plane  of the parallel lines .
Choose the correct options:
(a) Angular momentum l1 of particle 1 about A is 1
(b) Angular momentum l2 of particle 2 about A is 2
(c) Total angular momentum of the system about A is
(d) Total angular momentum of the system about A is
represents a  unit vector coming out of the page.
represents a  unit vector going into the page.
7.11 The net external torque on a system of particles about an axis is
zero. Which of the following are compatible with it ?
(a) The forces may be acting radially from a point on the axis.
(b) The forces may be acting on the axis of rotation.
(c) The forces may be acting parallel to the axis of rotation.
(d) The torque caused by some forces may be equal and opposite
to that caused by other forces.
Fig. 7.4
Syste m of Partic le s and
Rotational Motion
7.12 Figure 7.5 shows a lamina in x-y plane. Two axes z and
  pass perpendicular to its plane. A force F acts in the
plane of lamina at point P as shown. Which of the following
are true? (The point P is closer to z
✁-axis than the z-axis.)
(a) Torque
✂ caused by F about  z axis is along ˆ
(b) Torque
✁ caused by F about z
✁ axis is along ˆ
(c) Torque
✂caused by F about z axis is greater in magnitude
than that about z axis.
(d) Total torque is given be
7.13 With reference to Fig. 7.6 of a cube of edge a and
mass m, state whether the following are true or false.
(O is the centre of the cube.)
(a) The moment of inertia of cube about z-axis is
Iz = Ix + Iy
(b) The moment of inertia of cube about z
(c) The moment of inertia of cube about z✞ is
(d) Ix = Iy
7.14 The centre of gravity of a body on the earth coincides with its centre
of mass for a ‘small’ object whereas for an ‘extended’ object it may
not. What is the qualitative meaning of ‘small’ and ‘extended’ in
this regard?
For which of the following the two coincides? A building, a pond, a
lake, a mountain?
7.15 Why does a solid sphere have smaller moment of inertia than a
hollow cylinder of same mass and radius, about an axis passing
through their axes of symmetry?
7.16 The variation of angular position
✟, of a point on a rotating
rigid body, with time t is shown in Fig. 7.7. Is the body rotating
clock-wise or anti-clockwise?
Fig. 7.6
Fig. 7.5
Fig. 7.7
Exe mplar Proble ms–Physic s
Fig. 7.10
7.17 A uniform cube of mass m and side a is placed on a frictionless
horizontal surface. A vertical force F is applied to the edge as shown
in Fig. 7.8. Match the following (most appropriate choice):
(a) mg/4 <
 (i) Cube will move up.
(b) F > mg/2
(ii) Cube will not exhibit motion.
(c) F > mg
(iii) Cube will begin to rotate and
slip at A.
(d) F = mg/4
(iv) Normal reaction effectively at
a/3 from A, no motion.
7.18 A uniform sphere of mass m and radius R is placed on a rough
horizontal surface (Fig. 7.9). The sphere is struck horizontally at a
height h from the floor. Match the following:
h = R/2
(i) Sphere rolls without slipping with a
constant velocity and no loss of energy.
h = R
Sphere spins clockwise, loses energy by
friction.
h = 3R/2
(iii) Sphere spins anti-clockwise, loses energy
by friction.
h = 7R/5
(iv) Sphere has only a translational motion,
looses energy by friction.
7.19 The vector sum of a system of non-collinear forces acting on a rigid
body is given to be non-zero. If the vector sum of all the torques due
to the system of forces about a certain point is found to be zero,
does this mean that it is necessarily zero about any arbitrary point?
7.20 A wheel in uniform motion about an axis passing through its centre
and perpendicular to its plane is considered to be in mechanical
(translational plus rotational) equilibrium because no net external
force or torque is required to sustain its motion. However, the
particles that constitute the wheel do experience a centripetal
acceleration directed towards the centre. How do you reconcile this
fact with the wheel being in equilibrium?
How would you set a half-wheel into uniform motion about an
axis passing through the centre of mass of the wheel and
perpendicular to its plane? Will you require external forces to
sustain the motion?
7.21 A door is hinged at one end and is free to rotate about a vertical
axis (Fig. 7.10). Does its weight cause any torque about this axis?
Give reason for your answer.
Fig. 7.8
Fig. 7.9
Syste m of Partic le s and
Rotational Motion
7.22 (n-1) equal point masses each of mass m are placed at the vertices
of a regular n-polygon. The vacant vertex has a position vector a
with respect to the centre of  the polygon. Find the position vector of
centre of mass.
7.23 Find the centre of mass of a uniform (a) half-disc, (b) quarter-disc.
7.24 Two discs of moments of inertia
I and I  about their respective
axes (normal to the disc and passing through the centre), and
rotating with angular speed
    are brought into contact
face to face with their axes of rotation coincident.
(a) Does the law of conservation of angular momentum apply to
the situation? why?
(b) Find the angular speed of the two-disc system.
(c) Calculate the loss in kinetic energy of the system in the process.
(d) Account for this loss.
7.25 A disc of radius R is rotating with an angular speed
  about a
horizontal axis. It is placed on a horizontal table. The coefficient of
kinetic friction is
(a) What was the velocity of its centre of mass before being brought
in contact with the table?
(b) What happens to the linear velocity of a point on its rim when
placed in contact with the table?
(c) What happens to the linear speed of the centre of mass when
disc is placed in contact with the table?
(d) Which force is responsible for the effects in (b) and (c).
(e) What condition should be satisfied for rolling to begin?
(f ) Calculate the time taken for the rolling to begin.
7.26 Two cylindrical hollow drums of radii R and 2R, and of a common
height h, are rotating with angular velocities
  (anti-clockwise) and
  (clockwise), respectively. Their axes, fixed are parallel and in a
horizontal plane separated by (3
. They are now brought in
contact (
(a) Show the frictional forces just after contact.
(b) Identify forces and torques external to the system just after
contact.
(c) What would be the ratio of final angular velocities when friction
ceases?
Exe mplar Proble ms–Physic s
A uniform square plate S (side c) and a uniform rectangular plate
R (sides b, a) have identical areas and masses (Fig. 7.11).
Fig. 7.12
Fig. 7.11
Show that
1; ( )
iii I
7.28 A uniform disc of radius R, is resting on a table on its rim.The
coefficient of friction between disc and table is
✂ (Fig 7.12). Now the
disc is pulled with a force F as shown in the figure. What is the
maximum value of F for which the disc rolls without slipping ?
✝✞✟✠✆
✝✟✞✠✡✍
✕✡✟✝✔
✝☞✠✟✝
✡✏✞✠✝
❈✥✦✧★
●✯✰✱✲✳✰
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✕✖✑✙✘
✜✙✢✓✗
✔✥✓♥✙
✔✥✓♥✙
✓✥♥✔✚
✙♥✑✖✚
✔✥✓♥✩
✑✖♥✔✗
✗✥✣✥✐
✚✥♥✑✖
✓✗✕✥✔✥♥✣
✚✓✜✖✔✥✜✖✚
✕✖✑✙✘
✑✖✦✦✚
✔✔✖✗✥✖
✦✦✥✔✖
✓✦✦✥✚✥✓♥
✔✥✓♥✙
✓✕✚✖✗
✓✗✕✥✔
✑✓♥✚✥✐
✕✖✥♥✣
✕✖✑✙✘
✔✛✖✥✗
❈✡☛☛☞✌
✎✏☛✑✒
☛✓✍✔☛✑✕
✑✌✏✍✔
✌❜✍✌✏✑
☛✍✔☛✑✕
✌✑☞✔✍
✔✑☞✍✌
✔✑✥✌✏☞✌✐
☛✍✔☛✑
☞✍☛✑✌
✍✡✏☛✎✑
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✢✘✥✇✤
✣✚✛✜✦
✢✚✛✥✦
✬✖✩✘✗✖
✥✖✣✘✔✤✚✜
✦✣✚♦✙
✘✙✔✖✣
♦✥✘✜✖
✔✣✘★✖
✘✙✔✖✣
✢✚✛✥✦
★✘✥✤✦✮
✙✖✩✚✜✦
✘✜✧✖✮
✓✤✣✙✔
★✘✥✤✦✮
✧✧✖✙✔
✬✖✩✚✗
✜✚✔✕✤
✚✔✔✖✣
✬✤✥✥✤
✖✘✣✙✮
✘✣✚✛✜✦
✩✥✚✙✖✦
✓✓✤✩✤✖
✙✚✥✘✣
✙✔✖✗✮
✗✘✙✙✰
✜✛✗✬✖
✤✓✓✖✣
✚✬❞✖✩
❛✖♦✥✖✣
✔✕✤✣✦
✬✖✩✚✗✖
✜★✘✥✤
✬❞✖✩✔
❲✕✤✩✕
✓✚✥✥✚✢
✚✙✔✘✔
✘✣✚✛✜✦
✖✘✣✔✕
✚✙✔✘✔
✘✣✚✛✜✦
✖✘✣✔✕
♦✚✥✘✣
✘✣✚✛✜✦
✌☞✍✎✏
✥✑❛✍✎
✕✥☛☞✏
✕❛✦☞✕
✘✐☞✌✎
❛✍✕❛✗☞
✕✥☛☞✏☞
✜❛✎✔✎❛✑
✒✔✣✣❛✍
✌☞✍✎✏
☞✏✕✚✕
✏☞✌✎❛✑
✔✜❛✎✔✎❛✑
✘☞✎✤☞☞✍
✔✒✒☞✌✎☞✗
✗❛✥✥☞✗
✘☞✎✤☞☞✍
✒❛☞✣✗✕
✎✎❛✍✛
❛✍✕❛✗
☛✑✣✣✑
✗✚✌✎✑
✔✜❛✎✔✎❛✑
✍✒✣✚☞✍✌☞
☛✑✣✣✑
✕✥☛☞✏☞
✑✎☛☞✏
❛✍✕❛✗
✑✏✘❛✎❛
✏✘❛✎❛
✗☞✎☞✌
✔✜❛✎✙✴
✜❛✎✔✎❛✑
☛✑✣✣✑
✕✥☛☞✏
✕☛☞✣✣
☞✍✕❛✎✙✢
✤☛☞✏☞
✌☞✍✎✏☞
✕✥☛☞✏
✕☛☞✣✣
✚✍❛✒✑
✤☛☞✏☞
✘☞✎✤☞☞✍
☞✣✣❛✎
✕✎✔✎❛✑
✎☞✣✣❛✎
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✗✘✙✕✚
✣✔✚✦✕✙
✧✔✣★✔✔
✗✩✪✪✔✗✗✢✦
✢✛✢✕✖
✔✣★✔✔✖
✪✪✔✗✗✢✦
✛✢✗✣✕✖
✢✛✢✕✖
✔✕✚✙✜
✔✦✔✚✜
✗✩✪✪✔✗✗✢✦
✭❍✴✵✶✿
✪✢✚✪✩
✛✢✗✣✕✖
✣✢✥✔✗
✗✣✕✧✙
✔✼✩✢✙
✖✗★✔✚
✘✚✧✢✣
✘✚✧✢✣
✗✗✢✧✙✔
✺✔✪✣✢✙
✢✪✣✢✘✖
◗❯❱❲❳
❨❩❬❭❪
❫❴❵❛❜
❦❧♥♦♣
qr✉①②
④⑤⑥⑦⑧
☞✌✍✎✏✑
✎☛✎✖❤
✖✏✙✛✔
✖✔✗✐✙✕
✗✐✕✑✔
✓☞✸✐☛
✖✌✐✑✕
✐☛✎✑✐✏
✖✔✗✐✙✕
✎✔✕✎✕✜
✔✌☞✸✎
✑✐✑✐✎✕
✎❤✙✛✔✖
✑✎✛✛✐✑✎
❤✎☞✕✑
✏✔✑✐☞
✔✑✎✛✛✐✑✎
✔✑✎✛✛✐✑✎✕
✑✎✛✛✐✑✎✕
☛✐✑✕❩
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✔✕✖✗✘✙✚
✤✥✥✢✦✚✤
✤★★✤✣✗✖
✢★✢✗✩
✪✫✪✬✭✮✫
✚✦✤✤❡
✚✛✥✕✖
✣✚✗✕✣✗
✦✥✕✣✤
✗✕s ✤✣
✤✥✥✢✦✗
✢✘✤✥✢✛
✗✖✕✣✚✲
MCQ I
Modulus of rigidity of ideal liquids is
(a) infinity.
(b) zero.
(c) unity.
(d) some finite small non-zero constant value.
The maximum load a wire can withstand without breaking, when
its length is reduced to half of its original length, will
(a) be double.
(b) be half.
(c) be four times.
(d) remain same.
The temperature of a wire is doubled. The Young’s modulus of
elasticity
(a) will also double.
(b) will become four times.
C ha p te r Nine
MEC HANIC AL
PRO PERTIES O F
SO LIDS
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
(c)  will remain same.
(d)  will decrease.
A spring is stretched by applying a load to its free end. The strain
produced in the spring is
(a) volumetric.
(b) shear.
(c) longitudinal and shear.
(d) longitudinal.
A rigid bar of mass M is supported symmetrically by three wires
each of length l . Those at each end are of copper and the middle
one is of iron. The ratio of their diameters, if each is to have the
same tension, is equal to
(a) Ycopper/Yiron
copper
iro n
co ppe r
copper
A mild steel wire of length 2L and cross-sectional area A is
stretched, well within elastic limit, horizontally between two pillars
(Fig. 9.1). A mass m is suspended from the mid point of the wire.
Strain in the wire is
Fig. 9.1
Mec hanic al Properties of Solids
A rectangular frame is to be suspended symmetrically by two
strings of equal length on two supports (Fig. 9.2). It can be done
in one of the following three ways;
Fig. 9.2
The tension in the strings will be
(a) the same in all cases.
(b) least in (a).
(c) least in (b).
(d) least in (c).
Consider two cylindrical rods of identical dimensions, one of rubber
and the other of steel. Both the rods are fixed rigidly at one end to
the roof. A mass M is attached to each of the free ends at the centre
of the rods.
(a) Both the rods will elongate but there shall be no perceptible
change in shape.
(b) The steel rod will elongate and change shape but the rubber
rod will only elongate.
(c) The steel rod will elongate without any perceptible change in
shape, but the rubber rod will elongate and the shape of the
bottom edge will change to an ellipse.
(d) The steel rod will elongate, without any perceptible change in
shape, but the rubber rod will elongate with the shape of the
bottom edge tapered to a tip at the centre.
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
steel
MCQ II
The stress-strain graphs for two materials are shown in Fig.9.3
(assume same scale).
Fig. 9.3
(a) Material (ii) is more elastic than material (i) and hence material
(ii) is more brittle.
(b) Material (i) and (ii) have the same elasticity and the same
brittleness.
(c) Material (ii) is elastic over a larger region of strain as compared to (i).
(d) Material (ii) is more brittle than material (i).
A wire is suspended from the ceiling and stretched under the action
of a weight F suspended from its other end. The force exerted by
the ceiling on it is equal and opposite to the weight.
(a) Tensile stress at any cross section A of the wire is F/A.
(b) Tensile stress at any cross section is zero.
(c) Tensile stress at any cross section A of the wire is 2F/A.
(d) Tension at any cross section A of the wire is F.
A rod of length l and negligible mass is suspended at its two ends
by two wires of steel (wire A) and aluminium (wire B) of equal
lengths (Fig. 9.4). The cross-sectional areas of wires A and B are
1.0 mm2 and 2.0 mm 2, respectively.
10 Nm
10 Nm
steel
Fig. 9.4
Mec hanic al Properties of Solids
(a) Mass m should be suspended close to wire A to have equal
stresses in both the wires.
(b) Mass m should be suspended close to B to have equal stresses
in both the wires.
(c) Mass m should be suspended at the middle of the wires to
have equal stresses in both the wires.
(d) Mass m should be suspended close to wire A to have equal
strain in both wires.
For an ideal liquid
(a) the bulk modulus is infinite.
(b)  the bulk modulus is zero.
(c)  the shear modulus is infinite.
(d)  the shear modulus is zero.
A copper and a steel wire of the same diameter are connected end
to end. A deforming force F is applied to this composite wire which
causes a total elongation of 1cm. The two wires will have
(a) the same stress.
(b)  different stress.
(c)  the same strain.
(d)  different strain.
The Young’s modulus for steel is much more than that for rubber.
For the same longitudinal strain, which one will have greater
tensile stress?
Is stress a vector quantity?
Identical springs of steel and copper are equally stretched. On
which, more work will have to be done?
What is the Young’s modulus for a perfect rigid body?
What is the Bulk modulus for a perfect rigid body?
A wire of length L and radius r is clamped rigidly at one end. When
the other end of the wire is pulled by a force f, its length increases
by l. Another wire of the same material of length 2L and radius 2r,
is pulled by a force 2f. Find the increase in length of this wire.
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
A steel rod (Y = 2.0 × 1011 Nm–2; and
  = 10–50 C–1) of length 1 m
and area of cross-section 1 cm2 is heated from 0
°C to 200
°C, without
being allowed to extend or bend. What is the tension produced in
the rod?
To what depth must a rubber ball be taken in deep sea so that its
volume is decreased by 0.1%. (The bulk modulus of rubber is
9.8×108 N m –2; and the density of sea water is 103 kg m–3.)
A truck is pulling a car out of a ditch by means of a steel cable
that is 9.1 m long and has a radius of 5 mm. When the car just
begins to move, the tension in the cable is 800 N. How much has
the cable stretched? (Young’s modulus for steel is 2 × 1011 Nm–2.)
Two identical solid balls, one of ivory and the other of wet-clay,
are dropped from the same height on the floor. Which one will rise
to a greater height after striking the floor and why?
Consider a long  steel bar under a tensile stress due to forces F
acting at the edges along the length of the bar (Fig. 9.5). Consider
a plane making an angle
✁ with the length. What are the tensile
and shearing stresses on this plane?
Fig. 9.5
(a) For what angle is the tensile stress a maximum?
(b) For what angle is the shearing stress a maximum?
(a) A steel wire of mass
✄per unit length with a circular cross
section has a radius of 0.1 cm. The wire is of length 10 m when
measured lying horizontal, and hangs from a hook on the wall.
A mass of 25 kg is hung from the free end of the wire. Assuming
the wire to be uniform and lateral strains << longitudinal
strains, find the extension in the length of the wire. The density
of steel is 7860 kg m–3 (Young’s modules Y=2×1011 Nm–2).
(b) If the yield strength of steel is 2.5×108 Nm–2, what is the maximum
weight that can be hung at the lower end of the wire?
Mec hanic al Properties of Solids
A steel rod of length 2l, cross sectional area A and mass M is set
rotating in a horizontal plane about an axis passing through the
centre. If Y is the Young’s modulus for steel, find the extension in
the length of the rod. (Assume the rod is uniform.)
An equilateral triangle ABC is formed by two Cu rods AB and BC
and one Al rod. It is heated in such a way that temperature of
each rod increases by
 T. Find change in the angle ABC. [Coeff. of
linear expansion for
Cu is
✁,Coeff. of linear expansion for
Al is
In nature, the failure of structural members usually result from
large torque because of twisting or bending rather than due to
tensile or compressive strains. This process of structural
breakdown is called buckling and in cases of tall cylindrical
structures like trees, the torque is caused by its own weight bending
the structure. Thus the vertical through the centre of gravity does
not fall within the base. The elastic torque caused because of this
bending about the central axis of the tree is given by
. Y is
the Young’s modulus, r is the radius of the trunk and R is the
radius of curvature of the bent surface along the height of the tree
containing the centre of gravity (the neutral surface). Estimate the
critical height of a tree for a given radius of the trunk.
A stone of mass m is tied to an elastic string of negligble mass and
spring constant k. The unstretched length of the string is L  and
has negligible mass. The other end of the string is fixed to a nail at
a point P. Initially the stone is at the same level as the point P. The
stone is dropped vertically from point P.
(a) Find the distance y from the top when the mass comes to rest
for an instant, for the first time.
(b) What is the maximum velocity attained by the stone in this
drop?
(c) What shall be the nature of the motion after the stone has
reached its lowest point?
MCQ I
A tall cylinder is filled with viscous oil. A round pebble is dropped
from the top with zero initial velocity. From the plot shown in
Fig. 10.1, indicate the one that represents the velocity (v) of the
pebble as a function of time (t).
C ha p te r Te n
MEC HANIC AL
PRO PERTIES O F
FLUIDS
Fig. 10.1
Mec hanic al Properties of Fluids
Which of the following diagrams (Fig. 10.2) does not represent a
streamline flow?
Along a streamline
(a) the velocity of a fluid particle remains constant.
(b) the velocity of all fluid particles crossing a given position is
constant.
(c) the velocity of all fluid particles at a given instant is constant.
(d) the speed of a fluid particle remains constant.
An ideal fluid flows through a pipe of circular cross-section made
of two sections with diameters 2.5 cm and 3.75 cm. The ratio of
the velocities in the two pipes is
(a) 9:4
(b) 3:2
The angle of contact at the interface of water-glass is 0°,
Ethylalcohol-glass is 0°, Mercury-glass is 140° and Methyliodide-
glass is 30°. A glass capillary is put in a trough containing one of
these four liquids. It is observed that the meniscus is convex. The
liquid in the trough is
(a) water
(b) ethylalcohol
(c) mercury
(d) methyliodide.
MCQ II
For a surface molecule
(a) the net force on it is zero.
(b) there is a net downward force.
Fig. 10.2
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
(c) the potential energy is less than that of a molecule inside.
(d) the potential energy is more than that of a molecule inside.
Pressure is a scalar quantity because
(a) it is the ratio of force to area and both force and area are vectors.
(b) it is the ratio of the magnitude of the force to area.
(c) it is the ratio of the component of the force normal to the area.
(d) it does not depend on the size of the area chosen.
A wooden block with a coin placed on its top, floats in water as
shown in Fig.10.3.
The distance l and h are shown in the figure. After some time the
coin falls into the water. Then
(a) l decreases.
(b) h decreases.
(c) l increases.
(d) h increase.
With increase in temperature, the viscosity of
(a) gases decreases.
(b) liquids increases.
(c) gases increases.
(d) liquids decreases.
10.10 Streamline flow is more likely for liquids with
(a) high density.
(b) high viscosity.
(c) low density.
(d) low viscosity.
10.11 Is viscosity a vector?
10.12 Is surface tension a vector?
10.13 Iceberg floats in water with part of it submerged. What is the fraction
of the volume of iceberg submerged if the density of ice is
0.917 g cm–3?
10.14 A vessel filled with water is kept on a weighing pan and the
scale adjusted to zero. A block of mass M and density
suspended by a massless spring of spring constant k. This block
is submerged inside into the water in the vessel. What is the
reading of the scale?
Fig. 10.3
Mec hanic al Properties of Fluids
10.15 A cubical block of density
   is floating on the surface of water.
Out of its height L, fraction x is submerged in water. The vessel is
in an elevator accelerating upward with acceleration a . What is
the fraction immersed?
10.16 The sap in trees, which consists mainly of water in summer, rises
in a system of capillaries of radius r = 2.5×10–5 m. The surface
tension of sap is T = 7.28×10–2 Nm–1 and the angle of contact is 0°.
Does surface tension alone account for the supply of water to the
top of all trees?
10.17 The free surface of oil in a tanker, at rest, is horizontal. If the tanker
starts accelerating the free surface will be titled by an angle
✁. If
the acceleration is a m s–2, what will be the slope of the free surface?.
10.18 Two mercury  droplets of radii 0.1 cm. and 0.2 cm. collapse into
one single drop. What amount of energy is released? The surface
tension of mercury T= 435.5 × 10 –3 N m –1.
10.19 If a drop of liquid breaks into smaller droplets, it results in lowering
of temperature of the droplets. Let a drop of radius R, break into N
small droplets each of radius r. Estimate the drop in temperature.
10.20 The sufrace tension and vapour pressure of water at 20°C is
7.28×10–2 Nm–1 and 2.33×103 Pa, respectively. What is the radius
of the smallest spherical water droplet which can form without
evaporating at 20°C?
10.21 (a) Pressure decreases as one ascends the atmosphere. If the
density of air is ✂, what is the change in pressure dp over a
differential height dh?
(b) Considering the pressure p to be proportional to the density,
find the pressure p at a height h if the pressure on the surface
of the earth is p0.
(c) If p0 = 1.03×105 N m –2,
✂0 = 1.29 kg m–3 and g = 9.8 m s–2, at
what height will the pressure drop to (1/10) the value at the
surface of the earth?
(d) This model of the atmosphere works for relatively small distances.
Identify the underlying assumption that limits the model.
10.22 Surface tension is exhibited by liquids due to force of attraction
between molecules of the liquid. The surface tension decreases
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
with increase in temperature and vanishes at boiling point. Given
that the latent heat of vaporisation for water Lv = 540 k cal kg–1,
the mechanical equivalent of heat J = 4.2 J cal–1, density of water
  w = 103 kg l–1, Avagadro’s No NA = 6.0 × 10 26 k mole –1 and the
molecular weight of water MA = 18 kg for 1 k mole.
(a) estimate the energy required for one molecule of water to
evaporate.
(b) show that the inter–molecular distance for water is
and find its value.
(c) 1 g of water in the vapor state at 1 atm occupies 1601cm3.
Estimate the intermolecular distance at boiling point, in the
vapour state.
(d) During vaporisation a molecule overcomes a force F, assumed
constant, to go from an inter-molecular distance d to d
Estimate the value of F.
(e) Calculate F/d, which is a measure of the surface tension.
10.23 A hot air balloon is a sphere of radius 8 m. The air inside is at a
temperature of 60°C. How large a mass can the balloon lift when
the outside temperature is 20°C? (Assume air is an ideal gas,
R = 8.314 J mole–1K-1, 1 atm. = 1.013×105 Pa; the membrane
tension  is 5 N m–1.)
MCQ I
A bimetallic strip is made of aluminium and steel
steel
On heating, the strip will
(a) remain straight.
(b) get twisted.
(c) will bend with aluminium on concave side.
(d) will bend with steel on concave side.
A uniform metallic rod rotates about its perpendicular bisector
with constant angular speed. If it is heated uniformly to raise its
temperature slightly
(a) its speed of rotation increases.
(b) its speed of rotation decreases.
(c) its speed of rotation remains same.
(d) its speed increases because its moment of inertia increases.
The graph between two temperature scales A and B is shown in
Fig. 11.1. Between upper fixed point and lower fixed point there
C ha p te r Ele ve n
THERMAL
PRO PERTIES O F
MATTER
Exe mplar Proble ms–Physic s
are 150 equal division on scale A and 100 on scale B.
The relationship for conversion between the two scales
is given by
An aluminium sphere is dipped into water. Which of the following
is true?
(a) Buoyancy will be less in water at 0°C than that in water at
(b) Buoyancy will be more in water at  0°C than that in water at
(c) Buoyancy in water at  0°C will be same as that in water at
(d) Buoyancy may be more or less in water at 4°C depending on
the radius of the sphere.
As the temperature is increased, the time period of a pendulum
(a) increases as its effective length increases even though its centre
of mass still remains at the centre of the bob.
(b) decreases as its effective length increases even though its centre
of mass still remains at the centre of the bob.
(c) increases as its effective length increases due to shifting of
centre of mass below the centre of the bob.
(d) decreases as its effective length remains same but the centre
of mass shifts above the centre of the bob.
Heat is associated with
(a) kinetic energy of random motion of molecules.
(b) kinetic energy of orderly motion of molecules.
(c) total kinetic energy of random and orderly motion of
molecules.
(d) kinetic energy of random motion in some cases and kinetic
energy of orderly motion in other.
Fig. 11.1
The rmal Prope rtie s of Matte r
The radius of a metal sphere at room temperature T is R, and the
coefficient of linear expansion of the metal is
  . The sphere is
heated a little by a temperature
✁T so that its new temperature is
. The increase in the volume of the sphere is approximately
A sphere, a cube and a thin circular plate, all of same material
and same mass are initially heated to same high temperature.
(a) Plate will cool fastest and cube the slowest
(b) Sphere will cool fastest and cube the slowest
(c) Plate will cool fastest and sphere the slowest
(d) Cube will cool fastest and plate the slowest.
MCQ II
Mark the correct options:
(a) A system X is in thermal equilibrium with Y but not with Z.
System Y and Z may be in thermal equilibrium with each
other.
(b) A system X is in thermal equilibrium with Y but not with Z.
Systems Y and Z are not in thermal equilibrium with each
other.
(c) A system X is neither in thermal equilibrium with Y nor with
Z. The systems Y and Z must be in thermal equilibrium with
each other.
(d) A system X is neither in thermal equilibrium with Y nor with
Z. The system Y and Z may be in thermal equilibrium with
each other.
11.10
‘Gulab Jamuns’ (assumed to be spherical) are to be heated in an
oven. They are available in two sizes, one twice bigger (in radius)
than the other. Pizzas (assumed to be discs) are also to be heated
in oven. They are also in two sizes, one twice big (in radius) than
the other. All four are put together to be heated to oven
temperature. Choose the correct option from the following:
(a) Both size gulab jamuns will get heated in the same time.
(b) Smaller gulab jamuns are heated before bigger ones.
(c) Smaller pizzas are heated before bigger ones.
(d) Bigger pizzas are heated before smaller ones.
Exe mplar Proble ms–Physic s
11.11
Refer to the plot of temperature versus time (Fig. 11.2) showing
the changes in the state of ice on heating (not to scale).
Fig. 11.2
S.No.
l (m)
If the first observation is correct, what can you say about
observations 2, 3 and 4.
Temperature ( C)
time (min)
Which of the following is correct?
(a) The region AB represents ice and water in thermal
equilibrium.
(b) At B water starts boiling.
(c) At C all the water gets converted into steam.
(d) C to D represents water and steam in equilibrium at
boiling point.
11.12
A glass full of hot milk is poured on the table. It begins to cool
gradually. Which of the following is correct?
(a) The rate of cooling is constant till milk attains the
temperature of the surrounding.
(b) The temperature of milk falls off exponentially with time.
(c) While cooling, there is a flow of heat from milk to the
surrounding as well as from surrounding to the milk but
the net flow of heat is from milk to the surounding and that
is why it cools.
(d) All three phenomenon, conduction, convection and radiation
are responsible for the loss of heat from milk to the
surroundings.
11.13
Is the bulb of a thermometer made of diathermic or adiabatic wall?
11.14
A student records the initial length l, change in temperature
 and change in length l
  of a rod as follows:
The rmal Prope rtie s of Matte r
11.15
Why does a metal bar appear hotter than a wooden bar at the
same temperature? Equivalently it also appears cooler than
wooden bar if they are both colder than room temperature.
11.16
Calculate the temperature which has same numeral value on
celsius and Fahrenheit scale.
11.17
These days people use steel utensils with copper bottom. This is
supposed to be good for uniform heating of food. Explain this
effect using the fact that copper is the better conductor.
11.18
Find out the increase in moment of inertia I of a uniform rod
(coefficient of linear expansion
  ) about its perpendicular
bisector when its temperature is slightly increased by
11.19
During summers in India, one of the common practice to keep
cool is to make ice balls of crushed ice, dip it in flavoured sugar
syrup and sip it. For this a stick is inserted into crushed ice and
is squeezed in the palm to make it into the ball. Equivalently in
winter, in those areas where it snows, people make snow balls
and throw around. Explain the formation of ball out of crushed
ice or snow in the light of P–T diagram of water.
11.20
100 g of water is supercooled to –10°C. At this point, due to
some disturbance mechanised or otherwise some of it suddenly
freezes to ice. What will be the temperature of the resultant
mixture and how much mass would freeze?
Fusion
= 1cal/g/ C and
= 80cal/g
11.21
One day in the morning, Ramesh filled up 1/3 bucket of
hot water from geyser, to take bath. Remaining 2/3 was to
be filled by cold water (at  room temperature) to bring
mixture to a comfortable temperature. Suddenly Ramesh
had to attend to something which would take some times,
say 5-10 minutes before he could take bath. Now he had
two options: (i) fill the remaining bucket completely by cold
water and then attend to the work, (ii) first attend to the
work and fill the remaining bucket just before taking bath.
Which option do you think would have kept water warmer ?
Explain.
Exe mplar Proble ms–Physic s
11.22
We would like to prepare a scale whose length does not change
with temperature. It is proposed to prepare a unit scale of this
type whose length remains, say 10 cm. We can use a bimetallic
strip made of brass and iron each of different length whose length
(both components) would change in such a way that difference
between their lengths remain constant. If
1.8 10
brass
, what should we take as length of each strip?
11.23
We would like to make a vessel whose volume does not change
with temperature (take a hint from the problem above). We can
use brass and iron (
☎vbrass = 6 × 10–5/K  and
☎viron = 3.55 ×10 –5/
K) to create  a volume of 100 cc. How do you think you can
achieve this.
11.24
Calculate the stress developed inside a tooth cavity filled with
copper when hot tea at temperature of 57oC is drunk. You can
take body (tooth) temperature to be 37o C and
✆ = 1.7
✝10-5/oC,
bulk modulus for copper = 140
✝10 9 N/m2.
11.25
A rail track made of steel having length 10 m is clamped on a
raillway line at its two ends (Fig 11.3). On a summer day due to
rise in temperature by 20° C , it is deformed as shown in figure.
Find x (displacement of the centre) if
steel
= 1.2
✝10-5 /°C.
11.26
A thin rod having length L0 at 0°C and coefficient of linear
expansion
✆has its two ends maintained at temperatures
✞1 and
✞2, respectively. Find its new length.
11.27
According to Stefan’s law of radiation, a black body radiates
energy
✟T 4 from its unit surface area every second where T is the
surface temperature of the black body and ✟ = 5.67 × 10–8 W/
m2K4 is known as Stefan’s constant. A nuclear weapon may be
thought of as a ball of radius 0.5 m. When detonated, it reaches
temperature of 106K and can be treated as a black body.
(a) Estimate the power it radiates.
(b) If surrounding has water at 30 C , how much water can 10%
of the energy produced evaporate in 1 s?
4186.0J/kg K
10 J/kg
(c) If all this energy U is in the form of radiation, corresponding
momentum is p = U/c. How much momentum per unit time
does it impart on unit area at a distance of 1 km?
Fig. 11.3
MCQ I
An ideal gas undergoes four different processes from the
same initial state (Fig. 12.1). Four processes are adiabatic,
isothermal, isobaric and isochoric. Out of 1, 2, 3 and 4 which
one is adiabatic.
(a) 4
(b) 3
(c) 2
(d) 1
If an average person jogs, hse produces 14.5 × 103 cal/min. This is
removed by the evaporation of sweat. The amount of sweat evaporated
per minute (assuming 1 kg requires 580 × 103 cal for evaparation) is
(a) 0.25 kg
(b) 2.25 kg
(c) 0.05 kg
(d) 0.20 kg
Cha p te r Twe lve
THERMODYNAMICS
Fig. 12.1
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
Consider P-V diagram for an ideal gas shown in Fig 12.2.
Out of the following diagrams (Fig. 12.3), which represents
the T-P diagram?
(a) (iv)
(b) (ii)
(c) (iii)
(d) (i)
An ideal gas undergoes cyclic process ABCDA as shown in given
P-V diagram (Fig. 12.4).
The amount of work done by
the gas is
(a) 6PoVo
(b) –2 PoVo
(c) + 2 PoVo
(d) + 4 PoVo
Fig 12.4
Fig. 12.3
Fig. 12.2
(iii)
Thermodynamic s
Consider two containers A and B containing identical gases at
the same pressure, volume and temperature. The gas in container
A is compressed to half of its original volume isothermally while
the gas in container B is compressed to half of its original value
adiabatically. The ratio of final pressure of gas in B to that of gas
in A is
Three copper blocks of masses M1, M2 and M3 kg respectively are
brought into thermal contact till they reach equilibrium. Before
contact, they were at T1, T2, T3 (T1 > T2 > T3 ). Assuming there is no
heat loss to the surroundings, the equilibrium temprature T  is
(s is specific heat of copper)
M T s
M T s
M T s
MCQ II
Which of the processes described below are irreversible?
(a) The increase in temprature of an iron rod by hammering it.
(b) A gas in a small cantainer at a temprature T1 is brought in
contact with a big reservoir at a higher temprature T2 which
increases the temprature of the gas.
(c) A quasi-static isothermal expansion of an ideal gas in cylinder
fitted with a frictionless piston.
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
(d) An ideal gas is enclosed in a piston cylinder arrangement
with adiabatic walls. A weight W is added to the piston,
resulting in compression of gas.
An ideal gas undergoes isothermal process from some initial state
i to final state  f. Choose the correct alternatives.
(a) dU = 0
(b) dQ= 0
(c) dQ = dU
(d) dQ = dW
Figure 12.5 shows the P-V diagram of an ideal gas undergoing a
change of state from A to B. Four different parts I, II, III and IV as
shown in the figure may lead to the same change of state.
(a) Change in internal energy is same in IV and III cases, but not in I
and II.
(b) Change in internal energy is same in all the four cases.
(c) Work done is maximum in case I
(d) Work done is minimum in case II.
12.10
Consider a cycle followed by an engine (Fig. 12.6)
1 to 2 is isothermal
2 to 3 is adiabatic
3 to 1 is adiabatic
Such a process does not exist because
(a) heat is completely converted to mechanical energy in such a
process, which is not possible.
(b) mechanical energy is completely converted to heat in this
process,which is not possible.
(c) curves representing two adiabatic processes don’t intersect.
(d) curves representing an adiabatic process and an isothermal
process don’t intersect.
12.11
Consider a heat engine as shown in
Fig. 12.7. Q1 and Q2 are heat added to heat
bath T1 and heat taken from T2 in one cycle
of engine. W is the mechanical work done
on the engine.
If W > 0, then possibilities are:
(a) Q1 > Q 2 > 0
(b) Q2 > Q 1 > 0
(c) Q2 < Q 1 < 0
(d) Q1 < 0, Q2 > 0
Fig. 12.5
Fig .12.7
Fig. 12.6
Thermodynamic s
12.12
Can a system be heated and its temperature remains constant?
12.13
A system goes from P to Q by two different paths in the P-V
diagram as shown in Fig. 12.8. Heat given to the system in
path 1 is 1000 J. The work done by the system along path 1 is
more than path 2 by 100 J. What is the heat exchanged by the
system in path 2?
12.14
If a refrigerator’s door is kept open, will the room become cool or
hot? Explain.
12.15
Is it possible to increase the temperature of a gas without adding
heat to it? Explain.
12.16
Air pressure in a car tyre increases during driving. Explain.
12.17
Consider a Carnot’s cycle operating between
  and
T2=300K producing 1 k J of mechanical work per cycle. Find the
heat transferred to the engine by the reservoirs.
12.18
A person of mass 60 kg wants to lose 5kg by going up and down
a 10m high stairs. Assume he burns twice as much fat while
going up than coming down. If 1 kg of fat is burnt on expending
7000 kilo calories, how many times must he go up and down to
reduce his weight by 5 kg?
12.19
Consider a cycle tyre being filled with air by a pump. Let V be the
volume of the tyre (fixed) and at each stroke of the pump
of air is transferred to the tube adiabatically. What is the work
done when the pressure in the tube is increased from P1 to P2?
12.20
In a refrigerator one removes heat from a lower temperature
and deposits to the surroundings at a higher temperature. In
this process, mechanical work has to be done, which is provided
by an electric motor. If the motor is of 1kW power, and heat is
transferred from –3°C to 27°C, find the heat taken out of the
refrigerator per second assuming its efficiency is 50% of a
perfect engine.
Fig. 12.8
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
Fig. 12.9
1(P V , T
P V , T
= constant
12.21
If the co-efficient of performance of a refrigerator is 5 and operates
at the room temperature (27 °C), find the temperature inside the
refrigerator.
12.22
The initial state of a certain gas is (Pi, Vi, Ti). It undergoes
expansion till its volume becoms Vf . Consider the following two
cases:
(a) the expansion takes place at constant temperature.
(b) the expansion takes place at constant pressure.
Plot the P-V diagram for each case. In which of the two cases, is
the work done by the gas more?
12.23
Consider a P-V diagram in which the path followed by one mole
of perfect gas in a cylindrical container is shown in Fig. 12.9.
(a) Find the work done when the gas is taken from state 1 to
state 2.
(b) What is the ratio of temperature T1/T2, if V2 = 2V1?
(c) Given the internal energy for one mole of gas at temperature T
is (3/2) RT, find the heat supplied to the gas when it is taken
from state 1 to 2, with V2 = 2V1.
12.24
A cycle followed by an engine (made of one mole of perfect gas in
a cylinder with a piston) is shown in Fig. 12.10.
A to B : volume constant
B to C : adiabatic
C to D : volume constant
D to A : adiabatic
   (a) In which part of the cycle heat is supplied to the engine from
outside?
(b) In which part of the cycle heat is being given to the
surrounding by the engine?
(c) What is the work done by the engine in one cycle? Write your
answer in term of PA, PB, VA.
(d) What is the efficiency of the engine?
  for the gas], (
 for one mole)
Fig. 12.10
Thermodynamic s
12.25
A cycle followed by an engine (made of one mole of an ideal gas
in a cylinder with a piston) is shown in Fig. 12.11. Find heat
exchanged by the engine, with the surroundings for each section
of the cycle. (Cv = (3/2) R)
constant volume
constant pressure
adiabatic
constant pressure
12.26
Consider that an ideal gas (n moles) is expanding in a process
given by P = f ( V ), which passes through a point (V0, P0 ). Show
that the gas is absorbing heat at (P0, V0 ) if the slope of the curve
P = f (V ) is larger than the slope of the adiabat passing
through (P0, V0  ).
12.27
Consider one mole of perfect gas in a cylinder of unit cross section
with a piston attached (Fig. 12.12). A spring (spring constant k)
is attached (unstretched length L ) to the piston and to the bottom
of the cylinder. Initially the spring is unstretched and the gas is
in equilibrium. A certain amount of heat Q is supplied to the gas
causing an increase of volume from Vo to V1.
(a) What is the initial pressure of the system?
(b) What is the final pressure of the system?
(c) Using the first law of thermodynamics, write down a relation
between Q, Pa, V, Vo and k.
Fig. 12.12
Fig. 12.11
MCQ I
A cubic vessel (with faces horizontal + vertical) contains an ideal
gas at NTP. The vessel is being carried by a rocket which is moving
at a speed of 500m s–1 in vertical direction. The pressure of the
gas inside the vessel as observed by us on the ground
(a) remains the same because
500ms
   is very much smaller
than vrms of the gas.
(b) remains the same because motion of the vessel as a whole
does not affect the relative motion of the gas molecules and
the walls.
(c) will increase by a factor equal to
(500)
where
vrms was the original mean square  velocity of the gas.
(d) will be different on the top wall and bottom wall of the vessel.
1 mole of an ideal gas is contained in a cubical volume V,
ABCDEFGH at 300 K (Fig. 13.1). One face of the cube (EFGH) is
made up of a material which totally absorbs any gas molecule
C ha p te r Thirte e n
KINETIC  THEO RY
Kine tic  The ory
incident on it. At any given time,
(a) the pressure on EFGH would be zero.
(b) the pressure on all the faces will the equal.
(c) the pressure of EFGH would be double the pressure
on ABCD.
(d) the pressure on EFGH would be half that on ABCD.
Boyle’s law is applicable for an
(a) adiabatic process.
(b) isothermal process.
(c) isobaric process.
(d) isochoric process.
A cylinder containing an ideal gas is in vertical position and has
a piston of mass M that is able to move up or down without friction
(Fig. 13.2). If the temperature is increased,
Fig. 13.1
Fig. 13.2
Fig.13.3
100 200 300400500
T (K)
(a) both p and V of the gas will change.
(b) only p will increase according to Charle’s law.
(c) V will change but not p.
(d) p will change but not V.
Volume versus temperature graphs for a given mass of an
ideal gas are shown in Fig. 13.3 at two different values of
constant pressure. What can be inferred about relation
between P1 & P2?
(a) P1 > P2
(b) P1 = P2
(c) P1 < P2
(d) data is insufficient.
Exe mplar Proble ms–Physic s
1 mole of H2 gas is contained in a box of volume V = 1.00 m3 at
T = 300K. The gas is heated to a temperature of T = 3000K and
the gas gets converted to a gas of hydrogen atoms. The final
pressure would be (considering all gases to be ideal)
(a) same as the pressure initially.
(b) 2 times the pressure initially.
(c) 10 times the pressure initially.
(d) 20 times the pressure initially.
A vessel of volume V contains a mixture of 1 mole of Hydrogen
and 1 mole of Oxygen (both considered as ideal). Let f1(v)dv, denote
the fraction of molecules with speed between v and (v + dv) with
f2 (v)dv, similarly for oxygen. Then
obeys the Maxwell’s distribution law.
(b) f1 (v), f2 (v) will obey the Maxwell’s distribution law separately.
(c) Neither f1 (v), nor f2 (v) will obey the Maxwell’s distribution
(d) f2 (v)  and f1 (v) will be the same.
An inflated rubber balloon contains one mole of an ideal gas,
has a pressure p, volume V and temperature T. If the temperature
rises to 1.1 T, and the volume is increaset to 1.05 V,  the final
pressure will be
(a) 1.1 p
(b) p
(c) less than p
(d) between p and 1.1.
MCQ II
ABCDEFGH is a hollow cube made of an insulator (Fig. 13.4).
Face ABCD has positve charge on it. Inside the cube, we have
ionized hydrogen.
The usual kinetic theory expression for pressure
(a) will be valid.
(b) will not be valid since the ions would experience forces other
than due to collisions with the walls.
(c) will not be valid since collisions with walls would not be elastic.
(d) will not be valid because isotropy is lost.
13.10
Diatomic molecules like hydrogen have energies due to both
translational as well as rotational motion. From the equation in
kinetic theory
, E is
Fig. 13.4
Kine tic  The ory
(a) the total energy per unit volume.
(b) only the translational part of energy because rotational energy
is very small compared to the translational energy.
(c) only the translational part of the energy because during
collisions with the wall pressure relates to change in linear
momentum.
(d) the translational part of the energy because rotational energies
of molecules can be of either sign and its average over all the
molecules is zero.
13.11
In a diatomic molecule, the rotational energy at a given
temperature
(a) obeys Maxwell’s distribution.
(b) have the same value for all molecules.
(c) equals the translational kinetic energy for each molecule.
(d) is (2/3)rd the translational kinetic energy for each molecule.
13.12
Which of the following diagrams (Fig. 13.5) depicts ideal gas
behaviour?
Fig. 13.5
P = const
T = const
V = const
13.13
When an ideal gas is compressed adiabatically, its temperature
rises: the molecules on the average have more kinetic energy than
before. The kinetic energy increases,
(a) because of collisions with moving parts of the wall only.
(b) because of collisions with the entire wall.
Exe mplar Proble ms–Physic s
(c) because the molecules gets accelerated in their motion inside
the volume.
(d) because of redistribution of energy amongst the molecules.
13.14
Calculate the number of atoms in 39.4 g gold. Molar mass of
gold is 197g mole–1.
13.15
The volume of a given mass of a gas at 27°C, 1 atm is 100 cc.
What will be its volume at 327°C?
13.16
The molecules of a given mass of a gas have root mean square
speeds of
100 m s
   at 27 C
and 1.00 atmospheric pressure.
What will be the root mean square speeds of the molecules of the
gas at 127°C and 2.0 atmospheric pressure?
13.17
Two molecules of a gas have speeds of
10 m s
1 10 m s
, respectively. What is the root mean square speed of
these molecules.
13.18
A gas mixture consists of 2.0 moles of oxygen and 4.0 moles of
neon at temperature T. Neglecting all vibrational modes, calculate
the total internal energy of the system. (Oxygen has two rotational
modes.)
13.19
Calculate the ratio of the mean free paths of the molecules of two
gases having molecular diameters 1A
and 2A
. The gases may
be considered under identical conditions of temperature, pressure
and volume.
13.20
The container shown in Fig. 13.6 has two chambers, separated
by a partition, of volumes V1 = 2.0 litre and V2= 3.0 litre. The
chambers contain
4.0and
moles of a gas at
pressures p1 = 1.00 atm and p2 = 2.00 atm. Calculate the pressure
after the partition is removed and the mixture attains equilibrium.
13.21
A gas mixture consists of molecules of types A, B and C with
masses
. Rank  the three types of molecules in
decreasing order of (a) average K.E., (b) rms speeds.
Fig 13.6
✠1, p1
Kine tic  The ory
13.22
We have 0.5 g of hydrogen gas in a cubic chamber of size 3cm
kept at NTP. The gas in the chamber is compressed keeping the
temperature constant till a final pressure of 100 atm. Is one
justified in assuming the ideal gas law, in the final state?
(Hydrogen molecules can be consider as spheres of radius 1 A
o  ).
13.23
When air is pumped into a cycle tyre the volume and pressure of
the air in the tyre both are increased. What about Boyle’s law in
this case?
13.24
A ballon has 5.0 g mole of helium at 7°C. Calculate
(a) the number of atoms of helium in the balloon,
(b) the total internal energy of the system.
13.25
Calculate the number of degrees of freedom of molecules of
hydrogen in 1 cc of hydrogen gas at NTP.
13.26
An insulated container containing monoatomic gas of molar mass
m is moving with a velocity
v . If the container is suddenly
stopped, find the change in temperature.
13.27
Explain why
(a) there is no atmosphere on moon.
(b) there is fall in temperature with altitude.
13.28
Consider an ideal gas with following distribution of speeds.
Speed (m/s)
% of molecules
(i) Calculate
and hence T.
(ii) If all the molecules with speed 1000 m/s escape from the
system, calculate new
and hence T.
Exe mplar Proble ms–Physic s
13.29
Ten small planes are flying at a speed of 150 km/h in total
darkness in an air space that is 20 × 20 × 1.5 km3 in volume. You
are in one of the planes, flying at random within this space with
no way of knowing  where the other planes are. On the average
about how long a time will elapse between near collision with
your plane. Assume for this rough computation that a saftey
region around the plane can be approximated by a sphere of
radius 10m.
13.30
A box of 1.00m3 is filled with nitrogen at 1.50 atm at 300K. The
box has a hole of an area 0.010 mm2. How much time is required
for the pressure to reduce by 0.10 atm, if the pressure outside is
1 atm.
13.31
Consider a rectangular block of wood moving with a velocity v0
in a gas at temperature T and mass density
 . Assume the velocity
is along x-axis and the area of cross-section of the block
perpendicular to v0  is A. Show that the drag force on the block is
m , where m is the mass of the gas molecule.
MCQ I
The displacement of a particle is represented by the equation
y = 3 cos
The motion of the particle is
(a) simple harmonic with period  2p/w.
(b) simple harmonic with period
(c) periodic but not simple harmonic.
(d) non-periodic.
The displacement of a particle is represented by the equation
. The motion is
(a) non-periodic.
(b) periodic but not simple harmonic.
(c) simple harmonic with period  2 ✠/
(d) simple harmonic with period
Cha pte r Fo urte e n
OSCILLATIONS
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
The relation between acceleration and displacement of four
particles are given below:
(a) ax = + 2x.
(b) ax = + 2x2.
(c) ax = – 2x2.
(d) ax = – 2x.
Which one of the particles is executing simple harmonic motion?
Motion of an oscillating liquid column in a U-tube is
(a) periodic but not simple harmonic.
(b) non-periodic.
(c) simple harmonic and time period is independent of the density
of the liquid.
(d) simple harmonic and time-period is directly proportional to
the density of the liquid.
A particle is acted simultaneously by mutually perpendicular
simple hormonic motions x = a cos
 t and y = a sin
 t . The
trajectory of motion of the particle will be
(a) an ellipse.
(b) a parabola.
(c) a circle.
(d) a straight line.
The displacement of a particle varies with time according to the
relation
y = a sin  t + b cos  t.
(a) The motion is oscillatory but not S.H.M.
(b) The motion is S.H.M. with amplitude a + b.
(c) The motion is S.H.M. with amplitude a2 + b2.
(d) The motion is S.H.M. with amplitude
Four pendulums A, B, C and D are suspended from the same
Fig. 14.1
Osc illations
elastic support as shown in Fig. 14.1. A and C are of the same
length, while B is smaller than A and D is larger than A. If A is
given a transverse displacement,
(a) D will vibrate with maximum amplitude.
(b) C will vibrate with  maximum amplitude.
(c) B will vibrate with  maximum amplitude.
(d) All the four will oscillate with equal amplitude.
Figure 14.2. shows the circular motion of a particle. The radius
of the circle, the period, sense of revolution and the initial position
are indicated on the figure. The simple harmonic motion of the
x-projection of the radius vector of the rotating particle P is
(a) x (t) = B sin
(b) x (t) = B cos 15
(c) x (t) = B sin 15
(d) x (t) = B cos 15
The equation of motion of a particle is x = a cos (
✏ t )2.
The motion is
(a) periodic but not oscillatory.
(b) periodic and oscillatory.
(c) oscillatory but not periodic.
(d) neither periodic nor oscillatory.
14.10
A particle executing S.H.M. has a maximum speed of 30 cm/s
and a maximum acceleration of 60 cm/s 2. The period of
oscillation is
(b) 2
   s.
(c) 2
(d) t
14.11
When a mass  m is connected individually to two springs S1 and
S2,  the oscillation frequencies are
✓1 and
✓2. If the same mass is
Fig. 14.2
P t( = 0)
T = 30s
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
displacement
7 time (s)
attached to the two springs as shown in Fig. 14.3, the oscillation
frequency would be
  1 +
MCQ II
14.12
The rotation of earth about its axis is
(a) periodic motion.
(b) simple harmonic motion.
(c) periodic but not simple harmonic motion.
(d) non-periodic motion.
14.13
Motion of a ball bearing inside a smooth curved bowl, when
released from a point slightly above the lower point is
(a) simple harmonic motion.
(b) non-periodic motion.
(c) periodic motion.
(d) periodic but not S.H.M.
14.14
Displacement vs. time curve for a particle executing S.H.M. is
shown in Fig. 14.4. Choose the correct statements.
Fig. 14.4
Fig. 14.3
(a) Phase of the oscillator is same at t = 0 s and
t = 2 s.
(b) Phase of the oscillator is same at t = 2 s and
t = 6 s.
(c) Phase of the oscillator is same at t = 1 s and
t = 7 s.
(d) Phase of the oscillator is same at t = 1 s and
t = 5 s.
14.15
Which of the following statements is/are true for a simple
harmonic oscillator?
(a) Force acting is directly proportional to displacement from the
mean position and opposite to it.
Osc illations
(b) Motion is periodic.
(c) Acceleration of the oscillator  is constant.
(d) The velocity is periodic.
14.16
The displacement time graph of a particle executing S.H.M. is
shown in Fig. 14.5. Which of the following statement is/are true?
(a) The force is zero at
(b) The acceleration is  maximum at
(c) The velocity is maximum at
(d) The P.E. is equal to K.E. of oscillation at
14.17
A body is performing S.H.M. Then its
(a) average total energy per cycle is equal to its  maximum kinetic
energy.
(b) average kinetic energy per cycle is equal to half of its
maximum  kinetic energy.
(c) mean velocity over a complete cycle is equal to
✂ times of its
maximum velocity.
(d) root mean square velocity is
2  times of its  maximum velocity.
14.18
A particle is in linear simple harmonic motion between two points
A and B, 10 cm apart (Fig. 14.6). Take the direction from A to B
as the + ve direction and choose the correct statements.
Fig. 14.6
Fig.14.5
displacement
3T/4 T
5T/4 time (s)
(a) The sign of velocity, acceleration and force on the particle when
it is 3 cm away from A going towards B are positive.
(b) The sign of velocity of the particle at C going towards O is
negative.
(c) The sign of velocity, acceleration and force on the particle when
it is 4 cm away from B going towards  A are negative.
(d) The sign of acceleration and force on the particle when it is at
point B is negative.
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
14.19
Displacement versus time curve for a particle executing S.H.M.
is shown in Fig. 14.7. Identify the points marked at which (i)
velocity of the oscillator is zero, (ii) speed of the oscillator is
maximum.
Fig. 14.9
Fig. 14.7
Fig. 14.8
14.20
Two identical springs of spring constant K are attached to a block
of mass m and to fixed supports as shown in Fig. 14.8. When the
mass is displaced from equilllibrium position by a distance x
towards right, find the restoring force
14.21
What are the two basic characteristics of a simple harmonic
motion?
14.22
When will the motion of a simple pendulum be simple harmonic?
14.23
What is the ratio of maxmimum acceleration to the maximum
velocity of a simple harmonic oscillator?
14.24
What is the ratio between the distance travelled by the oscillator
in one time period and amplitude?
14.25
In Fig. 14.9,  what will be the sign of
the velocity of the point P
✄, which is
the projection of the velocity of the
reference particle P . P is moving in
a circle of radius R in anticlockwise
direction.
Osc illations
14.26
Show that for a particle executing S.H.M, velocity and
displacement have a phase difference of
14.27
Draw a graph to show the variation of P.E., K.E. and total energy
of a simple harmonic oscillator with displacement.
14.28
The length of a second’s pendulum on the surface of Earth is
1m. What will be the length of a second’s pendulum on the moon?
14.29
Find the time period of mass M when displaced from its
equilibrium positon and then released for the system shown in
Fig 14.10.
14.30
Show that the motion of a particle represented by
y = sin
✁t – cos
✁t is simple harmonic with a period of  2 /
14.31
Find the displacement of a simple harmonic oscillator at which
its P.E. is half of the maximum energy of the oscillator.
14.32
A body of mass m is situated in a potential field U(x) = U0 (1-cos
when U0 and
✄ are constants. Find the time period of small
oscillations.
14.33
A mass of 2 kg is attached to the spring of spring constant
50 Nm–1. The block is pulled to a distance of 5cm from its
equilibrium position at x = 0 on a horizontal frictionless surface
from rest at t = 0. Write the expression for its displacement at
anytime t.
14.34
Consider a pair of identical pendulums, which oscillate with equal
amplitude  independently such that when one pendulum is at
its extreme position making an angle of 2° to the right with the
vertical, the other pendulum makes an angle of 1° to the left of
the vertical. What is the phase difference between the pendulums?
14.35
A person normally weighing 50 kg stands on a massless platform
which oscillates up and down harmonically at a frequency of
2.0 s–1 and an amplitude 5.0 cm. A weighing machine on the
platform gives the persons weight against time.
(a) Will there be any change in weight of the body, during the
oscillation?
Fig. 14.10
Inextensible
string
Exemplar Problems–Physic s
(b) If answer to part (a) is yes, what will be the maximum and
minimum reading in the machine and at which position?
14.36
A body of mass m is attached to one end of a massless spring
which is suspended vertically from a fixed point. The mass is
held in hand so that the spring is neither stretched nor
compressed. Suddenly the support of the hand is removed. The
lowest position attained by the mass during oscillation is 4cm
below the point, where it was held in hand.
(a) What is the amplitude of oscillation?
(b) Find the frequency of oscillation?
14.37
A cylindrical log of wood of height h and area of cross-section A
floats in water. It is pressed and then released. Show that the log
would execute S.H.M. with a time period.
where m is mass of the body and
✄ is density of the liquid.
14.38
One end of a V-tube containing mercury is connected to a suction
pump and the other end to atmosphere. The two arms of the
tube are inclined  to horizontal at an angle of  45° each. A small
pressure difference is created between two columns when the
suction pump is removed. Will the column of mercury in V-tube
execute simple harmonic motion? Neglect capillary and viscous
forces.Find the time period of oscillation.
14.39
A tunnel is dug through the centre of the Earth. Show that a
body of mass ‘m’ when dropped from rest from one end of the
tunnel will execute simple harmonic motion.
14.40
A simple pendulum of time
period 1s and length l is hung
from a fixed support at O,
such that the bob is at a
distance H vertically above A
on the ground (Fig. 14.11).
The amplitude is
✝. The
string snaps at
✞0 /2. Find
the time taken by the bob to
hit the ground. Also find
distance from A where bob
hits the ground. Assume
small
andcos
Fig. 14.11
MCQ I
Water waves produced by a motor boat sailing in water are
(a) neither longitudinal nor transverse.
(b) both longitudinal and transverse.
(c) only longitudinal.
(d) only transverse.
Sound waves of wavelength
   travelling in a medium with a speed
of v m/s enter into another medium where its speed is 2v m/s.
Wavelength of sound waves in the second medium is
(b) 2
(d) 4
Cha pte r Fifte e n
WAVES
Exemplar Problems–Physics
Speed of sound wave in air
(a) is independent of temperature.
(b) increases with pressure.
(c) increases with increase in humidity.
(d) decreases with increase in humidity.
Change in temperature of the medium changes
(a) frequency of sound waves.
(b) amplitude of sound waves.
(c) wavelength of sound waves.
(d) loudness of sound waves.
With propagation of longitudinal waves through a medium, the
quantity transmitted is
(a) matter.
(b) energy.
(c) energy and matter.
(d) energy, matter and momentum.
Which of the following statements are true for wave motion?
(a) Mechanical transverse waves can propagate through all
mediums.
(b) Longitudinal waves can propagate through solids only.
(c) Mechanical transverse waves can propagate through solids
only.
(d) Longitudinal waves can propagate through vacuum.
A sound wave is passing through air column in the form of
compression and rarefaction. In consecutive compressions and
rarefactions,
(a) density remains constant.
(b) Boyle’s law is obeyed.
(c) bulk modulus of air oscillates.
(d) there is no transfer of heat.
Equation of a plane progressive wave is given by
0.6sin2
✟. On reflection from a denser medium its
amplitude becomes 2/3 of the amplitude of the incident wave.
The equation of the reflected wave is
0.6sin2
Waves
0.4 sin 2
0.4sin2
0.4sin2
A string of mass 2.5 kg is under a tension of 200 N. The length of
the stretched string is 20.0 m. If the transverse jerk is struck at
one end of the string, the disturbance will reach the other end in
(a) one second
(b)  0.5 second
(c)  2 seconds
(d)  data given is insufficient.
15.10
A train whistling at constant frequency is moving towards a
station at a constant speed V. The train goes past a stationary
observer on the station. The frequency n
✡ of the sound as heard
by the observer is plotted as a function of time t (Fig 15.1) . Identify
the expected curve.
Fig 15.1
Exemplar Problems–Physics
MCQ II
15.11
A transverse harmonic wave on a string is described by y (x,t) =
3.0 sin (36t + 0.018x +
where x and y are in cm and t is in s. The positive direction of x is
from left to right.
(a) The wave is travelling from right to left.
(b) The speed of the wave is 20m/s.
(c) Frequency of the wave is 5.7 Hz.
(d) The least distance between two successive crests in the wave
is 2.5 cm.
15.12
The displacement of a string is given by
y (x,t) = 0.06 sin (2
 x/3) cos (120
where x and y are in  m and t in s. The length of the string is 1.5m
and its mass is
(a) It represents a progressive wave of frequency 60Hz.
(b) It represents a stationary wave of frequency 60Hz.
(c) It is the result of superposition of two waves of wavelength 3
m, frequency 60Hz each travelling with a speed of 180 m/s
in opposite direction.
(d) Amplitude of this wave is constant.
15.13
Speed of sound waves in a fluid depends upon
(a) directty on density of the medium.
(b) square of Bulk modulus of the medium.
(c) inversly on the square root of density.
(d) directly on the square root of bulk modulus of the medium.
15.14
During propagation of a plane progressive mechanical wave
(a) all the particles are vibrating in the same phase.
(b) amplitude of all the particles is equal.
(c) particles of the medium executes S.H.M.
(d) wave velocity depends upon the nature of the medium.
15.15
The transverse displacement of a string (clamped at its both ends)
is given by y (x,t) = 0.06 sin (2
 x/3) cos (120
All the points on the string between two consecutive nodes
vibrate with
(a) same frequency
(b) same phase
(c) same energy
(d) different amplitude.
Waves
15.16
A train, standing in a station yard, blows a whistle of frequency
400 Hz in still air. The wind starts blowing in the direction from
the yard to the station with a speed of 10m/s. Given that the
speed of sound in still air is 340m/s,
(a) the frequency of sound as heard by an observer standing on
the platform is 400Hz.
(b) the speed of sound for the observer standing on the platform
is 350m/s.
(c) the  frequency of sound as heard by the observer standing
on the platform will increase.
(d) the  frequency of sound as heard by the observer standing
on the platform will decrease.
15.17
Which of the following statements are true for a stationary wave?
(a) Every particle has a fixed amplitude which is different from
the amplitude of its nearest particle.
(b) All the particles cross their mean position at the same time.
(c) All the particles are oscillating with same amplitude.
(d) There is no net transfer of energy across any plane.
(e) There are some particles which are always at rest.
15.18
A sonometer wire is vibrating in resonance with a tuning fork.
Keeping the tension applied same, the length of the wire is
doubled. Under what conditions would the tuning fork still be is
resonance with the wire?
15.19
An organ pipe of length L open at both ends is found to vibrate
in its first harmonic when sounded with a tuning fork of 480 Hz.
What should be the length of a pipe closed at one end, so that it
also vibrates in its first harmonic with the same tuning fork?
15.20
A tuning fork A, marked 512 Hz, produces 5 beats per second,
where sounded with another unmarked tuning fork B. If B is
loaded with wax the number of beats is again 5 per second. What
is the frequency of the tuning fork B when not loaded?
15.21
The displacement of an elastic wave is given by the function
y = 3 sin
 t + 4 cos
where y is in cm and t  is in second. Calculate the resultant
amplitude.
15.22
A sitar wire is replaced by another wire of same length and
material but of three times the earlier radius. If the tension in the
wire remains the same, by what factor will the frequency change?
Exemplar Problems–Physics
15.23
At what temperatures (in oC) will the speed of sound in air be
3 times its value at OoC?
15.24
When two waves of almost equal frequencies n 1 and n 2 reach at
a point simultaneously, what is the time interval between
successive maxima?
15.25
A steel wire has a length of 12 m and a mass of 2.10 kg. What will
be the speed of a transverse wave on this wire when a tension of
2.06 × 104N is applied?
15.26
A pipe 20 cm long is closed at one end. Which harmonic mode of
the pipe is resonantly excited by a source of 1237.5 Hz ?(sound
velocity in air = 330 m s–1)
15.27
A train standing at the outer signal of a railway station blows a
whistle of frequency 400 Hz still air. The train begins to move
with a speed of 10 m s-1 towards the platform. What is the
frequency of the sound for an observer standing on the platform?
(sound velocity in air = 330 m s–1)
15.28
The wave pattern on a stretched string is shown in
Fig. 15.2. Interpret what kind of wave this is and find its
wavelength.
Fig. 15.2
Waves
15.29
The pattern of standing waves formed on a stretched string at
two instants of time are shown in Fig. 15.3. The velocity of two
waves superimposing to form stationary waves is 360 ms–1 and
their frequencies are 256 Hz.
Fig. 15.4
Fig. 15.3
(a) Calculate the time at which the second curve is plotted.
(b) Mark nodes and antinodes on the curve.
(c) Calculate the distance between A
   and C
15.30
A tuning fork vibrating with a frequency of 512Hz is
kept close to the open end of a tube filled with water
(Fig. 15.4). The water level in the tube is gradually
lowered. When the water level is 17cm below the open
end, maximum intensity of sound is heard. If the room
temperature is 20°C, calculate
(a) speed of sound in air at room temperature
(b) speed of sound in air at 0°C
(c) if the water in the tube is replaced with mercury,
will there be any difference in your observations?
15.31
Show that when a string fixed at its two ends vibrates in 1 loop,
2 loops, 3 loops and 4 loops, the frequencies are in the ratio
1:2:3:4.
15.32
The earth has a radius of 6400 km. The inner core of 1000 km
radius is solid. Outside it, there is a region from 1000 km to a
radius of 3500 km which is in molten state. Then again from
3500 km to 6400 km the earth is solid. Only longitudinal (P)
waves can travel inside a liquid. Assume that the P wave has a
speed of 8 km s–1 in solid parts and of 5 km s–1 in liquid parts of
the earth. An earthquake occurs at some place close to the surface
of the earth. Calculate the time after which it will be recorded in a
seismometer at a diametrically opposite point on the earth if wave
travels along diameter?
Exemplar Problems–Physics
15.33
If c is r.m.s. speed of molecules in a gas and v is the speed of
sound waves in the gas, show that c/v is constant and independent
of temperature for all diatomic gases.
15.34
Given below are some functions of x and t to represent the
displacement of an elastic wave.
(a) y = 5 cos (4x ) sin (20t)
(b) y = 4 sin (5x – t/2) + 3 cos (5x – t/2)
(c) y = 10 cos [(252 – 250)
 t ] cos [(252+250)
(d) y = 100 cos (100
 t + 0.5x )
State which of these represent
(a) a travelling wave along –x direction
(b) a stationary wave
(c) beats
(d) a travelling wave along +x direction.
Given reasons for your answers.
15.35
In the given progressive wave
y = 5 sin (100
 t – 0.4
where y and x are in m, t is in s. What is the
(a) amplitude
(b) wave length
(c) frequency
(d) wave velocity
(e) particle velocity amplitude.
15.36
For the harmonic travelling wave y = 2 cos 2
  (10t–0.0080x + 3.5)
where x and y are in cm and t is second. What is the phase
difference  between the oscillatory motion at two points separated
by a distance of
(a) 4 m
(b) 0.5 m
(d) 3
✁ (at a given instant of time)
(e) What is the phase difference between the oscillation of a
particle located at x = 100cm, at t = T s and t = 5 s?
◆ ✁✂✄ ❈☎✆✝✞✟✠
✢✤✩✧✤✥✤✏
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
❙✰✱✜✛
✚✤✴✛✣✙
✛✜✘✧✙✛
✤✢✦✛✣
✧✘✱✢✰✢✰✛
✐✛✜✦✘✱✰
✘✢✰✤✱
✐✛✢✛✣
✘✐✛✢✛
✘✐✛✢✛
✛✱✜✛✵
✘✐✛✢✛
✢✰✐✛✙
✘✐✛✢✛
✐✤✤✱✩
✘✱✜✛✵
✘✐✛✢✛✣
✐✛✢✛✣
❡◆❖t❤
✘✢✤✐✰✜
✘✢✤✐✰✜
✘✢✰✤✱✙
✣✛✚✛✘✢✛✳
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
✚✘✢✣★
✛✘✢★✕
✪✘✛✙✤
✚✜✕✤✣✕
✣✱✚✘✢
✣✱✚✘✢
✬✣✙✙✕★✣
✙✙✕★✣
■✜✚✬✣
✗✩✚✜✕
✢✚✜✩✚
✚✜✜✛✜
✱✚✘✢✣
✚✬✛✱✚✢
✚✬✛✱✚✢
■✜✚✢✢✣
✤✣✱✚✘✢
✱✚✘✢✣
✛✘✕✙✙
✬✛✜✜✚✬★
✚✜✜✛✜
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
❙✑✒✓❡
✙✑✖✘✔
✕❡✒✓❡
✖❡✘✤✢
❙✑✒✓❡
❡✒✘✑✗✒
✙✗✖✛✤✢✜✘✮
❍❡✒✓❡
❡✒✘✑✗✒✘✮
❡✒✘✑✗✒✢❡✘✘
✤✒✑✔✘
✤✒✓✔✑✗✒
✕❡✖❡✙✗✖❡✣
✜✢✓✗✕✗
✑✘✘✘✗
✼✜✔❡✖
✗✼✚❡✖
✼✜✔❡✖✣
❡✒✔✑✖❡
✢✤✔✑✗✒
✼✜✔❡✖✣
✼✜✔❡✖
✼✜✔❡✖
✼✕❡✖❡
✼✕❡✖❡
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
☛☞✌✍✎
✒✓✔☞✕
☛☞✌✎✓✔✖
✏✘✓☛☞
✛✤✦✧✧
✌✔✎☞❝
✔❝✎☞❝
✌✔✎☞❝
✎✕✌✍❝☞
✖✌☛☞✕
✌✔✎☞❝
✠☞✗✔☞☞
❝✌✕✖✏
✘✓❝✕✓✌✕✖
✎✕✖✘✘
✖✌☛☞✕☞✔
✠☞✗✔☞☞
✖✌☛☞✕
✘✓❝✕✓✌✕✖✏
☞q ✓✖
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
❈✑✒✓✔✕✖
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
❙✟✓✓✞
✍✞✝✑❫
☞✠✞✏✍✎✝
✍✎✝✎✗✞✝✎,
✒☞✑✠✕
✖☞✝✑☞✏
✕✔✞✓✎
✎✝✘✎✓✏
⑦③④⑧⑨
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✥✕✖✗✥✘
s ✙✫✉
✛✗✤✖≈
✗✥✤✓✒✤
✓✗s ✤r
✓✗s✤r
⑥⑦⑧⑨⑩❶
✦✖✓✔✛✩
✖✤✫✖✗✥✓
✓✗s✤r
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
t❛✝✟✎
☛✟✟☞✠
✎✠✎✝✟✎
❈❅❇❉❊❋●
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✜✕✢✣✔
✢✣✣✕✪✕
♦✾✿❀❁
✺❁❂❃✻
❏❃❑❈❍●
❂■❃❃✿
❃❑❈❍✺✾θ
✕✣✓✖✪
✜✓✖✣✢✪
✙✚✛✕✛✓
✤✕✣✜✕✢✘✖
❆✣✣✕✪
s✉①②②
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
✛✜✢✣✤✥✦
✻✼✽✼✼
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✵✲✔✬✳✲
✳✗✵✥✲
➸➺➻➼➽➾➚➪
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
❍■❏❑▲▼◆
☞✔✟✏✒✡✠✐✌
☞✐✠✐✡❝
✞✟☞✠❡✞
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✒✓✔✕✖
✬✴✙✙✵
✬✙✕✚✦
✙✔✘✛✫✳
✘❁✓✔✫
❁✙✳✓✰✖✙
✕✚✓✘✔
✘❁✓✔✫
✵✕✗✕✫
✵✓✬✚✕✔✰✙
✳✓✙❁✙
✰✙✗✙✔
✳✕✔✫✙
✗✘✗✙✔
✳✕✔✰✙
✙❞✛✕✖
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
✡✍✎✏✌
☛☞✎✌✓✖
✎✌✡✍✎✌✘
✌✕✑✗✎✌
✡✍✎✏✌
❍❏✓❑❡✑
✤✏✏✌✒
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
❆✚✚✛✜✛
➏➐➑➏➐
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
❙✘✙✙✚
✜✌☞✢✣
✮✘✙✙✚
✢✘✾❛✌✚
✢✘✾❛✌✚
✢✘✾❛✌✚
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
❈✒✓✔✕✖✗
✮✰✱✬✣✲✳
✰✿✲❀✲✴✵
❁✿✬❀✯
❁✿✬❀✯
◆❅✯✣❅
✴✮✲✿❀✬✵✯
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
☛☞✌✍✎
✏✑✒✍✓
✍✌✏☞✑
✍✌✏☞✑
❶❷❸❹❺❻❼
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✙✚✥✛✙✘
✙✗✙❛✦
➔→➣↔➔
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
❀❁❃❄❅
✛✢✛✚✾✖
✙✛✚P ✛✜
✛✢✛✚✤
✾✢✢✔✖
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
❜✔✒✦✧✜★
❇❜✒✔✚✫❜
✒✔✜✜✥
✣✧✜❜✙
✛✥✒✣❜✙
✰✦❜✛❜
❧✖✪➅➈
✔✕✥✥✜
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
✏✑✒✡✒
❝▲▼♥◆❖
✑✎❴✏✡☞✒✡
q①②③④⑤⑥
✑✎✑✟✑
✏✡✞✌✡❴✟✑✍✎
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
❋✕✗✘✙✚
❋✕✗✘✙
✘✙✣✘✙
✜✢✦✫✧✙✘
✢✜✪✙✦
✙✣✩✙✩
✙✣✩✙✩
★✴✗✛✣✩✙
✜✢✦✫✧✙✘
✢✜✪✙✦
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
✥☞✑☞✡✔
✑☞✖✌✎✔✞
✕✔✕☞✞✌
✖✔✎✞✖✎
✑☞✖✌✎✔✞
✥☞✞✖☞
✕✟✎✞✌
✑✔✌✟✌✎✔✞
✑✔✍✓✖☞✍
✳✓✑✡✟✖☞
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✲✸✲✻✼✽
❁✻✵✒✺
✲✒✻✲❀
✒✲✸✺✻✲
s✳✵❍❍
➌➍➎➏➐➑➐➌➒
➙➛➜➝➞
➤➧➨➩➜➢➫
➙➛➜➝➞
➨➩➜➢➫
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
✥✠✡☛✡
✓✔☛✕✡✖
✗✙✙✔☛✑✚
✑✡☛✍✌✒
✔✕✪✥✩
❍✡✍✕✡✮
✖✦✗✌☛✡
✕✕✡✒✌
✕✕✡✒✌
✩✍✘✟✚
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
❈✒✓✔✕✖✗
✺✷✱✱❄
✼✱✷✺✸
✱✹✳✸✺✾
★✱✺✿✱✱✹
❋●❡❍■
❏❑▲❖P
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
☞✡☞✠✌
☛☞✎✎❡
❝❡✡✓✣
☞✖❡✎✏✌✘
❡✍✓♠✑✏
✗❡✠❡✖
✒☞✡✌☞✠
✘❡✡✌✏❡
✎✠☞✍✖❡
☞✡❡☞✔
✭✢✏✌✖✏
❛✌✍✖❡
✓♠✡✎✣
✡✡❡✎✘
✎❡✖✓✍✗
✎☛☞✔✔
✕✓✡✖❡✎
✔☞✡✑❡
✎❡✖✓✍
❡t ♠✌
✡❡t ♠✌
✡❡☛❡✍
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
♠✖✗✘✙✳
✣✤✥✦✧✤
✦✚✦✚✭
✱✲✥✴✦✴❡
★✚✭❡✱
✷★✩✢✤✥✸
❡★✱❡✱✸
❡★✱❡✱
❡★✱❡✱
✦✚✩✥❡★✱❡✱
✦✚✩✥❡★✱❡✱
✪★✱✱❡✱
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
✙♦r❝❡
✼✾✿❀❁
➌✍✎➍✞
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✙✚✑✑✛
✜✢✣✤✢
✑✦✧✑✒✘✣✤
✘✘✑✙✚✦✔✛
✬✳✵✻✾
✘✘✑✙✚
✔✙✑✘❳
✑✘✣✕✑✑
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
✦✧★✩✤
❍✮✯✰✮
✵✯✼✿✮
✼✵✲✮❂
❩❬❭❪❫❴❵
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✧✔✦✜✔
✤✔✙✚✕
✧✔✦✜✔
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
✌✕✔☛✥
✑✌✥✔✍
✘☛✥✔✘✥✔✘✌
✗✑✏☛☛
✍✏✘✔✕
✳✏✘☛✍✜
✘✏✑✖✔✕
☞✌✔✑✍
✳✏✘☛✍✜
☛✥✔✘✗✌
✘☛✍✏✘☛
✜✍☛✥✔✘
✍✘✗✑✌
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
②③④⑤⑥⑦②⑧
⑨⑩⑤③❶⑦②⑧
➇➈➉➋➇
= 250 ×10 ×
✳✩✪✴✪µ
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
✎✏✑✒✡✓✔✡
✡✙✡✏☛
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✯✰✲✳✪
❂✘✯❃✫✪
✧✘✲✳❂
✯✩★✲✳✬✺❄
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
❘✞✟✠✡
✌✠✎✎✞✎
✟✞☛✎✡
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
❝♦s ✭
❈❃❄❅❇❉❋
✗✳✺★✲
✈✩✸✦✬
✼✦✩✻✳
❡❢❤❥❧
✹✦✲✸✲✼
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
✇✞✟✠✟ρ
✌✟✍☛✥
✖✓✎✗✘✙
✈✜✢✢✜
✡✦✧✜★
✔☛☞✟✌
✌✟✍☛✥
✚✞✟✍ρ
✑✗✗✟✓✟✠✑☞✥✎
✎✠✗✟☛
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✢❝❝✓✣
✦✓✤✥✣
✽✾✽✽✿
▼◆❖✾❖
⑧⑨⑩❶❷❶
✤✤✥✦✓
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
✡✑✗✏✕
s ✏✗✔
♣✦❞♣✳
✡✌✗✏✎
P ✮✚✎
✏✡✑✔✒
❉❊❋❇❋
✍s ☞✔✒✏✑
✗✡s ✏
✎✍s ✔
✡✌✗✏s
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✤✥✦✧r ✤★
r ✤✥✦✧r ✤★
❚✛✬★✧
✜r ✛✯
✛✪✪✦✱
✖r✛✦✬✰
✖✱✛✦r
✛✪✪✦✱
✖✱✛✦r
✛✪✪✦✱
✛✪✪✦✱
✛✪✪✦✱
❹× ❷❺
✣✖✬✪✤
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
✳✍✌✹✽
✗✘✙✗✚✛
t❀❁❁❂❂
❂✡✯✼✾✞
❻❼❻❽❾❾
➃➄➅➃➆
➏➐➏➑➒➒
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
❈✒✓✔✕✖✗
✯✰✮✱✲✳
❪❫❴❵❛❜❡❴
❢❣❤❥❦
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
❘✓✔✓✕
✓✓❤✓✛✸
✩✩✜✦✣
✓✖✥✓✓✦
✔✕✓✓❤
✕✛✜✦✣
✧✦✛✜✦✣
❜r ❇s s
❿➀➁➂➃
➄➅➆➇➅➈
➔→➔➔↕
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✐r ♦♥
✲✹✹✴✾
✼✹✹✴✾
❙✤✖✚✛✛
✛✤✖✦✣✘
➀➁➂➃➄
✣✛✤✦✘
✣✘✚✦✖
✜✚✘➋✤
➼➽➾➚➚
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
✮☛✡☞✟❛
❛❛✪★✟
✮✟✡☛✠
✟★✩✟✡☛✞
❱❲❳❨❩❬❭
✳✟❛❛✱
✳✬✫✡☞
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✸✹✹✹✺
✣✘✙✙✧
✘✣✥✖✩
✘✣✘✕✜
✣✘✙✙✩✣✘
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
❙✻✽✻✾
❙✻✽✻✾
❙✻✽✻✾
➅➆➇➇✾✻
➆✿✻✈➈
➜➝➝➞➟➞
➼➽➽➾➚
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
❙✢✣✤✦
✪✫✬✯✦
❙✢✣✤✦
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✇✔✕✖✕
✴✦✧★✤✛
✪✫✬✯✱✲✳
❀❁❁❂❃
❀❁❁❂❃
❘▼▲❯❨
❀❁❁❂❃
❘▼▲❯❨
❲❑▼❨❳❳❴
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
❈✞✟✟✠
✍✎✏✑✒✓✔✕
✒✛✑✕✜✢
✍✛❣✧✣
❈✞✟✟✠
✪✌✑✕❣
✍✛❣✧✘
✛✍✍✫✔✮
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
q s✉✉
❸❹❺❺❻❼❽❾
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
✈✕✖✘✥
✈✕✖✘✥
✈✕✖✘✥
☞✇✕✘✴
✈✕✖✘✥
❡★✗❡✚
❡✢✥✕✖
✗☞★★✕
✙✴☞✴❡✫
✴✘☞✴✧✕
❡★❡✢✩
★✴❡✢★☞✖
✗✗✘✦✧
rs t✉①
✛✢❡❡✫✕✥
✛✢❡❡✫✕✥
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✜✙✛✢✢
✤✘✢✚★
✜✙✛✢✢
✜✙✛✢✢
✤✘✢✚★
✣r✘✛✦
✗✘♦★✘
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
✠✡✵✵✮
✠✻✵✵✮
✠✽✵✵✮
✺✕✖✗✘✙
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✗✓✒✘✙
✧✔✣✔✓✗★✓✢
★✖✪✪✥★✖
❝✚✗✘✙
✖★★✖✕
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
❡✟✡✓✑✒
✞✟✡✕✖
❡✙❡✚✡✙❡✛
❈✪✫✬✭✮✯
❡✙✞✒✑✡✕
✑✙❡✓✒
▼✙✡▼✡✙✒✑✡✕
❡◆❡✕✒
✞✓❡◆❡✕✒
✑✕θ ≅θ
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✷✪✯✭✫
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
= −° ∴
✬✌✍✌✯
✬✌✍✌✯
✒✓✔✕✒
✖✑✒❳✕
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
❈✗✘✙✚✛✜✢
✜✘★✣✤
✭✢✥❇❉
✤✭✘★✜
❈✤✭✘★✜
❈✤✭✘★✜
❈✤✭✘★✜
✜✢✜✘✣
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
✥✦✦✧★
✱✩✫✲✬✪✳
✥✐✐✰❂
✐✧✦✭✮✯
✭✦✬✪✳
✦✰★✫✩
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✘✖✩✪✙
✚✖✛✔✙
✘✖✛✔✙
❆  ✁✂✄☎✁
❈✞✟✠✡☛☞
✲★✯✣✪
✲★✯✣✪
❘■❙❯❱
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✦✥✜✤✥
✥✛❋✗●
✣✘✤✥✦
✫✥✜✪■✜✢
✦■✜❍✘
✜✥✦■❧✗
❋✘✦✥✦
P ❍ ✁✂✄
❈▲☎✁✁
❚■✝✞✿
▼❆❘☞✡✿
✓✏✔✕✓✑
✗✐✜✜✑✖
✔✑✛✔✪✘
✔✏✑♦✖✺
✒✕✤✑✘
❛✏♦✖✔
✇①②③④⑤
⑧⑨⑩❶❷
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✗✘✙✚✛✜
✩✣✚✪✙✕
✗✘✙✚✜✛
✩✣✚✪✙✕
❡✩✱✱✬
✰✘✙✚✜✛
✯✢✕✕✙✯✜
❡✯★✙✤
✲★✙✕✙
✯✘✮✜✥
✙✳✙✮✚
✗✘✙✚✜✛
✽✾✿❀❁❂✿
❀❅❅❀❆❇❋✿
❉✛❙❙✛
❙✂✄☎✆✝
✠✡☛☞✌
✍✂☎✝✎✠
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✔✚✛✙✜✢✓
✦✧★✩✪✫✬✮
✱✲✧✥✩
❚✷★✯★
✦✧★✩✪✫✬✮
✦✧★✩✪✫✬✮
✦✧★✩✪✫✬✮✩
✰✣✯✯✳
❡✬❝★❄★✯
❄✫❂★❂
✪✷✯★★
✰✷✬✫✰★
✦✧★✩✪✫✬
✫✪✪★❂
❝✷★✯★❄★✯
★✮✪✧✱
✪✣✽★✮
❃✧✮❂✣✱
★✮✪✣✥
✪✫✪✫★
✬✰✫✪✳
★✦✧✣✥
✪✣✮✪✣✮★✬✧✩
✬✰✫✪✳
✱✬✪✫✬✮
✱✣♦✮✫✪✧❂★
★✯✣✪✫✬✮
✯✫✰✪✫✬✮
✯★✩✧✥
✽✫✮★✪✫✰
✽✫✮★✪✫✰
★✮★✯♦✳
✲✬✪★✮✪✫✣✥
✈✇①②③④
⑤✇②④⑥
⑧⑨⑩❶❷⑩
❙✂✄☎✆✝
✠✡☛☞✌
✍✂☎✝✎✠
✓✗✚✖✥
✥✗✢✜✗
✮✗✘✤✏
✷✏✸✏✹
✙✑✗✥✗
✢✗✓✔✚
✗✥✛✤✵
✗✜✥✗✢✗✚✖
✙✑✗✥✗
✢✬✜✗✥
■❝❛❧❏❣❏
✪✬✓✣✗✖
✕✔✘✘✔
✗✒✛✑✖✢
❴θ ❩★
✜✥✗✢✢✒
③④④③⑤
⑥⑦⑧⑨⑩⑨
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✚✛✜✢✣
✣✧✦✦✪
✩✥❡❡✮
✣✧✤✜❡✣
✩❡❡★❣
✩✪✩✣❡✱
✣✧✰❡★
❡✮✛✧✣❡
✿❡✩✩✙
✚✦✧✩✰
✥❡✤✧✣
✩✥❡❡✮
✘❍✙❍✭❏
❡✿✭✦✧✤
✳✵✙❍✭✙
✩✥❡❡✮
✩✥❡❡✮
❜✛✱✭✱
✜✦❡θ❣
✿✫❡✚✚
❡✣✲❡❡★
✫✲✛★✜❇
✿✧✣✿✢✙
✥✧✩✩❡★
✱✧✜★✛
❡★✜❡✤✩❣
✫✭★✮✛★✜
✫✭★✮✛★
✦✧✣✚✫
✚✧✿❡✙
✥✦✛❡✩
❙✂✄☎✆✝
✠✡☛☞✌
✍✂☎✝✎✠
✜✤❛✏✚
✓✱✛❛✤✗
✙✤✗✙✏
✙✤❛✤✗✏
❛✏✪✛✖
✏✗✤✗❛
✓✜✜✗✙✏
✗✏✓✤✗✚
✕✙✤✓✏✤✗
✓✏✓✔✪✢
✜❛✤✓✖✖
✖✚✛✖❛✤
✖✖✗✤✓
✤✔❛✏✜✘✓
✓✜✜✛✔
✚✔✓❛✜✓✑
✗✪✓✔❛✤✙
✕✓✔❛✤
✓✕✙✜✗✤✜
❛✏✗✚❛✖
✕✙✣✓✔
✕✓✔✘✓
✔❛✤✓✜
✖✙✙✕✜
✓✱✛✓✏
❉✓✘✗✏✓
✚✙✓✘✘✗
✗✜✚✙✜✗✤✢
✣✔✗✤✓
❉✓✘✗✏✓
✕✔✓✜✜✗✙✏
✖✖✗✏✪
✔✓✜✜✲✜✤
✜✤❛✤✓
✔✔✓✜✕✙✏
✕✙✗✏✤
✓✪✗✙✏✜
✔✓✜✜✲
❉✓✜✚✔
❛✕✕✓✏
✔✔✓✜✕✙✏
❤❥♥♣qq
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✘✙✚✛✜✖✔r
✚✔✛✗✖
✔✚✕✛r
✖✔★✙✕✙
✻✗✕✖★✔✕✙
✥✜✔✕✕✙
✕✔✚✕✱
✻✗✕✖★
✗✗✛★✙
✤✧✜✙θ
✙✥✥✙✚✕✖
✗✘✙✚✕✔✕
❃✣✤✕✔✜
✔✤✧✙✒
✖★✖✗✙
✚✚✙✜✙r
✖✗✘✜✔
✗✗✦✗✙
✙✚✛✕✙
❙✂✄☎✆✝
✠✡☛☞✌
✍✂☎✝✎✠
✔✕✕✖✗✔
✔✚✛✔✜
✦✧★★πt✲★✩✪π
✖✛✯✜✔
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
❙❆✒✓✔✕
✥❆✓✕✖
❘▼❍❏❑
❙✁✂✄☎✆
✟✠✡☛☞
✌✁✄✆✍✟
❾❿➀➁➂
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✭✘✙✚✚✛
➛⑥❽⑧❽
❾⑧❶⑨④
❙✂✄☎✆✝
✠✡☛☞✌
✍✂☎✝✎✠
✔✕✖✗✘✙✚✛
★✕✢✗✕✙
✛✪✫✫✕✙
✖✘♠✕✙
✗✢✗✕♠✕✙✗
✣✣✤✏✤
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✴t✖✓✴✴
✱✴✸♦✴✱t
♦✖✖✓✴
t✖✓✴✴
❙✂✄☎✆✝
✠✡☛☞✌
✍✂☎✝✎✠
✖✓✲✕✯
❫❴❫❴❫❴✑
❐❒❮❰ÏÐÑÒ
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✔✕✕✖✗
✬✘✒✬✒✘✙✚✒
✣✚✫✬✗
✬✔✘✙✚✕✗✖
✢✗✒✕✱
✬✘✖✫✫✖✣
✲✖✘✙✚✕✔✗
✚✫✬✗✔✕
✖✳✦✚✗✚
✖✳✦✚✗✚
✜✒✘✕✖
✣✚✫✬✗✔✕✖✣
✘✙✭✖✘
✣✚✫✬✗✔✕✖✮✖✛
✜✒✘✕✖
✜✒✘✕✖
✬✘✒✬✒✘✙✚✒
❙✂✄☎✆✝
✠✡☛☞✌
✍✂☎✝✎✠
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
❚✜✢✚✚
★✩✢✬✧
✴✵✷✸✹✺✻✼✸
✾✿✵✳✸
✴✵✷✸✹✺✻
✴✵✷✸✹✺✻
✴✵✷✸✹✺✻
✻✺✽✷❁
✰✹✻❛✸
✳✺✴✵✺
✵✼✺✹❀
✼✸✹✰✼✹
✷✹✷❛✸
▼✰✳✳✺✼
✼✸✹✰✼
✰✾✻✵✼
✶   ❙✁✂✄☎✆
✟✠✡☛☞
✌✁✄✆✍✟
❲✢✣✤✢
✩✥✪✣✫✬
✲✱✣✤✯✩
✣✽★✫✱
✽✥✽★✫
✫✱✧✯✫
✴✫✵★✰
✣✦✦★✰★
✤★✱✱★✱
✣✧✣✯✩
✱✧✯✧★
✤★✱✱★✱
✥✧✢★✰
✪✯✰✽★✰
✤✥❤★✰
✱✢✥✪✫
✵✣✦✦★✰★✫
❤✯✩✴★✱
✮✰★✱✱
✰★✩✯✧✣✥
★✧✪★★✫
❫❴❵❛❜
❞❣✐❥❝
✰★✽✯✣
✦✩✴✣✵
✦✩✴✣✵
✰★✽✯✣
r✧✯✧★
s★✪✧✥
✱★✰❤✯✧
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✓✔✕✖✗
✪❛✘✫✥✬
✣✖✪✪✳
✮✘✭✪✣
✪❛❛✥✖✬
❙✂✄☎✆✝
✠✡☛☞✌
✍✂☎✝✎✠
✩✗✔✗✘✗✜✖
✪✒✗✙✒
✓✥✓✖✣
✔✓✘✘✓
✓✥✦✓✕
✣✒✓✗✕
✘✦✓✓✩
✓✚✕✣✒
✚✖✤✓✘
✖✚✖✙✓
✜✰✘✓✕
✚✖✘✪✓✕
✸❏✦✓✓
✦✕✜✦✜
✣✓✥✦✓✕✚✣
◆✰✣✚✗✖
✓✱✦✕✓✘✘✗✜
✚✙✙✓✛✓✕
✕✢✚✙✓
✪✒✓✕✓
✚✙✙✓✛✓✕
✕✗✔✓✕
✘✪✗✥✥✓✕
✘✪✗✥✥✗
✛✣✚✖✣
✘✣✚✕✣
✜✦✦✜✘✗
✦✜✗✖✣
✘✪✗✥❄
✘✦✓✓✩❄
✢✢✓✕✓✖
✦✦✜✘✗✣
✖✩✕✜✦
✢✢✓✕✓
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✚✛✜✢✙
✣✘✜✢✤✣✢
✛★✢✙✜✧
✘✜✥✛★★
✢✤✕✥✛
✕✛✤✦✙✜✧
✜✙✢✙✤✥✥
✘✥✥✙★✙✘✜
✛✥✤★✢✙
✪✘✥✥✘
✘★★✙✕✥✛
✤✪✢✛✦
✘✥✥✙★✙
✛✤★✙✛✦
P❲❘❙❯
✚✙✤✧✦✤
✛✜★✙✘✜★
✭✚✙✦✛
✤✧✜✙✢
✤✣✢✙✜✧
❙✂✄☎✆✝
✠✡☛☞✌
✍✂☎✝✎✠
✢✣✛✤✦✙✓
✖✧✗★✘✗✩✒
✜✥✧✗✘✗
✜✥✧✗✘✗
✵✧✗✘✗
✜✥✧✗✘✗
✓✣✛✦✜
✜✥✧✗✘✗
✓✣✣✗✘
✘✛✤✖✛★
✦✥✥✗✘
✘✓✤✖✛
✤✘✗✓✜
✦✥✥✗✘
✤✛✥✙✗
✗✚✥✘✗✜✜✛★
✜★✦✢✣
✜★✦✘✤✗
✜★✦✢✣
✜✖✗✢✗✘
✗✤✖✛★
✗✚✥✘✗
✥✗✘✛★
✦✙✦✩✜
✵✧✛✤✧
✢✣✦✙✦
✗✚✖✘✗
★✖✧✗✘
✢✣✦✙✦
✗✚✖✘✗
✢✣✦✙✦
✗✚✥✘✗✜✜
✗✚✥✘✗✜✜
✩✓✚✛✩
✘★✦✢✣
✘✗✤★✛
✗✙★✤✛✖♠
✤✤✗✙✗✘✓✖✛★
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✴✵✼✬✽
✬✾✿✬✬✲
✴❀❁✬✱✼
✬❅✬✲✾
✱❀✲✼❇
✼✼✰✵✲
❬❬❭❪❫
❬❬❭❪❫
❣❤❭✐❪❫
❙✂✄☎✆✝
✠✡☛☞✌
✍✂☎✝✎✠
✖✗✘✙✘
✒✙✢✣✤
✒✙✢✣✤✥✦
✘✤✩✛✱
✒✙✢✣✤
✬✒★✯✘
⑥❷❸❹❺❻
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✶✸✹✺✺✻
✣✩✪✧✣
❙✂✄☎✆✝
✠✡☛☞✌
✍✂☎✝✎✠
✒✓✔✕✑
✗✚✛✜✑ α
✕✔✗✒✤
✣✒✒✑✔✑✚
✣✒✒✑✔
✒✗✕✑✙
❜❝❡❢❤
✔✑❳✑✔
✑✚✛✣✚✑
⑥⑦⑧⑨⑩❶
⑥❹❺❻❶❼
❊ ✁✂✄☎✆✝
✟✠☎✁✂✡☛✞☞✌✡✍✎✡
✜✣✤✜✥
✩✫✬✮✯✪✯✥
= −° ∴
✜✣✤✜✥
