2015-16(19/01/2015)
First Edition
February 2008  Magha 1929
Reprinted
February 2009   Magha 1930
January 2010   Pausa 1931
January 2011   Magha 1932
January 2012   Magha 1933
November 2012   Kartika 1934
November 2013   Kartika 1935
November 2014   Agrahayana 1936
PD  480T  MJ
©	National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2008
` 45.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training, Sri
Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and
printed at Om Enterprises, D-75.  Sector
63, Noida (UP).
ISBN 978-81-7450-816-4
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
p	 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior
permission of the publisher.
p	 This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of
trade,  be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without
the publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than
that in which it is published.
p	 The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page,
Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by
any other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.
Publication Team
Head, Publication
:	 N. K. Gupta
Division
Chief Production
:	 Kalyan Banerjee
Officer
Chief Editor
:	 Shveta Uppal
Chief Business
:	 Gautam Ganguly
Manager
Production Assistant
:	 Sunil Kumar
Cover, Layout and Illustrations
Blue Fish
Cartography
Cartographic Designs Agency
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bangalore 560 085
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021	Phone :  0361-2674869
2015-16(19/01/2015)
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that
children’s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This
principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning which
continues to shape our  system and causes a gap between the school,
home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of
NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt to
discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between
different subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantly
further in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined in
the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals
and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning
and to  pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise
that, given space, time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by
engaging with the information passed on to them by adults. Treating the
prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons
why other resources and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity
and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as participants in
learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual  calendar so that the required number of teaching
days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and
evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making
children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or
boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of curricular
burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with
greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching.
The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority
and  space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in
small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committee
responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory
committee for textbooks in Social Sciences, at the upper primary level,
Professor Hari Vasudevan and the Chief Advisor for this book, Vibha
Parthasarathi, for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers
FOREWORD
2015-16(19/01/2015)
contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their
principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions
and organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon their
resources, material and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members
of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of
Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development
under the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor
G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. As an organisation
committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality of
its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable
us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi
National Council of Educational
30 November 2007
Research and Training
2015-16(19/01/2015)
TEXTBOOK
DEVELOPMENT
COMMITTEE
Chairperson, Advisory Committee for Textbooks in Social Sciences at
the Upper Primary Level
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Calcutta,
Kolkata
Chief Advisor
Vibha Parthasarathi, Principal (Retd.), Sardar Patel Vidyalaya, New Delhi
Members
Anindita Datta, Lecturer, Delhi School of Economics, University of Delhi,
Delhi
Anshu, Reader, Kirorimal College, University of Delhi, Delhi
Aparna Pandey, Lecturer, DESSH, NCERT, New Delhi
Bhagirathy Jhingran, TGT, Pathways World School, Gurgaon
Meera Hoon, TGT, Modern School, Barakhamba Road, New Delhi
Punam Behari, Vice Principal, Miranda House, University of Delhi, Delhi
Samita Dasgupta, PGT, Anandalaya, Anand, Gujarat
Srinivasan K., TGT, Mallya Aditi International School, Bangalore
Syamala Srivatsa, TGT, Sardar Patel Vidyalaya, New Delhi
Member-coordinator
Tannu Malik, Lecturer, Department of Education in Social Sciences and
Humanities, NCERT, New Delhi
2015-16(19/01/2015)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges
the contributions of Pramila Kumar, Professor (Retd), Bhopal and Shipra
Nair, Darjiling in the development of this textbook.
Acknowledgements are also due to Savita Sinha, Professor and Head,
Department of Education in Social Sciences and Humanities, NCERT, for
her valuable support at every stage of preparation of this textbook.
The Council is also grateful to the individuals and organisations as
listed below for providing various photographs, illustrations and activities
used in this textbook: Anshu, Reader, Kirorimal College, Delhi for
Figs. 2.5, 2.15 and 4.14; Srinivasan K., TGT, Mallya Aditi International
School, Bangalore for Fig. 3.7 and a picture of varieties of maize on page
45; Krishan Sheoran from Austria for Fig. 2.1; Mohammad Aslam, Learning
Touch, New Delhi for Fig. 4.4; Ashish Chhatwal from Rajouri Garden,
New Delhi for Fig. 3.8; R.C. Das, CIET, NCERT for Figs. 2.8, 2.10 and picture
of bamboo on page 50; Nimisha Kapoor for the photographs of the windmill,
children and the potter on the cover; Blue Fish for Figs. 1.1, 5.11 and a
picture of a notebook on page 50; National Disaster Management Division,
Ministry of Home Affairs for pictures of retention wall, Union Carbide Factory
and rescue operation in Gao Qiao on page 12, 53 and 54 respectively;
Department of Industry, Government of Bihar for Figs. 4.5, 4.6, 4.13 and 5.1;
Directorate of Extension, Ministry of Agriculture, I.A.R.I Campus, New Pusa,
New Delhi for Figs. 2.9, 4.9, 4.10, 4.11 and 4.14; Ministry of Environment
and Forests, Government of India for Figs. 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 2.16,
2.17, 2.18 and 2.19 and a picture of a vulture on page 18; Ministry of Coal,
Government of India for Figs. 3.1 and 3.12; Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy, Government of India for Fig. 3.17; COMFED, Patna for Fig. 5.2;
Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity, Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting for Figs. 3.9, 3.15 and 3.18; Oil and Natural Gas Corporation
Limited for Figs. 3.4 and 3.13; ITDC/Ministry of Tourism, Government of
India for Fig. 3.11; Social Science Textbook for Class VIII, Part II (NCERT,
2005) for Figs. 2.6, 2.7, 4.7, 4.8, 4.12, 4.16, 4.17, 4.18 and a picture of
landslide on page 12; The Times of India, Hindustan Times and Indian
Express for news in a collage on page 20; Arvind Gupta, IUCAA, Pune for an
activity of solar worker on page 34 and Kushal Sharma, Reader, Kirorimal
College, New Delhi for a case study of landslide on page12.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contribution of Uttam
Kumar, Anil Sharma and Moqaddas Azam, DTP Operators; Ajay Singh,
Satish Jha, Copy Editors and Dinesh Kumar, Incharge, Computer Station
who have helped in giving a final shape to this textbook. The contribution of
the Publication Department, NCERT is also duly acknowledged.
2015-16(19/01/2015)
CONTENTS
Foreword
Chapter 1
1 – 8
Resources
Chapter 2
9 – 23
Land, Soil, Water, Natural Vegetation
and Wildlife Resources
Chapter 3
24 – 39
Mineral and Power Resources
Chapter 4
40 – 49
Agriculture
Chapter 5
50 – 65
Industries
Chapter 6
66 – 75
Human Resources
2015-16(19/01/2015)
2015-16(19/01/2015)
Mona and Raju were helping Amma to clean their house.
“Look at all these things…. clothes, utensils, foodgrains,
combs, this bottle of honey, books…..Each of these has a
use,” said Mona. “That is why they are important,” said
Amma. “These are resources…..”. “What is a resource?”
was Raju’s question to Amma. “Anything that can be used
to satisfy a need is a resource”, replied amma. “Look around
you and observe, you will be able to identify many types of
resources. The water you drink when you are thirsty, the
electricity you use in your house, the rickshaw you use to
get home from school, the textbook you use to study are all
resources. Your father has prepared a tasty snack for you.
The fresh vegetables he has used are also a resource”.
Water, electricity, rickshaw, vegetable and textbook
have something in common. They have all been used by
you, so they have utility. Utility or usability is what makes
an object or substance a resource.
“How does something become a resource?” Raju now
wanted to know. Amma told the children that things become
resources only when they have a value. “Its use or utility gives
it a value. All resources have some value.” said Amma.
Value means worth. Some resources have economic
value, some do not. For example, metals may have an
economic value, a beautiful landscape may not. But both
are important and satisfy human needs.
Some resources can become economically valuable
with time. Your grandmother’s home remedies have no
commercial value today. But if they are patented and sold by
a medical firm tomorrow, they could become economically
valuable.
Resources
Glossary
Patent: It means
the exclusive right
over any idea or
invention.
Let’s do
List out five
resources you use
in your home and
five you use in
your classroom.
© NCERT
not to be republished
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
Time and technology are two important factors that
can change substances into resources. Both are related
to the needs of the people. People themselves are the
most important resource. It is their ideas, knowledge,
inventions and discoveries that lead to the creation of
more resources. Each discovery or invention leads to many
others. The discovery of fire led to the practice of cooking
and other processes while the invention of the wheel
ultimately resulted in development of
newer modes of transport. The technology
to create hydroelectricity
has turned energy in fast
flowing water into an
important resource.
TYPES OF RESOURCES
Resources are generally classified into
natural, human made and human.
Natural Resources
Resources that are drawn from Nature and used without
much modification are called natural resources. The
air we breathe, the water in our rivers and lakes, the
soils, minerals are all natural resources. Many of these
resources are free gifts of nature and can be used
directly. In some cases tools and technology may be
needed to use a natural resource in the best possible
Natural resources are classified into different groups
depending upon their level of development and use;
origin; stock and distribution.
On the basis of their development and use resources
can be classified into two groups, actual resources and
potential resources.
Actual resources are those resources whose quantity
is known. These resources are being used in the present.
The rich deposits of coal in Ruhr region of Germany and
petroleum in the West Asia, the dark soils of the Deccan
plateau in Maharashtra are all actual resources.
Potential resources are those whose entire quantity
may not be known and these are not being used at
“So I am a
resource too!”
“A very
valuable one!”
Amma’s List
Cotton cloth
Iron ore
Intelligence
Medicinal plants
Medical knowledge
Coal deposits
Agricultural land
Clean environment
Old folk songs
Good weather
Resourcefulness
A good singing voice
Grandmother’s
home remedies
Affection from
friends and family
Beautiful scenery
Activity
Circle those
resources from
Amma’s list that
have no commercial
value as yet.
Glossary
Technology: It is
the application of
latest knowledge
and skill in doing
or making things.
© NCERT
not to be republished
RESOURCES
present. These resources could be used in the future.
The level of technology we have at present may not be
advanced enough to easily utilise these resources. The
uranium found in Ladakh is an example of potential
resource that could be used in the future. High speed
winds were a potential resource two hundred
years ago. Today they are an actual resource and
wind farms generate energy using windmills like
in Netherlands. You will find some in Nagercoil in
Tamil Nadu and on the Gujarat coast.
Based on their origin, resources can be
abiotic or biotic. Abiotic resources are non-living
while biotic resources are living. Soils, rocks and
minerals are abiotic but plants and animals are
biotic resources.
Natural resources can be broadly categorised into
renewable and non-renewable resources.
Renewable resources are those which get renewed or
replenished quickly. Some of these are unlimited and are
not affected by human activities, such as solar and wind
energy. Yet careless use of certain renewable resources
like water, soil and forest can affect their stock. Water
seems to be an unlimited renewable resource. But
shortage and drying up of natural water sources is a
major problem in many parts of the world today.
Non-renewable resources are those which have a
limited stock. Once the stocks are exhausted it may
take thousands of years to be renewed or replenished.
Since this period is much more than human life spans,
such resources are considered non-renewable. Coal,
petroleum and natural gas are some examples.
On the basis of their distribution resources can be
ubiquitous or localised.  Resources that are found
everywhere like the air we breathe, are ubiquitous.
But those which are found only in certain places are
localised, like copper and iron ore.
The distribution of natural resources depends
upon number of physical factors like terrain, climate
and altitude. The distribution of resources is unequal
because these factors differ so much over the earth.
Fig. 1.1: Windmills
Glossary
Stock of Resource
It is the amount of
resources available
for use.
Let’s do
Think of a few
renewable resources
and mention how
their stock may get
affected by overuse.
© NCERT
not to be republished
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
Human Made Resources
Sometimes, natural substances become resources only
when their original form has been changed. Iron ore
was not a resource until people learnt to extract iron
from it. People use natural resources to make buildings,
bridges, roads, machinery and vehicles, which are
known as human made resources. Technology is also
a human made resource.
“So people like us use natural resources to make human
made resources,” said Mona nodding in understanding.
“Yes,” said Raju.
Human Resources
People can make the best use of nature to create more
resources when they have the knowledge, skill and
the technology to do so. That is why human beings
are a special resource. People are human resources.
Education and health help in making people a valuable
resource. Improving the quality of people’s skills so
that they are able to create more resources is known as
human resource development.
“…its all thanks
to the knowledge,
education and
skill… we could find
a solution…
that’s it!
“Crops ruined
due to
drought”.
“Can I find
a solution?”.
Let’s do
Make a list of
five human made
resources that you
can observe around
Do you know?
Human Resource
refer to the number
(quantity) and
abilities (mental
and physical)
of the people.
Though, there are
differing views
regarding treatment
of humans as
a resource, one
cannot deny the
fact that it is
the abilities of
human that help
in transfering the
physical material
into valuable
resource.
Read and Ponder: Humans are interdependent on
each other. Farmers provide food grains for every one.
Scientists suggest various means to combat problems
related to agriculture and improve farm production.
© NCERT
not to be republished
RESOURCES
CONSERVING RESOURCES
Mona had a nightmare. She
dreamt that all the water on
the earth had dried up and all
the trees cut down. There was
no shade and nothing to eat or
drink. People were suffering and
roaming
around
desperately
looking for food and shade.
She told her mother about
the dream. “Amma can this really
happen?” she asked.
“Yes,”
replied.
are not careful then even renewable
resources can become very scarce and the
non- renewable ones can definitely get exhausted”. “What
can we do about it,” Raju asked. “Lots,” replied Amma.
Using resources carefully and giving them time to
get renewed is called resource conservation. Balancing
the need to use resources and also conserve them for
the future is called sustainable development. There
are many ways of conserving resources. Each person
can contribute by reducing consumption, recycling and
reusing thing. Ultimately it makes a difference because
all our lives are linked.
That evening the children and their friends made
packets and shopping bags out of old
newspapers, discarded clothes and baskets
from bamboo sticks. “We will give a few to every
family we know,” said Mona. “After all it is for
a very good cause,” said Mustafa, “To save our
resources and to keep our earth alive”.
“I am going to be very careful not to waste
paper,” said Jessy. “Many trees are cut down
to make paper,” she explained.
“I will see that electricity is not wasted in
my house,” shouted Mustafa. “Electricity comes
from water and coal.”
Glossary
Sustainable
Development
Carefully utilising
resources so that
besides meeting
the requirements
of the present, also
takes care of future
generations.
© NCERT
not to be republished
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
“I will make sure that water is not wasted at home,”
said Asha. “Every drop of water is precious”
“Together we can make a difference!” chorused the
children.
These are some of the things Mona, Raju and their
friends did. What about you? How are you going to help
in conserving resources?
The future of our planet and its people is linked with
our ability to maintain and preserve the life support
system that nature provides. Therefore it is our duty to
ensure that.
• all uses of renewable resources are sustainable
• the diversity of life on the earth is conserved
• the damage to natural environmental system is
minimised.
Exercises
1. Answer the following questions.
(i) Why are resources distributed unequally over the earth?
(ii) What is resource conservation?
(iii) Why are human resources important?
(iv) What is sustainable development?
2. Tick the correct answer.
(i) Which one of the following does NOT make substance a resource?
(a) utility
(b) value
(c) quantity
(ii) Which one of the following is a human made resource?
(a) medicines to treat cancer
(b) spring water
(c) tropical forests
(iii) Complete the statement.
Biotic resources are
(a) derived from living things
(b) made by human beings
(c) derived from non-living things
3. Differentiate between the followings.
(a) Potential and actual resources
(b) Ubiquitous and localised resources
Some Principles of
Sustainable Development
Respect and care for all
forms of life
Improve the quality of
human life
Conserve the earth’s
vitality and diversity
Minimise the depletion
of natural resources
Change personal
attitude and practices
toward the environment
Enable communities
to care for their own
environment.
© NCERT
not to be republished
RESOURCES
4. Activity
“Rahiman paani raakhiye,
Bin paani sab soon.
Paani gaye na ubere
Moti, manus, choon…”
[Says Rahim, keep water, as without water there is nothing. Without water
pearl, swan and dough cannot exist. ]
These lines were written by the poet Abdur Rahim Khankhana, one of the
nine gems of Akbar’s court. What kind of resource is the poet referring to?
Write in 100 words what would happen if this resource disappeared?
For Fun
1. Pretend that you live in the prehistoric times on a high windy plateau. What
are the uses you and your friends could put the fast winds to? Can you call
the wind a resource?
Now imagine that you are living in the same place in the year 2138. Can
you put the winds to any use? How? Can you explain why the wind is an
important resource now?
2. Pick up a stone, a leaf, a paper straw and a twig. Think of how you can use
these as resources.  See the example given below and get creative!
To play stapu
As a paper-weight
To crush spices
To decorate your garden/room
decoration piece
To open a bottle
In a catapult
weapon
You can use a stone…
Use/Utility
You can use a leaf…
Use/Utility
© NCERT
not to be republished
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
You can use a straw…
Use/Utility
You can use a twig…
Use/Utility
© NCERT
not to be republished
In a small village in Tanzania, Africa, Mamba gets up
very early in the morning to fetch water. She has to walk
a long way and returns after a few hours. She then helps
her mother in the house and joins her brothers in taking
care of their goats.  All her family owns is a piece of rocky
land around their small hut. Mamba’s father can barely
grow some maize and beans on it after toiling hard. This
is not enough to feed their family for the whole year.
Peter lives in the heart of the sheep rearing region in
New Zealand where his family runs a wool processing
factory. Everyday when he returns from school, Peter
watches his uncle taking care of their sheep. Their sheep
yard is situated on a wide grassy plain with hills in the
far distance. It is managed in a scientific way using the
latest technology. Peter’s family also grows vegetables
through organic farming.
Mamba and Peter stay in two different parts of the
world and lead very different lives. This difference is
because of the differences in the quality of land, soil,
water, natural vegetation, animals and the usage of
technology. The availability of such resources is the
main reason places differ from each other.
Land is among the most important natural resources.
It covers only about thirty per cent of the total area of
the earth’s surface and all parts of this small percentage
are not habitable.
The uneven distribution of population in different
parts of the world is mainly due to varied characteristics
of land and climate. The rugged topography, steep slopes
of the mountains, low-lying areas susceptible to water
Let’s do
Observe the land,
type of soil and
water availability
in the region you
live. Discuss in
your class, how it
has influenced the
lifestyle of people
there.
Do you know?
Ninety per cent
of the world
population
occupies only
thirty per cent of
land area. The
remaining seventy
per cent of the
land is either
sparsely populated
or uninhabited.
Land,
Soil, Water,
Natural Vegetation
and Wildlife Resources
© NCERT
not to be republished
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
Study the above table and answer the following:
Name the countries having the highest percentage of land under
cropland, forest, pasture and other uses.
(ii) How would you relate the land use patterns of these countries
with the probable economic activities?
logging, desert areas, thick forested areas are normally
sparsely populated or uninhabited. Plains and river
valleys offer suitable land for agriculture. Hence, these
are the densely populated areas of the world.
LAND USE
Land is used for different purposes such as agriculture,
forestry, mining, building houses, roads and setting up of
industries. This is commonly
termed as Land use. Can you
list out the different ways in
which Mamba’s and Peter’s
family use their land?
determined
physical
factors such as topography,
soil, climate, minerals and
availability of water. Human
factors such as population
and technology are also
important determinants of
land use pattern.
Table 2.1 : Land use in selected countries
Countries
Percentage of area in
Cropland
Pasture
Forest
Other Use
Australia
Brazil
Canada
China
France
India
Japan
Russia
World
Notes
Fig. 2.1: Salzburg in Austria
Notice in how many ways  the land has been used in the
above picture.
© NCERT
not to be republished
LAND, SOIL, WATER, NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES
Land can also be divided on the basis of private
land and community land. Private land is owned by
individuals whereas, community land is owned by the
community for common uses like collection of fodder,
fruits, nuts or medicinal herbs. These community lands
are also called common property resources.
People and their demands are ever growing but
the availability of land is limited. The quality of land also
differs from place to place. People started encroaching
the common lands to build up commercial areas,
housing complexes in the urban areas and to expand
the agricultural land in the rural areas. Today the vast
changes in the land use pattern also reflect the cultural
changes in our society. Land degradation, landslides,
soil erosion, desertification are the major threats to the
environment because of the expansion of agriculture
and constructional activities.
CONSERVATION OF LAND RESOURCE
Growing population and their ever growing demand has
led to a large scale destruction of forest cover and  arable
land and has created a fear of losing this natural
Let’s do
Talk to some
elderly person
in your family or
neighbourhood and
collect information
about changes
in the land use
over years, where
you live. Display
your findings on a
bulletin board in
your classroom.
Fig. 2.2: Change in land use over time
© NCERT
not to be republished
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
resource. Therefore, the present rate of degradation of
land resources must be checked. Afforestation, land
reclamation, regulated use of chemical pesticide and
fertilisers and checks on overgrazing are some of the
common methods used to conserve land.
Landslides
Landslides are simply defined as the mass movement
of rock, debris or earth down a slope. They often take
place in conjunction with earthquakes, floods and
volcanoes. A prolonged spell of rainfall can cause
heavy landslide that can block the flow of river for
quite some time. The formation of river blocks can
cause havoc to the settlements downstream on its
bursting. In the hilly terrain landslides have been a
major and widely spread natural disaster that often
strike life and property and occupy a position of major
concern.
A Case Study
A massive landslide hit Pangi village near Reckong Peo in Kinnaur district of
Himachal Pradesh and damaged a 200-meter stretch of old Hindustan-Tibet
road, National Highway - 22. This landslide was triggered by intense blasting
at Pangi village. Due to the blasting this weak zone of slope collapsed and
caused intense damage to the road and nearby villages. The Pangi village was
completely vacated to avoid any possible loss of life.
Mitigation Mechanism
Advancement in scientific techniques has empowered us to understand what
factors cause landslides and how to manage them. Some broad mitigation
techniques of landslide are as follows:
Hazard mapping locate areas prone to
landslides. Hence, such areas can be avoided
for building settlements.
Construction of retention wall to stop land from
slipping.
Increase in the vegetation cover is an effective
way to arrest landslide.
The surface drainage control works are
implemented to control the movement of
landslide along with rain water and spring flows.
A Landslide
Retention Wall
© NCERT
not to be republished
LAND, SOIL, WATER, NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES
Do you know?
It takes hundreds
of years to make
just one centimetre
of soil.
Fig. 2.4: Factors affecting soil formation
Glossary
Weathering
The breaking
up and decay of
exposed rocks,
by temperature
changes, frost
action, plants,
animals and man.
The thin layer of grainy substance covering the surface
of the earth is called soil. It is closely linked to land.
Landforms determine the type of soil. Soil is made
up of organic matter, minerals and weathered rocks
found on the earth. This happens through the process
of weathering. The right mix of minerals and organic
matter make the soil fertile.
Fig. 2.3: Soil Profile
FACTORS OF SOIL FORMATION
The major factors of soil formation are the nature of the
parent rock and climatic factors. Other factors are the
topography, role of organic material and time taken for
the composition of soil formation. All these differ from
place to place.
Climate
Temperature,
Rainfall influence
rate of weathering
and humus
Determines thickness
of soil profile
Flora, Fauna and
Micro-organism
Affect the rate of humus
formation
Relief
Altitude and
slope, determine
accumulation
of soil
Parent Rock
Determines colour,
texture, chemical
properties
mineral, content,
permeability
Top soil with humus and
vegetation
Sub soil with sand, silt and
Weathered rock material
Parent rock
© NCERT
not to be republished
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
DEGRADATION OF SOIL AND CONSERVATION
MEASURES
Soil erosion and depletion are the major threats to soil
as a resource. Both human and natural factors can
lead to degradation of soils. Factors which lead to soil
degradation are deforestation, overgrazing, overuse of
chemical feritilisers or pesticides, rain wash, landslides
and floods.
Some methods of soil conservation are
Mulching: The bare ground between plants is covered
with a layer of organic matter like straw. It helps to
retain soil moisture.
Contour barriers: Stones, grass, soil are used to build
barriers along contours. Trenches are made in front of
the barriers to collect water.
Rock dam: Rocks are piled up to slow down the flow of
water. This prevents gullies and further soil loss.
Fig 2.6: Contour Ploughing
Fig 2.5: Terrace Farming
Activity
In India soils
could be alluvial,
black, red, laterite,
desertic and
mountain soil.
Collect a handful
of different types
of soil and observe
how they are
different?
Terrace farming: These are made on the steep
slopes so that flat surfaces are available to grow
crops. They can reduce surface run-off and soil
erosion (Fig. 2.5).
Intercropping: Different crops are grown in alternate
rows and are sown at different times to protect the
soil from rain wash.
Contour ploughing: Ploughing parallel to the
contours of a hill slope to form a natural barrier
for water to flow down the slope (Fig. 2.6).
Shelter belts: In the coastal and dry regions, rows
of trees are planted to check the wind movement to
protect soil cover (Fig. 2.7).
Fig 2.7: Shelter Belts
© NCERT
not to be republished
LAND, SOIL, WATER, NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES
WATER
Water is a vital renewable natural resource. Three-
fourth’s of the earth’s surface is covered with water.
It is therefore appropriately called the ‘water planet’.
It was in the primitive oceans that life began almost
3.5 billion years back. Even today, the oceans cover
two-thirds of the earth’s surface and support a rich
variety of plant and animal life. The ocean water is
however saline and not fit for human consumption.
Fresh water accounts for only about 2.7 per cent. Nearly
70 per cent of this occurs as ice sheets and glaciers in
Antarctica, Greenland and mountain regions. Due to
their location they are inaccessible. Only 1 per cent of
freshwater is available and fit for human use. It is found
as ground water, as surface water in rivers and lakes
and as water vapour in the atmosphere.
Fresh water is therefore, the most precious substance
on earth. Water can neither be added nor subtracted
from the earth. Its total volume remains constant.
Its abundance only seems to vary because it is in
constant motion, cycling through the oceans, the
air, the land and back again, through the processes
of evaporation, precipitation and run-off. This as
you already know is referred to as the ‘water cycle’.
Do you know?
In 1975, the
consumption of
water for human
use was 3850cu
km/year. It soared
to more than 6000
cu km/year in the
year 2000.
Activity
Take two trays A and B of same
size. Make six holes in the end
of these trays and then fill
them with the same amount
of soil. Leave the soil in tray A
bare while grow grass in tray B.
When the grass in tray B has
grown  few centimetres high,
place both the trays in such a
way that they are on a slope.
Pour one mug of water from the
same height into trays. Collect
the muddy water that trickles
down the holes of both trays
separate
containers
and compare how much soil
is washed out of each tray?
Do you know?
A dripping tap
wastes1200
litres in a year.
© NCERT
not to be republished
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
Humans use huge amounts of water not only for
drinking and washing but also in the process of
production.
Water
agriculture,
industries,
generating
electricity
through reservoirs of
dams are the other
usages.
Increasing
population,
rising
demands for food and
cash crops, increasing
urbanisation and rising
standards
living
are the major factors
leading to shortages in
supply of fresh water
either due to drying
up of water sources or
water pollution.
PROBLEMS OF WATER AVAILABILITY
There is scarcity of water in many regions of the world.
Most of Africa, West Asia, South Asia, parts of western
USA, north-west Mexico, parts of South America and
entire Australia are facing shortages in fresh water supply.
Countries located in climatic zones most susceptible to
droughts face great problems of water scarcity. Thus, water
shortage may be a consequence of variation in seasonal
or annual precipitation or the scarcity is caused by over-
exploitation and contamination of water sources.
CONSERVATION OF WATER
RESOURCES
Access to clean and adequate water
sources is a major problem facing the
world today. Steps have to be taken to
conserve this dwindling resource. Even
though water is a renewable resource, its
overuse and pollution make it unfit for
use. Discharge of untreated or partially
treated sewage, agricultural chemicals
and industrial effluents in water bodies
are major contaminants. They pollute
water with nitrates, metals and pesticides.
Do you know?
Have you ever
heard about a water
market? Amreli
city in Saurastra
region with a
population of 1.25
lakhs is completely
dependent on
purchasing water
from the nearby
talukas.
Activity
An average urban Indian uses about 135 litres
of water every day.
Litres per person per day
Drinking
Cooking
Bathing
Flushing
Washing clothes
Washing utensils
Gardening
Total
Can you suggest some ways to bring down this use?
Fig 2.8: Yamuna is getting polluted due to
sewage, industrial effluents and garbage
© NCERT
not to be republished
LAND, SOIL, WATER, NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES
Most of these chemicals being non-biodegradable reach
human bodies through water. Water pollution can be
controlled by treating these effluents suitably before
releasing them in water bodies.
Forest and other vegetation cover slow the
surface runoff and replenish underground
water. Water harvesting is another method
to save surface runoff. Water is used for
irrigating fields. The canals should be
properly lined to minimise losses by water
seepage. Sprinklers effectively irrigate the
area by checking water losses through
seepage and evaporation. In dry regions
with high rates of evaporation, drip or
trickle irrigation is very useful. The valuable
water resource can therefore be conserved
by adopting these means of conservation.
NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE
Some school children were visiting an exhibition on
handicrafts. The articles in the exhibition were collected
from different parts of the country. Mona picked up a bag
and exclaimed, “This is a beautiful handbag!” “Yes, it
is made from Jute,” the teacher said. “Do you see those
baskets, lamp shades and chairs? Those are made of
canes and bamboos. In the eastern and north eastern
humid regions of India, bamboo grows in plenty.” Jassy
was excited to see a silk scarf.  “See this beautiful
scarf”. The teacher explained that silk is obtained from
silk worms that are bred on Mulberry trees. The children
understood that plants provide us with many different
products that we use in our day-to-day life.
Natural vegetation and wildlife exist only
in the narrow zone of contact between the
lithosphere, hydrosphere and atmosphere that
we call biosphere. In the biosphere living beings
are inter-related and interdependent on each
other for survival. This life supporting system
is known as the ecosystem. Vegetation and
wildlife are valuable resources. Plants provide
us with timber, give shelter to animals, produce
oxygen we breathe, protects soils so essential
for growing crops, act as shelter belts, help in
Do you know?
Rain water
harvesting is
the process of
collecting rain
water from roof
tops and directing
it to an appropriate
location and
storing if for
future use. On an
average, one spell
of  rain for two
hours is enough to
save 8,000 litres of
water.
Fig 2.10: Silk Worms
Fig 2.9: A Water Sprinkler
© NCERT
not to be republished
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
storage of underground water,
give us fruits, nuts, latex,
turpentine oil, gum, medicinal
plants and also the paper that
is so essential for your studies.
There are innumerable uses of
plants and you can add some
more.
Wildlife includes animals,
birds, insects as well as
the aquatic life forms. They
provide us milk, meat, hides
and wool. Insects like bees
provide us honey, help in
pollination of flowers and
have an important role to
decomposers
the ecosystem. The birds
feed on insects and act as
decomposers as well. Vulture
due to its ability to feed on
dead livestock is a scavenger
considered
vital
cleanser of the environment.
So animals big or small, all
are integral to maintaining
balance in the ecosystem.
DISTRIBUTION OF NATURAL VEGETATION
The growth of vegetation depends primarily on
temperature and moisture. The major vegetation types
of the world are grouped as forests, grasslands, scrubs
and tundra.
In areas of heavy rainfall, huge trees
may thrive. The forests are thus associated
with areas having abundant water supply.
As the amount of moisture decreases the
size of trees and their density reduces.
In the regions of moderate rainfall short
stunted trees and grasses grow forming the
grasslands of the world. In dry areas of low
rainfall, thorny shrubs and scrubs grow.
In such areas plants have deep roots and
Do you know?
Vultures in
the Indian
subcontinent were
dying of kidney
failure shortly
after scavenging
livestock treated
with diclofenac, a
painkiller that is
similar to aspirin
or ibuprofen.
Efforts are on to
ban the drug for
livestock use and
breed vultures in
captivity.
Fig 2.11: Brahma Kamal
a Medicinal Herb
Fig 2.12: A Blue Kingfisher
Fig. 2.13: Grassland and Forest
© NCERT
not to be republished
LAND, SOIL, WATER, NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES
leaves have thorny and waxy surface to
reduce loss of moisture by transpiration.
Tundra vegetation of cold Polar Regions
comprise of mosses and lichens.
Forests are broadly classified as
evergreen and deciduous depending
their
leaves.
Evergreen forests do not shed their
leaves simultaneously in any season
of the year. Deciduous forests shed
their leaves in a particular season
to conserve loss of moisture through
transpiration. These forests are
further classified as tropical or
temperate
based
their
location in different latitudes.
You have learnt in detail about
the various forest types, their
distribution and the associated
animal life in the previous class.
Today there are many more
people in the world than there
were two centuries back. To feed
the growing numbers, large areas
of forests have been cleared to
grow crops. Forest cover all over
the world is vanishing rapidly.
There is an urgent need to
conserve this valuable resource.
CONSERVATION OF NATURAL
VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE
Forests are our wealth. Plants give shelter to
the animals and together they maintain the
ecosystem. Changes of climate and human
interferences can cause the loss of natural
habitats for the plants and animals. Many
species
become
vulnerable
endangered and some are on the verge
of extinction. Deforestation, soil erosion,
constructional
activities,
forest
fires,
tsunami and landslides are some of the
human made and natural factors which
Fig. 2.14: A Python in a forest
Fig. 2.15: A collage of a forest made by school students
Fig. 2.16: Loss of rainforest in
Great Nicobar after Tsunami
© NCERT
not to be republished
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
together accelerate the process of extinction
of these great natural resources. One of the
major concerns is the increasing incidents
of poaching that result in a sharp decline
in the number of particular species. The
animals are poached for collection and illegal
trade of hides, skins, nails, teeth, horns
as well as feathers. Some of these animals
are tiger, lion, elephant, deer, black buck,
crocodile, rhinoceros, snow leopard, ostrich
and peacock. These can be conserved by
increasing awareness.
Fig. 2.17: Black buck also needs protection
Forest Fire
Activity
Read the news item and find out how fire started in California ? Could it be avoided?
Know More
Forest fire is a threat to entire region of fauna and flora. It occurs mainly due to three
reasons.
1. Natural fire due to lightening etc.
2. Fire due to heat generated in the litter due to carelessness of people.
3. Purposely caused fire by local inhabitants.
Some Control Measures
1. Prevention of human-caused fires through education.
2. Prompt detection of fires through well co-ordinated network of obsevation points,
efficient ground patroling and communication network.
© NCERT
not to be republished
LAND, SOIL, WATER, NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES
Glossary
Biosphere reserves
Series of protected
areas linked
through a global
network, intended
to demonstrate
the relationship
between
conservation and
development.
Glossary
National Park
A natural area
designated to
protect the
ecological integrity
of one or more
ecosystems for
present and future
generations
Do you know?
CITES (the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species
of Wild Fauna and Flora) is an international agreement between
governments. It aims to ensure that international trade in specimens of
wild animals and plants does not threaten their survival. Roughly 5,000
species of animals and 28,000 species of plants are protected. Bears,
dolphins, cacti, corals, orchids and aloes are some examples.
National parks, wildlife sanctuaries, biosphere
reserves are made to protect our natural vegetation and
wildlife. Conservation of creeks, lakes, and wetlands is
necessary to save the precious resource from depletion
There is a balance in the environment if the relative
number of species is not disturbed. Human activities
in several parts of the world have disturbed the natural
habitats of many species. Due to indiscriminate killings,
several birds and animals have either become extinct or
are on the verge of extinction.
Awareness programmes like social forestry and
Vanamohatasava should be encouraged at the regional
and community level. School children should
be encouraged for bird watching and visiting
nature camps so that they appreciate the
habitat of varied species.
countries
passed
declaring that the trades as well as killing of
birds and animals are illegal. In India, killing
of lions, tigers, deers, great Indian bustards
and peacocks have been banned
An international convention CITES has been
established that lists several species of animals
and birds in
which
trade
is prohibited.
Conservation
of plants and
animals is an
ethical duty of
every citizen.
Fig. 2:18: Herd of Cheetals
Fig. 2:19: Elephant herd in Kaziranga
National Park
© NCERT
not to be republished
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
Exercises
Answer the following questions.
(i) Which are the two main climatic factors responsible for soil formation?
(ii) Write any two reasons for land degradation today.
(iii) Why is land considered an important resource?
(iv) Name any two steps that government has taken to conserve plants
and animals.
(v) Suggest three ways to conserve water.
Tick the correct answer.
(i) Which one of the following is NOT a factor of soil formation?
(a) time
(b) soil texture
(c) organic matter
(ii) Which one of the following methods is most appropriate to check
soil erosion on steep slopes?
(a)  shelter belts
(b) mulching
(c) terrace cultivation
(iii) Which one of the following is NOT in favour of the conservation
of nature?
(a)  switch off the bulb when not in use
(b) close the tap immediately after using
(c)  dispose polypacks after shopping
Match the followings.
(i) Land use
prevent soil erosion
(ii) Humus
land suitable for agriculture
(iii) Rock dams
productive use of land
(iv) Arable land
organic matter deposited on top soil
contour ploughing
State whether the given statement is true or false.
If true, write the reasons.
(i) Ganga–Brahmaputra plain of India is an overpopulated region.
(ii) Water availability per person in India is declining.
(iii) Rows of trees planted in the coastal areas to check the wind
movement is called intercropping.
(iv) Human interference and changes of climate can maintain the
ecosystem.
Activity
Discuss some more reasons which are responsible for changes of land use
pattern. Has your place  undergone any change in the land use pattern?
© NCERT
not to be republished
LAND, SOIL, WATER, NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES
Find out from your parents and elderly people. You can conduct an interview by
asking the following questions.
Place
When your
grand
parent’s were
in their 30’s
When your
parents were
in their 30’s
Why do you
think this is
happening?
Are common
areas and
open spaces
disappearing?
Rural
Number of
cattle and
poultry owned
Number of
trees and
ponds in the
village
occupation of
the head of
the family
Urban
Number of
cars owned
Number of
rooms in the
house
Number of
metalled
roads
Number of
flyovers in the
Number of
parks and
playgrounds
Based on the table you have just completed, draw a picture of land use patterns
that you foresee in your neighbourhood after 20 years. Why do you think that land
use patterns change over the years?
© NCERT
not to be republished
Kiri was visiting Sukant in his
native place near Dhanbad. Kiri
was amazed to see that large
areas were black. “Sukant, why
is this place so black and dusty?”
she asked. “This is because of the
coal mines nearby. Do you see
the trucks? They are carrying the
mineral coal”, replied Sukant.
“What are minerals?,” asked
Kiri.
Sukant
replied,
“Have
you ever seen a baker baking
biscuits? The flour, milk, sugar
and sometimes eggs are mixed
together. While eating the baked biscuits can you see
these ingredients separately? Just as in the biscuits,
there are a number of things that you cannot see,
rocks on this earth have several materials called
minerals mixed in them. These minerals are scattered
throughout the earth’s rocky crust”.
A naturally occurring substance that has a definite
chemical composition is a mineral. Minerals are not
evenly distributed over space. They are concentrated in
a particular area or rock formations. Some minerals are
found in areas which are not easily accessible such as
the Arctic ocean bed and Antarctica.
Minerals are formed in different types of geological
environments, under varying conditions. They are
created by natural processes without any human
interference. They can be identified on the basis of their
physical properties such as colour, density, hardness
and chemical property such as solubility.
Do you know?
The salt in your
food and graphite in
your pencil are also
minerals.
Mineral and
Power Resources
Fig. 3.1: Loading of a truck in
a coal mine
Do you know?
A rock is an
aggregate of one or
more minerals but
without definite
composition of
constituent of
mineral. Rocks
from which
minerals are mined
are known as ores.
Although more
than 2,800 types
of minerals have
been identified,
only about 100
are considered ore
minerals.
TYPES OF MINERALS
There are over three thousand different minerals.
On the basis of composition, minerals are classified
mainly as metallic and non-metallic minerals (Fig. 3.2).
Minerals
Metallic
Ferrous
Non-metallic
Non-ferrous
Fig. 3.2: Classification of Minerals
Extraction of Minerals
Mining
Open cast
mining
Drilling
Shaft
mining
Quarrying
Fig. 3.3: Extraction of Minerals
Metallic minerals contain metal in raw form. Metals are
hard substances that conduct heat and electricity and
have a characteristic lustre or shine. Iron ore, bauxite,
manganese ore are some examples. Metallic minerals
may be fer rous or non-ferrous. Ferrous minerals like
iron ore, manganese and chromites contain iron. A
non-ferrous mineral does not contain iron but may contain
some other metal such as gold, silver, copper or lead.
Non-metallic minerals do not contain metals.
Limestone, mica and gypsum are examples of such
minerals. The mineral fuels like coal and petroleum are
also non-metallic minerals.
Minerals can be extracted by mining, drilling or
quarrying (Fig 3.3).
The process of taking out minerals from rocks buried
under the earth’s surface is called mining. Minerals that
lie at shallow depths are taken out by removing the surface
layer; this is known as open-cast mining. Deep bores, called
shafts, have to be made to reach mineral deposits that lie
at great depths. This is called shaft mining. Petroleum
and natural gas occur far below the earth’s surface. Deep
wells are bored to take them out, this is called drilling
(Fig 3.4). Minerals that lie near the surface are simply dug
out, by the process known as quarrying.
Fig. 3.4: Off shore
drilling of oil
MINERAL AND POWER RESOURCES     25
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
DISTRIBUTION OF MINERALS
Minerals occur in different types of rocks. Some are
found in igneous rocks, some in metamorphic rocks
while others occur in sedimentary rocks. Generally,
metallic minerals are found in igneous and metamorphic
rock formations that form large plateaus. Iron-ore in
north Sweden, copper and nickel deposits in Ontario,
Canada, iron, nickel, chromites and platinum in South
Africa are examples of minerals found in igneous and
metamorphic rocks. Sedimentary rock formations of
plains and young fold mountains contain non-metallic
minerals like limestone. Limestone deposits of Caucasus
region of France, manganese deposits of Georgia and
Ukraine and phosphate beds of Algeria are some
examples. Mineral fuels such as coal and petroleum are
also found in the sedimentary strata.
China and India have large iron ore deposits.
The continent produces more than half of the world’s tin.
Do you know?
You can always tell
if a rock contains
copper because
then the rock looks
blue in colour.
Fig. 3.5: World: Distribution of Iron, Copper and Bauxite
MINERAL AND POWER RESOURCES     27
Do you know?
Switzerland has
no known mineral
deposit in it.
Let’s do
Identify the
Canadian Shield,
the Appalachians,
Western Cordilleras
and Lake Superior
with the help of an
atlas.
China, Malaysia and Indonesia are among the world’s
leading tin producers. China also leads in production of
lead, antimony and tungsten. Asia also has deposits of
manganese, bauxite, nickel, zinc and copper.
EUROPE
Europe is the leading producer of iron-ore in the world.
The countries with large deposits of iron ore are Russia,
Ukraine, Sweden and France. Minerals deposits of
copper, lead, zinc, manganese and nickel are found in
eastern Europe and European Russia.
NORTH AMERICA
The mineral deposits in North America are located in
three zones: the Canadian region north of the Great
Lakes, the Appalachian region and the mountain ranges
of the west. Iron ore, nickel, gold, uranium and copper
are mined in the Canadian Shield Region, coal in the
Appalachians region. Western Cordilleras have vast
deposits of copper, lead, zinc, gold and silver.
Fig 3.6: World: Distribution of Mineral Oil and Coal
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
Activity
With the help of an
atlas, on an outline
map of India, mark
the distribution
of iron, bauxite,
manganese and
mica.
SOUTH AMERICA
Brazil is the largest producer of high grade iron-ore
in the world. Chile and Peru are leading producers of
copper. Brazil and Bolivia are among the world’s largest
producers of tin. South America also has large deposits of
gold, silver, zinc, chromium, manganese, bauxite, mica,
platinum, asbestos and diamond. Mineral oil is found
in Venezuela, Argentina, Chile, Peru and Columbia.
AFRICA
Africa is rich in mineral resources. It is the world’s
largest producer of diamonds, gold and platinum. South
Africa, Zimbabwe and Zaire produce a large portion of
the world’s gold. The other minerals found in Africa
are copper, iron ore, chromium, uranium, cobalt and
bauxite. Oil is found in Nigeria, Libya and Angola.
AUSTRALIA
Australia is the largest producer of bauxite in the world.
It is a leading producer of gold, diamond, iron ore, tin
and nickel. It is also rich in copper, lead, zinc and
manganese. Kalgoorlie and Coolgardie areas of  western
Australia have the largest deposits of gold.
ANTARCTICA
The geology of Antarctica is sufficiently well known to
predict the existence of a variety of mineral deposits,
some probably large. Significant size of deposits of coal in
the Transantarctic Mountains and iron near the Prince
Charles Mountains of East Antarctica is forecasted. Iron
ore, gold, silver and oil are also present in commercial
quantities.
DISTRIBUTION IN INDIA
Iron: India has deposits of high grade iron ore. The
mineral is found mainly in Jharkhand, Odisha,
Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Goa, Maharashtra and
Karnataka.
Bauxite: Major bauxite producing areas are Jharkhand,
Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat,
Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu.
Do you know?
• A green
diamond is the
rarest diamond.
• The oldest rocks
in the world
are in Western
Australia. They
date from 4,300
million years
ago, only 300
million years
after the earth
was formed.
MINERAL AND POWER RESOURCES     29
Mica: Mica  deposits mainly occur in
Jharkhand, Bihar, Andhra Pradesh and
Rajasthan. India is the largest producer and
exporter of mica in the world.
Copper: It is mainly produced in Rajasthan,
Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka
and Andhra Pradesh.
Manganese: India’s
manganese
deposits
Maharashtra,
Madhya
Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh,
Odisha,
Karnataka
Andhra Pradesh.
Limestone: Major limestone producing states
in India are Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha,
Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan,
Gujarat and Tamil Nadu.
Gold: Kolar in Karnataka has deposits of gold
in India. These mines are among the deepest in
the world which makes mining of this ore a very
expensive process.
Salt: It is obtained from seas, lakes and rocks
(Fig 3.8). India is one of the world’s leading
producers and exporters of salt.
USES OF MINERALS
Minerals are used in many industries.
Minerals which are used for gems are usually hard.
These are then set in various styles for jewellery. Copper
is another metal used in everything from coins to pipes.
Silicon, used in the computer industry is obtained from
quartz. Aluminum obtained from its ore bauxite is
used in automobiles and airplanes, bottling industry,
buildings and even in kitchen cookware.
CONSERVATION OF MINERALS
Minerals are a non-renewable resource. It takes
thousands of years for the formation and concentration
of minerals. The rate of formation is much smaller than
the rate at which the humans consume these minerals.
It is necessary to reduce wastage in the process of
mining. Recycling of metals is another way in which the
mineral resources can be conserved.
Let’s do
List uses of any
five minerals.
Fig. 3.7: Quarrying of limestone
Fig. 3.8: Extraction of salt from
Sambhar lake in Rajasthan
Think and Act
Recycle
Reduce
Reuse
Minerals
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
POWER RESOURCES
Sunny’s mother begins her day by switching on the
geyser.  She irons Sunny’s school uniform before waking
him up. She then rushes to the kitchen to prepare a glass
of orange juice for him in the blender.
“Sunny, have you finished taking bath? Come and
have your breakfast”, calls out mother while preparing
breakfast on the gas stove for Sunny.
While going to school Sunny forgets to switch off
lights and fans. When mother switches them off she
thinks that life in the cities may be more comfortable, but
its dependency on more and more gadgets all of which
consume energy has led to a wide gap between the
demand and the supply. With the advent of science and
technology the life styles are changing very  fast.
Power or energy plays a vital role in our lives. We also need
power for industry, agriculture, transport, communication
and defense. Power resources may be broadly categorised
as conventional and non-conventional resources.
Conventional
Sources
Conventional sources
of energy are those
which have been in
common use for a
long time. Firewood
and fossil fuels are
c o n v e n t i o n a l
energy sources.
Firewood
It is widely used
cooking
and heating. In our
country
fifty per cent of the
energy
villagers comes from
fire wood.
Fig. 3.9: National Power
Grid to supply Electricity
Fig 3.10: Conventional Sources of Energy
MINERAL AND POWER RESOURCES     31
Remains of plants and animals which were buried
under the earth for millions of years got converted by the
heat and pressure into fossil fuels. Fossil fuel such as
coal, petroleum and natural gas are the main sources of
conventional energy. The reserves of these minerals are
limited. The rate at which the growing world population
is consuming them is far greater than the rate of their
formation. So, these are likely to be exhausted soon.
This is the most abundantly found fossil fuel. It is used
as a domestic fuel, in industries such as iron and steel,
steam engines and to generate electricity. Electricity
from coal is called thermal power.  The coal which
we are using today was formed millions of years ago
when giant ferns and swamps got buried under
the layers of earth. Coal is therefore referred to as
Buried Sunshine.
The leading coal producers of the world are
China, USA, Germany, Russia, South Africa
and France. The coal producing areas of India
are Raniganj, Jharia, Dhanbad and Bokaro in
Jharkhand.
Petroleum
The petrol that keeps your car running as well as
the oil that keeps your cycle from squeaking, both
began as a thick black liquid called Petroleum. It is found
between the layers of rocks and is drilled from oil fields
located in off-shore and coastal areas. This is then sent
to refineries which process the crude oil and produce
a variety of products like diesel, petrol, kerosene, wax,
plastics and lubricants. Petroleum and its derivatives
are called Black Gold as they are very valuable.
The chief petroleum producing
countries are Iran, Iraq, Saudi
Arabia and Qatar. The other
major producers are USA, Russia,
Venezuela, and Algeria. The leading
producers in India are Digboi in
Assam, Bombay High in Mumbai
and the deltas of Krishna and
Godavari rivers.
Fig 3.11: A woman
carrying firewood in
North East India
Word Origin
The word
petroleum is
derived from
Latin words
–Petra meaning
rock, oleum
meaning oil. So,
petroleum means
rock oil.
Fig 3.12: A view of a Thermal
Power Station
Fig 3.13: Crude Oil
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
Natural Gas
Natural gas is found with petroleum deposits and is
released when crude oil is brought to the surface. It
can be used as a domestic and industrial fuel. Russia,
Norway, UK and the Netherlands are the major producers
of natural gas.
In India Jaisalmer, Krishna Godavari delta, Tripura
and some areas off shore in Mumbai have natural gas
resources. Very few countries in the world have sufficient
natural gas reserves of their own.
The sharp increase in our consumption of fossil fuels
has led to their depletion at an alarming rate.  The toxic
pollutants released from burning these fuels are also a
cause for concern. Unchecked burning of fossil fuel is
like an unchecked dripping tap which will eventually
run dry. This has led to the tapping of various non-
conventional sources of energy that are cleaner
alternatives to fossil fuels.
Hydel Power
Rain water or river water stored in dams is made to
fall from heights. The falling water flows through pipes
inside the dam over turbine blades placed at the bottom
of the dam. The moving blades then turn the generator
to produce electricity. This is called hydro electricity.
The water discharged after the generation of electricity is
used for irrigation. One fourth of the world’s electricity is
produced by hydel power. The leading producers of hydel
power in the world are Paraguay, Norway, Brazil, and
Do you know?
Compressed
natural gas (CNG)
is a popular eco-
friendly automobile
fuel as it causes
less pollution than
petroleum and
diesel.
Water
reservoir
Turbine
Generator
Fig. 3.14: Hydel Power
Do you know?
Norway was the
first country in the
world to devlop
hydroelectricity.
MINERAL AND POWER RESOURCES     33
China. Some important hydel power stations in India
are Bhakra Nangal, Gandhi Sagar, Nagarjunsagar
and Damodar valley projects.
NON-CONVENTIONAL SOURCES OF ENERGY
The increasing use of fossil fuels is leading to its
shortage. It is estimated that if the present rate
of consumption continues, the reserves of these
fuel will get exhausted. Moreover, their use also causes
environmental pollution. Therefore, there is need for
using non-conventional sources such as solar energy,
wind energy, tidal energy which are renewable.
Solar energy
Sun’s heat and light energy can be felt by us every
day. Solar energy trapped from the sun can be used in
Fig 3.16: Non-conventional Sources of Energy
Fig. 3.15: Salal
Hydroelectric Project
Jammu and Kashmir
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
Do you know?
The site of the
world’s first solar
and wind powered
bus shelter  is in
Scotland.
Fig. 3.18 : Nuclear power station ,
Kalpakkam
Activity
Solar Cooker
Take an old car
tube. Inflate it and
keep it on a wooden
platform. Paint an
aluminium vessel
black from outside
and add 1 cup rice
with 2 cups of water
to it. Close the vessel
with a lid and place
the vessel in the
inner circle of the
tube. Now place a
glass frame over the
tube and keep the
set out in the sun.
After the glass frame
is placed, air can
neither come in nor
go out but the sun
rays coming into
the closed cavity
enclosed by the
tube, get trapped
and cannot escape.
The temperature
increases slowly
cooking the rice over
a few hours.
solar cells to produce
electricity. Many of
these cells are joined
solar
panels
generate
power
heating
lighting
purpose.
technology
utilising solar energy
benefits
tropical
countries
that are blessed with
abundant sun shine. Solar energy is also used in solar
heaters, solar cookers, solar dryers besides being used
for community lighting and traffic signals.
Wind Energy
Wind is an inexhaustible source of energy. Wind mills have
been used for grinding grain and lifting water since times
immemorial. In modern time wind mills, the high speed
winds rotate the wind mill which is connected to a generator
to produce electricity. Wind farms having clusters of such
wind mills are located in coastal regions and in mountain
passes where strong and steady winds blow. Windfarms
are found in Netherlands, Germany, Denmark, UK, USA
and Spain are noted for their wind energy production.
Nuclear Power
Nuclear power is obtained from energy stored in the
nuclei of atoms of naturally occurring radio active
elements like uranium and thorium. These fuels undergo
nuclear fission in nuclear reactors and emit power. The
greatest
producers
of nuclear power are
Europe.
In India Rajasthan and
Jharkhand have large
deposits of Uranium.
Thorium is found in
large
quantities
the Monozite sands of
Kerala. The nuclear
power stations in India
Fig 3.17: Solar Panels to trap
solar energy
MINERAL AND POWER RESOURCES     35
are located in Kalpakkam in Tamilnadu, Tarapur in
Maharastra, Ranapratap Sagar near Kota in Rajasthan,
Narora in Uttar Pradesh and Kaiga in Karnataka.
Fig. 3.19 : Nuclear Energy
Geothermal Energy
Heat energy obtained from the
earth
called
geothermal
energy. The temperature in the
interior of the earth rises steadily
as we go deeper. Some times
this heat energy may surface
itself in the form of hot springs.
This heat energy can be used
to generate power. Geothermal
energy in the form of hot springs
has been used for cooking,
heating and bathing for several
Fig. 3.21 : Geothermal Energy
Natural crack
Steam
Water
turbine
generator
Fig. 3.20 : (a) Geothermal Energy in Manikaran
(b) Cooking food with the help of Geothermal Energy
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
years. USA has the world’s largest geothermal power
plants followed by New Zealand, Iceland, Philippines
and Central America. In India, geothermal plants are
located in Manikaran in Himachal Pradesh and Puga
Valley in Ladakh.
TIDAL ENERGY
Energy generated from tides is called tidal energy. Tidal
energy can be harnessed by building dams at narrow
openings of the sea. During high tide the energy of the tides
is used to turn the turbine installed in the dam to produce
electricity. Russia, France and the Gulf of Kachchh in
India have huge tidal mill farms.
Fig. 3.23 : Biogas
BIOGAS
Organic waste such as dead plant and animal material,
animal dung and kitchen waste can be converted into
a gaseous fuel called biogas. The organic waste is
decomposed by bacteria in biogas digesters to emit biogas
which is essentially a mixture of methane and carbon
dioxide. Biogas is an excellent fuel for
cooking and lighting and produces huge
amount of organic manure each year.
Energy is everywhere but we can
see that harnessing this energy is
both difficult as well as costly. Each
one of us can make a difference by not
wasting energy. Energy saved is energy
generated. Act now and make brighter
energy future.
Fig. 3.22: Tidal Energy
Do you know?
The first tidal
energy station was
built in France.
MINERAL AND POWER RESOURCES     37
Exercises
1. Answer the following questions.
(i) Name any three common minerals used by you every day.
(ii) What is an ore? Where are the ores of metallic minerals generally
located?
(iii) Name two regions rich in natural gas resources.
(iv) Which sources of energy would you suggest for
(a) rural areas
(b) coastal areas
(c) Arid regions
(v) Give five ways in which you can save energy at home.
2. Tick the correct answer.
(i) Which one of the following is NOT a characteristic of minerals?
(a) They are created by natural processes.
(b) They have a definite chemical composition.
(c) They are inexhaustible.
(d) Their distribution is uneven.
(ii) Which one of the following is NOT a producer of mica?
(a) Jharkhand
(c) Rajasthan
(b) Karnataka
(d) Andhra Pradesh
(iii) Which one of the following is a leading producer of copper in the world?
(a) Bolivia
(c) Chile
(b) Ghana
(d) Zimbabwe
(iv) Which one of the following practices will NOT conserve LPG in your
kitchen.
(a) Soaking the dal for some time before cooking it.
(b) Cooking food in a pressure cooker.
(c) Keeping the vegetables chopped before lighting the gas for cooking.
(d) Cooking food in an open pan kept on low flame.
3. Give reasons.
(i) Environmental aspects must be carefully looked into before building
huge dams.
(ii) Most industries are concentrated around coal mines.
(iii) Petroleum is referred to as “black gold”.
(iv) Quarrying can become a major environmental concern.
4. Distinguish between the followings.
(i) Conventional and non conventional sources of energy
(ii) Biogas and natural gas
(iii) Ferrous and nonferrous minerals
(iv) Metallic and nonmetallic minerals
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
5. Activity
(i) Use pictures from old magazines to show different kinds of fuels used
by  us in our lives and display them on your bulletin board.
(ii) Design a poster highlighting energy conservation tips you would take
for your school.
(iii) Salma’s class took up an action campaign to do an energy audit of
their school by surveying electricity consumption.They prepared survey
sheets  for the students of the school.
Electricity Audit
Sl. No.
Appliance
Quantity
(No. being
used)
Usage Time
(Approx.
No. of
working
hours)
Quantity
(No. actual-
ly needed)
Is it
switched
on even
when not
in use?
(Yes or No)
Fluorescent Tube
light 40 W
Incandescent Bulb
40 W / 60 W
Co-impact
ﬂ uorescent lamps
Exhaust Fans
Electric Bell / Buzzer
Computers
Conditioners
Refrigerators
Oven / Hot Case
Public Address
System
Water Pump / Water
Cooler
Overhead
Projector
Photostat
Machine
Any other
MINERAL AND POWER RESOURCES     39
Using the data collected during the survey, students calculated the units
consumed for one month and the approximate expenditure and compared
it with the electricity bill of the previous month. They also calculated the
approximate cost of electricity consumed by fans, lights and other appliances
not switched off. Thus, they highlighted the amount that could be saved and
suggested simple energy conservation habits like
Switching off the appliances when not in use.
Minimal usage as per requirement.
Maximising the use of natural breeze and light by keeping the windows
open.
Keeping the lights dust free.
The appropriate maintenance and usage of appliances as per the given
instructions.
Can you add some more tips to this list?
You could conduct a similar survey at home and then extend it to your
appartment and make your neighbours also energy wise.
Agriculture
Gurpreet, Madho and Tina were walking through
the village where they saw a farmer tilling land. The
farmer told them that he was growing wheat and had
just added manure to the soil to make it more fertile.
He told the children that the wheat would fetch a
good price in the mandi from where it would be taken
to factories to make bread and biscuits from flour.
This transformation from a plant to a finished
product involves three types of economic activities.
These are primary, secondary and tertiary activities.
Primary activities include all those connected
with extraction and production of natural resources.
Agriculture, fishing and gathering are good examples.
Secondary activities are concerned with the processing
of these resources. Manufacturing of steel, baking of
bread and weaving of cloth are examples of this activity.
Tertiary activities provide support to the primary and
secondary sectors through services. Transport, trade,
banking, insurance and advertising are examples of
tertiary activities.
Agriculture is a primary activity. It includes growing
crops, fruits, vegetables, flowers and rearing of livestock.
In the world, 50 per cent of persons are engaged in
agricultural activity. Two-thirds of India’s population is
still dependent on agriculture.
Favourable topography of soil and climate are vital
for agricultural activity. The land on which the crops
are grown is known as arable land (Fig. 4.1). In the map
you can see that agricultural activity is concentrated in
those regions of the world where suitable factors for the
growing of crops exist.
Word Origin
The word
agriculture is
derived from Latin
words ager or agri
meaning soil and
culture meaning,
cultivation.
Fig. 4.1: World Distribution of Arable Land
Do you know?
Viticulture
Cultivation of grapes.
Horticulture
Growing vegetables, flowers and fruits for commercial use.
Sericulture
Commercial rearing of silk worms. It may supplement the
income of the farmer.
Agriculture
The science and art of cultivation on the soil, raising
crops and rearing livestock. It is also called farming.
Farm System
Agriculture or farming can be looked at as a system. The
important inputs are seeds, fertilisers, machinery and
Pisciculture
Breeding of fish in specially constructed tanks and ponds.
Agriculture
+ Culture
Pisci
Horti
resources And development
labour. Some of the operations involved are ploughing,
sowing, irrigation, weeding and harvesting. The outputs
from the system include crops, wool, dairy and poultry
products.
tyPeS OF FarmING
Farming is practised in various ways across the world.
Depending upon the geographical conditions, demand
of produce, labour and level of technology, farming can
be classified into two main types. These are subsistence
farming and commercial farming.
Subsistence Farming
This type of farming is practised to meet the needs of the
farmer’s family. Traditionally, low levels of technology
and household labour are used to produce on small
output. Subsistence farming can be further classified
as intensive subsistence and primitive subsistence
farming.
In intensive subsistence agriculture the farmer
cultivates a small plot of land using simple tools and
more labour. Climate with large number of days with
sunshine and fertile soils permit growing of more than
one crop annually on the same plot. Rice is the main
crop. Other crops include wheat, maize, pulses and
oilseeds. Intensive subsistence agriculture is prevalent
in the thickly populated areas of the monsoon regions
of south, southeast and east Asia.
Processes
Outputs
Fig 4.2: The farm system of an arable farm
Fig 4.3: Physical and human farm inputs
Human
Inputs
Crops
Interesting Fact
Organic Farming
In this type of
farming,  organic
manure and
natural pesticides
are used instead
of chemicals.
No genetic
modification is
done  to increase
the yield of the
crop.
Ploughing
Sowing
Spraying
Chemicals
Inputs
Machinery
Seeds
Sunshine
Temperature
Slope
Physical Inputs
Rainfall
Storage
Machinery
Labour
Chemicals
Agriculture
Do you know?
Shifting cultivation
is known by
different names in
different parts of
the world
Jhumming -
North-East India
Milpa -Mexico
Roca - Brazil.
Ladang - Malaysia
Primitive subsistence agriculture includes shifting
cultivation and nomadic herding.
Shifting cultivation is practised in the thickly
forested areas of Amazon basin, tropical Africa, parts of
southeast Asia and Northeast India. These are the areas
of heavy rainfall and quick regeneration of vegetation.
A plot of land is cleared by felling the trees and burning
them. The ashes are then mixed with the soil and crops
like maize, yam, potatoes and cassava are grown. After
the soil loses its fertility, the land is abandoned and the
cultivator moves to a new plot. Shifting cultivation is
also known as ‘slash and burn’ agriculture.
Nomadic herding is practised in the semi-arid
and arid regions of Sahara, Central Asia and some
parts of India, like Rajasthan and Jammu and
Kashmir. In this type of farming, herdsmen
move from place to place with their animals for
fodder and water, along defined routes. This
type of movement arises in response to climatic
constraints and terrain. Sheep, camel, yak and
goats are most commonly reared. They provide
milk, meat, wool, hides and other products to
the herders and their families.
Commercial Farming
In commercial farming  crops are grown and
animals are reared for sale in market. The area
cultivated and the amount of capital used is
large. Most of the work is done by machines.
Commercial
farming
includes
commercial
grain farming, mixed farming and plantation
agriculture (Fig 4.5).
In commercial grain farming crops are grown
for commercial purpose. Wheat and maize are
common commercially grown grains. Major
areas where commercial grain farming is
pracised are temperate grasslands of North America,
Europe and Asia. These areas are sparsely populated
with large farms spreading over hundreds of hectares.
Severe winters restrict the growing season and only a
single crop can be grown.
In mixed farming the land is used for growing
fodder
crops
rearing
livestock.
Fig 4.4: Nomadic Herders with
their camels
Fig 4.5: A Sugarcane
plantation
Resources and Development
It is practised in Europe, eastern USA, Argentina,
southeast Australia, New Zealand and South Africa.
Plantations are a type of commercial farming
where single crop of tea, coffee, sugarcane, cashew,
rubber, banana or cotton are grown. Large amount
of labour and capital are required. The produce may
be processed on the farm itself or in nearby factories.
The development of a transport network is thus
essential for such farming.
Major plantations are found in the tropical
regions of the world. Rubber in Malaysia, coffee
in Brazil, tea in India and Sri Lanka are some
examples.
Major Crops
A large variety of crops are grown to meet the
requirement of the growing population. Crops also
supply raw materials for agro based industries.
Major food crops are wheat, rice, maize and
millets. Jute and cotton are fibre crops. Important
beverage crops are tea and coffee.
Rice: Rice is the major food crop of the world. It
is the staple diet of the tropical and sub-tropical
regions. Rice needs high temperature, high
humidity and rainfall. It grows best in alluvial
clayey soil, which can retain water. China leads in
the production of rice followed by India, Japan, Sri
Lanka and Egypt. In favourable climatic conditions
as in West Bengal and Bangladesh two to three
crops are grown in a year.
Wheat: Wheat requires moderate temperature and
rainfall during growing season and bright sunshine
at the time of harvest. It thrives best in well drained
loamy soil. Wheat is grown extensively in USA,
Canada, Argentina, Russia, Ukraine, Australia
and India. In India it is grown in winter.
Millets: They are also known as coarse grains and
can be grown on less fertile and sandy soils. It is
a hardy crop that needs low rainfall and high to
Fig 4.7: Rice Cultivation
Fig 4.8: Wheat Harvesting
Fig 4.6 : A Banana Plantation
Fig 4.9: Bajra Cultivation
Agriculture
moderate temperature and adequate rainfall. Jowar,
bajra and ragi are grown in India. Other countries are
Nigeria, China and Niger.
Maize: Maize requires
moderate
temperature,
rainfall
sunshine.
needs
well-drained fertile soils.
Maize is grown in North
America, Brazil, China,
Russia, Canada, India,
and Mexico.
Cotton: Cotton requires
high temperature, light
rainfall,
hundred
and ten frost-free days
and bright sunshine for
its growth. It grows best
on black and alluvial
soils. China, USA, India,
Pakistan, Brazil and Egypt are the leading producers of
cotton. It is one of the main raw materials for the cotton
textile industry.
Jute: Jute was also known as the ‘Golden Fibre’. It grows
well on alluvial soil and requires high temperature,
heavy rainfall and humid climate. This crop is grown in
the tropical areas. India and
Bangladesh are the leading
producers of jute.
Coffee: Coffee requires warm
and wet climate and well-
drained loamy soil. Hill slopes
are more suitable for growth
of this crop. Brazil is the
leading producer followed by
Columbia and India.
Tea: Tea is a beverage crop grown on plantations. This
requires cool climate and well distributed high rainfall
throughout the year for the growth of its tender leaves.
Fig 4.11: Cotton Cultivation
Fig 4.12: Coffee Plantation
Do you know?
Maize is also know
as corn. Various
colourful varieties
of maize are found
across the world.
Interesting Fact
Who discovered
the Coffee Plant?
There are different
versions about
the discovery of
coffee. In about
AD 850, Kaldi, an
Arab goat-herder,
who was puzzled
by the queer antics
of his flock, tasted
the berries of the
evergreen bush on
which the goats
were feeding.
On experiencing
a sense of
exhilaration, he
proclaimed his
discovery to the
world.
Fig 4.10: Maize Cultivation
resources And development
Fig 4.14: Farmers ploughing
a field
Fig 4.13: Tea Plantation
Do you know?
Food security
exists when all
people, at all
times, have access
to sufficient, safe
and nutritious
food to meet their
dietary needs and
food preferences
for an active and
healthy life.
It needs well-drained loamy soils and gentle
slopes. Labour in large number is required to
pick the leaves. Kenya, India, China, Sri Lanka
produce the best quality tea in the world.
aGrICULtUraL DeVeLOPmeNt
Agricultural Development refers to efforts
made to increase farm production in order
to meet the growing demand of increasing
population. This can be achieved in many ways such as
increasing the cropped area, the number of crops grown,
improving irrigation facilities, use of fertilisers and high
yielding variety of seeds. Mechanisation of agriculture
is also another aspect of agricultural development. The
ultimate aim of agricultural development is to increase
food security.
Agriculture has developed at different places in different
parts of the world. Developing countries with large
populations usually practise intensive agriculture where
crops are grown on small holdings mostly for subsistence.
Larger holdings are more suitable for commercial agriculture
as in USA, Canada and Australia. With the help of two case
studies of farms — one from India and the other from the
USA, let us understand about agriculture in the developing
and a developed country.
A Farm in India
There is a small village Adilabad in Ghazipur district of
Uttar Pradesh. Munna Lal is a small farmer in this village
who has farmland of about 1.5 hectares. His house is in
the main village. He purchases high yielding varieties of
seeds from the market every alternate year. The
land is fertile and he grows atleast two crops
in a year which are normally wheat or rice and
pulses. The farmer takes advice of his friends
and elders as well as government agricultural
officers regarding farming practices. He takes
a tractor on rent for ploughing his field, though
some of his friends still use traditional method
of using bullocks for ploughing. There is a
tubewell in the nearby field which he takes on
rent to irrigate his field.
Agriculture
Munna Lal also has two buffaloes and few hens. He
sells milk in the cooperative store located in the nearby
town. He is a member of the co-operative society which
also advises him on the type of fodder for his animals,
safety measures to protect the health of the livestock
and artificial insemination.
All the members of the family help him
in various farm activities. Sometimes, he
takes credit from a bank or the agricultural
co-operative society to buy HYV seeds and
implements.
He sells his produce in the mandi located
in the nearby town. Since majority of the
farmers do not have lack storage facilities,
they are forced to sell the produce even
when the market is not favourable to them.
In recent years, the government has taken
some steps to develop storage facilites.
A Farm in the USA
The average size of a farm in the USA is much
larger than that of an Indian farm. A typical
farm size in the USA is about 250 hectares.
The farmer generally resides in the farm.
Some of the major crops grown are corn,
soyabean, wheat, cotton and sugarbeet.
Joe Horan, a farmer in the Midwest USA, in
Iowa State owns about 300 hectares of land.
He grows corn on his field after making sure
that soil and water resources meet the needs
of this crop. Adequate measures are taken to control
pests that can damage the crop. From time to time
he sends the soil samples to a soil testing laboratory
to check whether  the
nutrients are sufficient or
not. The results help Joe
Horan to plan a scientific
fertiliser programme. His
computer is linked to the
satellite which gives him
a precise picture of his
field. This helps him to
use chemical fertilisers
Fig 4.17: Spray of Pesticides
Fig 4.16: A Farm in the USA
Fig 4.15: An Agricultural Field in India
resources And development
Exercises
1. Answer the following questions.
(i)  What is agriculture?
(ii)  Name the factors influencing agriculture?
(iii) What is shifting cultivation? What are its disadvantages?
(iv)  What is plantation agriculture?
(v)  Name the fibre crops and name the climatic conditions required for their
growth.
2. Tick the correct answer.
(i) Horticulture means
(a) growing of fruits and vegetables
(b) primitive farming
(c) growing of wheat
(ii)  Golden fibre refers to
(a) tea
(b) cotton
(c) jute
(iii)  Leading producers of coffee
(a) Brazil
(b) India
(c) Russia
3. Give reasons.
(i)  In India agriculture is a primary activity.
(ii) Different crops are grown in different regions.
4. Distinguish between the followings.
(i)  Primary activites and tertiary activities
(ii) Subsistence farming and intenstive farming.
5. Activity
(i) Collect seeds of wheat, rice, jowar, bajra, ragi, maize, oilseeds and pulses
available in the market. Bring them to the class and find out in which type
of soil they grow.
(ii) Find out the difference between the life style of farmers in the USA and
India on the basis of pictures collected from magazines, books, newspapers
and the internet.
Fig 4.18: Mechanised Harvesting in the USA
and pesticides wherever they are required.
He uses tractors, seed drills, leveller,
combined harvester and thresher to perform
various agricultural operations. A grains are
stored in the automated grain storage or
despatched to market agencies. The farmer
in USA works like a businessman and not
like a peasant farmer.
1. Crop that needs well drained fertile
soils, moderate temperatures and
lots of sunshine (5)
2. Increasing production through use
of HYV seeds, chemical fertilisers
and pesticides (5,10)
4. USA, Canada, Russia, Australia are
major producers of this crop (5)
10. Type of farming to meet family
needs (11)
13. Rearing of animals for sale (9)
14. Growing grapes for wines (11)
1. Coarse grains are also called (7)
3. Cultivation involving slash and
burn (8)
5. Growing
crops,
fruits
vegetables (11)
6. Tea, coffee, sugarcane and rubber
are grown in (11)
7. Requires 210 frost-free days for
growth (6)
8. Growing of flowers (12)
9. Also called ‘Golden Fibre’ (4)
11. Also known as paddy (4)
12. Activity concerned with extraction
of natural resources (7)
Across
6. For Fun
Solve the crossword puzzle with
the help of given clues.
Agriculture
Have you ever given a thought to the fact that the note
book you use for writing has come to you after a long
process of manufacturing. It started its life as part of a
tree. It was cut down and transported to the pulp mill.
There the wood of the tree was processed and converted
into wood pulp. The wood pulp was mixed with chemicals
and finally changed into paper by machines. This paper
found its way to the press where ink made from chemicals
was used to print the lines on the pages. The pages were
then bound in the form of a note book, packed and sent to
the market for sale. Finally, it reached your hands.
Secondary activities or manufacturing change
raw materials into products of more value to people. As
you have seen pulp was changed into paper and paper
into a note book. These represent the two stages of the
manufacturing process.
The paper made from pulp and cloth made from
cotton have had value added to them at each stage of the
manufacturing process. In this way the finished product
has more value and utility than the raw material that it
is made from.
Industry refers to an economic activity that is
concerned with production of goods, extraction of
minerals or the provision of services. Thus we have iron
and steel industry (production of goods), coal mining
industry (extraction of coal) and tourism industry
(service provider).
Classification of Industries
Industries can be classified on the basis of raw materials,
size and ownership.
Activity
Trace the journey
of your shirt from
a cotton field to
your wardrobe.
Industries
Journey begins...
...paper made...
...recycle...
2015-16(19/01/2015)
Raw  Materials: Industries may be agro based, mineral
based, marine based and forest based depending on the
type of raw materials they use. Agro based industries
use plant and animal based products as their raw
materials. Food processing, vegetable oil, cotton textile,
dairy products and leather industries are examples of
agro-based industries. Mineral based industries are
primary industries that use mineral ores as their raw
materials. The products of these industries feed other
industries. Iron made from iron ore is the product of
mineral based industry. This is used as raw material for
the manufacture of a number of other products, such
as heavy machinery, building materials and railway
coaches. Marine based industries use products from the
sea and oceans as raw materials. Industries processing
sea food or manufacturing fish oil are some examples.
Forest based industries utilise forest produce as raw
materials. The industries associated with forests are pulp
and paper, pharmaceuticals, furniture and buildings.
Size:  It refers to the amount of capital invested,
number of people employed and the volume of production.
Based on size, industries can be classified into small
scale and large scale industries. Cottage or
household industries are a type of small scale
industry where the products are manufactured
by hand, by the artisans. Basket weaving,
pottery and other handicrafts are examples
of cottage industry. Small scale industries
use lesser amount of capital and technology
as compared to large scale industries that
produce large volumes of products. Investment
of capital is higher and the technology used
is superior in large scale industries. Silk
weaving and food processing industries are
small scale industries(Fig 5.1). Production of
automobiles and heavy machinery are large
scale industries.
Ownership: Industries can be classified into private
sector, state owned or public sector, joint sector and
cooperative sector. Private sector industries are owned
and operated by individuals or a group of individuals.
The public sector industries are owned and operated by
the government, such as Hindustan Aeronautics Limited
Activity
Give some
examples of agro
based industries.
Fig 5.1: Stages in food processing of
Gorgon nut (makhana)
Industries
2015-16(19/01/2015)
Resources and Development
and Steel Authority of India Limited. Joint sector
industries are owned and operated by the state
and individuals or a group of individuals. Maruti
Udyog Limited is an example of joint sector
industry. Co-operative sector industries are
owned and operated by the producers or suppliers
of raw materials, workers or both. Anand Milk
Union Limited and Sudha Dairy are a success
stories of a co-operative venture.
Factors Affecting Location of Industries
The factors affecting the location
of industries are the availability of
raw material, land, water, labour,
power, capital, transport and market.
Industries are situate d where some or
all of these factors are easily available.
Sometimes, the government provides
incentives like subsidised power, lower
transport cost and other infrastructure
so that industries may be located in
backward
areas.
Industrialisation
often leads to development and growth
of towns and cities.
Industrial System
An industrial system consists of inputs, processes and
outputs. The inputs are the raw materials, labour and
costs of land, transport, power and other infrastructure.
The processes include a wide range of activities that
convert the raw material into finished products. The
outputs are the end product and the income earned
from it. In case of the textile industry the inputs may be
cotton, human labour, factory and transport cost. The
processes include ginning, spinning, weaving, dyeing
and printing. The output is the shirt you wear.
Industrial Regions
Industrial regions emerge when a number of industries
locate close to each other and share the benefits of
their closeness. Major industrial regions of the world
are eastern North America, western and central Europe,
eastern Europe and eastern Asia (Fig 5.4). Major
Fig 5.3: Locational factors for industries
Activity
Find out the
inputs, outputs
and processes
involved in the
manufacture of a
leather shoe.
Fig 5.2: Sudha dairy in
Co-operative sector
2015-16(19/01/2015)
Industries
Fig 5.4: World’s Industrial Regions
industrial regions tend to be located in the temperate
areas, near sea ports and especially near coal fields.
India has several industrial regions like Mumbai-
Pune cluster, Bangalore-Tamil Nadu region, Hugli region,
Ahmedabad-Baroda region, Chottanagpur industrial belt,
Vishakhapatnam-Guntur belt, Gurgaon-Delhi-Meerut
region and the Kollam-Thiruvanathapuram industrial
cluster.
Industrial Disaster
In industries, accidents/disasters mainly occur due to technical
failure or irresponsible handling of hazardous material.
One of the worst industrial disasters of all time occurred
in Bhopal on 3 December 1984 around 00:30 a.m. It was
a technological accident in which highly poisonous Methyl
Isocynate (MIC) gas along with Hydrogen Cyanide and other
reaction products leaked out of the pesticide factory of Union
Carbide. The official death toll was 3,598 in 1989. Thousands,
who survived still suffer from one or many ailments like blindness,
impaired immune system, gastrointestinal disorders etc.
Union Carbide Factory
2015-16(19/01/2015)
Resources and Development
In another incident, on 23 December 2005, due to gas well
blowout in Gao Qiao, Chongging, China, 243 people died, 9,000 were
injured and 64,000 were evacuated. Many people died because they
were unable to run after the explosion. Those who could not escape
in time suffered burns to their eyes, skin and lungs from the gas.
Risk Reduction Measures
1.	 Densely populated residential areas should be separated far
away from the industrial areas.
2.	 People staying in the vicinity of industries should be aware of
the storage of toxins or hazardous substances and their possible
effects in case if an accident occurs.
3.	 Fire warning and fighting system should be improved.
4.	 Storage capacity of toxic substances should be limited.
5.	 Pollution dispersion qualities in the industries should be
improved.
Distribution Of Major Industries
The world’s major industries are the iron and steel
industry, the textile industry and the information
technology industry. The iron and steel and textile
industry are the older industries while information
technology is an emerging industry.
The countries in which iron and steel industry is
located are Germany, USA, China, Japan and Russia.
Textile industry is concentrated in India, Hong Kong,
South Korea, Japan and Taiwan. The major hubs of
Information technology industry are the Silicon valley
of Central California and the Bangalore region of India.
Iron and Steel Industry
Like other industries iron and steel industry too
comprises various inputs, processes and outputs. This
is a feeder industry whose products are used as raw
material for other industries.
The inputs for the industry include raw materials
such as iron ore, coal and limestone, along with labour,
capital, site and other infrastructure. The process of
converting iron ore into steel involves many stages.
The raw material is put in the blast furnace where it
undergoes smelting (Fig 5.6). It is then refined. The
output obtained is steel which may be used by other
industries as raw material.
Do you know?
Emerging
industries are also
known as ‘Sunrise
Industries’.These
include Information
technology,
Wellness,
Hospitality and
Knowledge.
Glossary
Smelting
It is the process
in which metals
are extracted
from their ores by
heating beyond
the melting point
Rescue operation
in Gao Qiao
2015-16(19/01/2015)
Industries
Steel is tough and it can easily be shaped, cut,
or made into wire. Special alloys of steel can be
made by adding small amounts of other metals
such as aluminium, nickel, and copper. Alloys give
steel unusual hardness, toughness, or ability to
resist rust.
Steel is often called the backbone of modern
industry. Almost everything we use is either made
of iron or steel or has been made with tools and
machinery of these metals. Ships, trains, trucks,
and autos are made largely of steel. Even the safety
pins and the needles you use are made from steel.
Oil wells are drilled with steel machinery. Steel
pipelines transport oil. Minerals are mined with
steel equipment. Farm machines are mostly steel.
Large buildings have steel framework.
Before 1800 A.D. iron and steel industry was
located where raw materials, power supply and
running water were easily
available.
Later
ideal
location for the industry was
near coal fields and close to
canals and railways. After
1950, iron and steel industry
began to be located on large
areas of flat land near sea
ports. This is because by this
time steel works had become
very large and iron ore had
to be imported from overseas
(Fig 5.7).
In India, iron and steel
industry has developed taking
Fig. 5.6: From iron ore to steel
in a blast furnace
Fig 5.5: Manufacturing of steel
8 tonnes of coal
1 tonne of
steel
4 tonnes of
iron ore
1 tonne of
limestone
Fig 5.7: The changing location of the iron and
steel industry
1: The best location
before 1800
2: The best location
from 1800 to 1950
3: The best location
since 1950
2015-16(19/01/2015)
Resources and Development
advantage of raw materials, cheap labour, transport and
market. All the important steel producing centres such as
Bhilai, Durgapur, Burnpur, Jamshedpur, Rourkela, Bokaro
are situated in a region that spreads over four states — West
Bengal, Jharkhand, Odisha and Chhattisgarh. Bhadravati
and Vijay Nagar in Karnataka, Vishakhapatnam in Andhra
Pradesh, Salem in Tamil Nadu are other important steel
centres utilising local resources.
Jamshedpur
Before 1947, there was only one iron and steel plant in the
country – Tata Iron and Steel Company Limited (TISCO). It
was privately owned. After Independence, the government
took the initiative and set up several iron and steel plants.
TISCO was started in 1907 at Sakchi, near the confluence of
the rivers Subarnarekha and Kharkai in Jharkhand. Later
on Sakchi was renamed as Jamshedpur. Geographically,
Jamshedpur is the most conveniently situated iron and
steel centre in the country.
Fig 5.8: World: Major Iron Ore Producing Areas
2015-16(19/01/2015)
Industries
Fig 5.9: Location of iron and steel industry in Jamshedpur
Sakchi was chosen to set up the steel plant for
several reasons. This place was only 32 km away from
Kalimati station on the Bengal-Nagpur railway line. It
was close to the iron ore, coal and manganese deposits
as well as to Kolkata, which provided a large market.
TISCO, gets coal from Jharia coalfields, and iron ore,
limestone, dolomite and manganese from Odisha and
Chhattisgarh. The Kharkai and Subarnarekha rivers
ensured sufficient water supply. Government initiatives
provided adequate capital for its later development.
In Jamshedpur, several other industrial plants were
set up after TISCO. They produce chemicals, locomotive
parts, agricultural equipment, machinery, tinplate,
cable and wire.
The development of the iron and steel industry
opened the doors to rapid industrial development in
India. Almost all sectors of the Indian industry depend
heavily on the iron and steel industry for their basic
infrastructure. The Indian iron and steel industry
consists of large integrated steel plants as well as mini
Let’s do
With the help of
an atlas identify
some iron and
steel industries in
India and mark
their location on
an outline map of
India.
Sketch
2015-16(19/01/2015)
Resources and Development
steel mills. It also includes secondary producers, rolling
mills and ancillary industries.
Pittsburgh : It is an important steel city of the United
States of America. The steel industry at Pittsburgh
enjoys locational advantages. Some of the raw material
such as coal is available locally, while the iron ore comes
from the iron mines at Minnesota, about 1500 km from
Pittsburgh. Between these mines and Pittsburgh is one
of the world’s best routes for shipping ore cheaply – the
famous Great Lakes waterway. Trains carry the ore
from the Great Lakes to the Pittsburgh area. The Ohio,
the Monogahela and Allegheny rivers provide adequate
water supply.
Today, very few of the large steel mills are in Pittsburgh
itself. They are located in the valleys of the Monogahela
and Allegheny rivers above Pittsburgh and along the
Ohio River below it. Finished steel is transported to the
market by both land and water routes.
The Pittsburgh area has many factories other than
steel mills. These use steel as their raw material to make
many different products such as railroad equipment,
heavy machinery and rails.
Cotton Textile Industry
Weaving cloth from yarn is an ancient art. Cotton,
wool, silk, jute, flax have been used for making cloth.
The textile industry can be divided on the basis of raw
materials used in them. Fibres are the raw material of
textile industry. Fibres can be natural or man-made.
Natural fibres are obtained from wool, silk, cotton, linen
and jute. Man made fibres include nylon, polyester,
acrylic and rayon.
The cotton textile industry is one of the oldest
industries in the world. Till the industrial revolution in
the 18th century, cotton cloth was made using hand
spinning techniques (wheels) and looms. In 18th century
power looms facilitated the development of cotton textile
industry, first in Britain and later in other parts of the
world. Today India, China, Japan and the USA are
important producers of cotton textiles.
India has a glorious tradition of producing excellent
quality cotton textiles. Before the British rule, Indian
Do you know?
The names of Great
Lakes are Superior,
Huron, Ontario,
Michigan and Erie.
Lake Superior is
the largest of these
five lakes. It lies
higher upstream
than others.
Word Origin
The term ‘textile’
is derived from
the Latin word
texere which
means to weave.
2015-16(19/01/2015)
Industries
Fig 5.10: World : Major cotton textile manufacturing regions
hand spun and hand woven cloth already had a
wide market. The Muslins of Dhaka, Chintzes of
Masulipatnam, Calicos of Calicut and Gold-wrought
cotton of Burhanpur, Surat and Vadodara were
known worldwide for their quality and design. But the
production of hand woven cotton textile was expensive
and time consuming. Hence, traditional cotton textile
industry could not face the competition from the new
textile mills of the West, which produced cheap and good
quality fabrics through mechanized industrial units.
The first successful mechanized textile mill was
established in Mumbai in 1854. The warm, moist
climate, a port for importing machinery, availability
of raw material and skilled labour resulted in rapid
expansion of the industry in the region.
Initially this industry flourished in the states of
Maharashtra and Gujarat because of favourable humid
climate. But today, humidity can be created artificially,
and raw cotton is a pure and not weight losing raw
material, so this industry has spread to other parts
Do you know?
The first textile
mill in the country
was established at
Fort Gloster near
Kolkata in 1818
but it closed down
after some time.
2015-16(19/01/2015)
Resources and Development
of India. Coimbatore, Kanpur, Chennai, Ahmedabad,
Mumbai, Kolkata, Ludhiana, Puducherry and Panipat
are some of the other important centres.
Ahmedabad : It is located in Gujarat on the banks
of  the Sabarmati river. The first mill was established
in 1859. It soon became the second largest textile city
of India, after Mumbai. Ahmedabad was therefore often
referred to as the ‘Manchester of India’. Favourable
locational factors were responsible for the development
of the textile industry in Ahmedabad. Ahmedabad is
situated very close to cotton growing area. This ensures
easy availability of raw material. The climate is ideal
for spinning and weaving. The flat terrain and easy
availability of land is suitable for the establishment
of the mills. The densely populated states of Gujarat
and Maharashtra provide both skilled and semi-skilled
labour. Well developed road and railway network permits
easy transportation of textiles to different parts of the
country, thus providing easy access to the market.
Mumbai port nearby facilitates import of machinery
and export of cotton textiles.
But in the recent years, Ahmedabad textile mills have
been having some problems. Several textile mills have
closed down. This is primarily due to the emergence
of new textile centres in the country as well as non-
upgradation of machines and technology in the mills of
Ahmedabad.
Osaka : It is an important textile centre of Japan,
also known as the ‘Manchester of Japan’. The textile
industry developed in Osaka due to several geographical
factors. The extensive plain around Osaka ensured that
land was easily available for the growth of cotton mills.
Warm humid climate is well suited to spinning and
weaving. The  river Yodo  provides sufficient water for
the mills. Labour is easily available. Location of  port
facilitates  import of  raw cotton and for exporting textiles.
The textile industry at Osaka depends completely upon
imported raw materials. Cotton is imported from Egypt,
India, China and USA. The finished product is mostly
exported and has a good market due to good quality
and low price. Though it is one of the important textile
cities in the country, of late, the cotton textile industry
of Osaka has been replaced by other industries, such as
Do you know?
About one-third of
the Indian textile
industry’s total
production is
exported.
Activity
Collect different
types of pieces
of cloth from a
tailor’s shop and
classify them
under cotton, silk,
synthetic and
woollen. Find out
the raw materials
used in their
manufacturing.
Let’s do
On an outline
map of the world
mark the places
which provide raw
material to cotton
textile industry of
Osaka
2015-16(19/01/2015)
Industries
iron and steel, machinery, shipbuilding, automobiles,
electrical equipment and cement.
Information Technology (IT)
Imagine how much could be accomplished if companies
could operate on a twenty-four hour workday. Some
software companies in the United States of America and
in Bengaluru, India have joined hands to achieve this.
There are many ways in which this form of shift work
across oceans. For example, two software professionals,
Danny in Silicon Valley, California and Smitha in
Bengaluru are working on a joint project. While Smitha
in Bengaluru sleeps, Danny in California is working. At
the end of his workday, he sends a message to
Smitha, updating his progress. When she arrives
at work in Bengaluru, a couple of hours later, she
notices that a message awaits her. She gets to
work on the project straight away. By the end of
her workday she relays the results of her efforts
back to California. By the way they communicate
and work together, it is as if they were sitting in
adjoining offices.
The information technology industry deals
in the storage, processing and distribution of
information. Today, this industry has become global.
This is due to a series of technological, political, and
socio-economic events. The main factors guiding the
location of these industries are resource availability, cost
and infrastructure. The major hubs of the IT industry
are the Silicon Valley, California and Bengaluru, India.
Bengaluru is located on the Deccan Plateau from
where it gets the name ‘Silicon Plateau’. The city is
known for its mild climate throughout the year. Silicon
Valley, is a part of Santa Clara Valley, located next to
the Rocky Mountains of North America. The area has
temperate climate with the temperatures rarely dropping
below 0 degrees centigrade. The locational advantages
of the Silicon plateau, Bengaluru and Silicon Valley,
California are discussed on the next page. You may
notice the similarities between the two cities.
There are other emerging information technology
hubs in metropolitan centres of India such as Mumbai,
Activity
Bangalore has
some important
public sector
industries
and research
institutions.
Find out the
full forms of the
organisations
listed below.
BEL, BHEL, HAL,
NAL, DRDO, ISRO,
ITI , IISc, NCBS
and UAS
Fig 5.11: A View of an IT industry
2015-16(19/01/2015)
Resources and Development
New Delhi, Hyderabad and Chennai. Other cities
such as Gurgaon, Pune, Thiruvanthapuram, Kochi
and Chandigarh are also important centres of the IT
industry. However, Bengaluru has always had a unique
advantage, as a city with highest availability of middle
and top management talent.
Do you know?
Why do high
technology
industries group
together?
• They can be
located near
main road/
highways for
easy access.
• Firms can
benefit from
exchange of
knowledge.
• Services and
facilities such
as roads, car
parks and waste
disposal can
be organised
efficiently.
Interesting Fact
Being Bangalored…
means to lose one’s
job to someone
in the city of
Bengaluru. A few
years ago many
IT jobs in the USA
were outsourced
to countries like
India where equally
skilled labour was
available at lower
salaries.
Fig 5.12: Locational advantages
Silicon plateau - Bengaluru
Bengaluru has the largest number of educational
institutions and IT colleges in India.
The city was considered
dust free with  low rents
and low cost of living.
The state government of Karnataka was
the first to announce an IT Policy in 1992.
The city has the largest and
widest availability of skilled
managers with work experience.
Fig. 5.13:  Locational advantages of
Silicon valley - California
Close to some of the most advanced scientific
and technological centres in the world
Pleasant climate with an attractive
and a clean environment. Plenty of
space for development and future
expansion.
Located close to major roads and airports
Good access to markets and
skilled work force
2015-16(19/01/2015)
Industries
Exercises
1.	 Answer the following questions.
(i)	 What is meant by the term ‘industry’?
(ii)	 Which are the main factors which influence the location of an industry?
(iii)	 Which industrty is often referred to as the backbone of modern industry
and why?
(iv)		 Why cotton textile industry rapidly expanded in Mumbai?
(v)	 What are the similarities between information technology industry in
Bengaluru and California?
2.	 Tick the correct answer.
(i)	 Silicon Valley is located in
(a)	Bengaluru
(b)	California
(c)	 Ahmedabad
(ii)	 Which one of the following industries is known as sunrise industry?
(a)	Iron and steel indstury
(b)	Cotton textile
(c)	Information technology
(iii)	Which one of the following is a natural fibre?
(a) nylon
(b) jute
(c)	acryclic
3.	 Distinguish between the followings.
(i) 	 Agro-based and mineral based industry
(ii) 	 Public sector and joint sector industry
4.	 Give two examples of the following in the space provided :
(i)	 Raw Materials: _____________ and _____________________
(ii)	 End products: _______________ and _________________________
(iii)	 Tertiary Activities: ________________ and __________
(iv)	 Agro-based Industries: ____________ and ____________
(v)	 Cottage Industries: ___________ and ________________
(vi)	 Co-operatives: ______________________ and _____________
2015-16(19/01/2015)
Resources and Development
5.	 Activity
How to identify a location for establishing an industry —
Divide your class into groups. Each group is a Board of Directors faced with
the problem of choosing a suitable site for an iron and steel plant of Developen
Dweep. A team of technical experts has submitted a report with notes and a map.
The team considered access to iron ore, coal, water and limestone, as well as the
main market, sources of labour and port facilities. The team has suggested two
sites, X and Y. The Board of Directors has to take the final decision about where
to locate the steel plant.
• Read the report submitted by the team.
• Study the map to find out the distances of the resources from each site.
• Give each resource a ‘weight’ from 1 to 10, according to its importance. The
greater the ‘pull’ of the factor on the industry the higher the weight from 1 to 10.
• Complete the table on the next page.
• The site with the lowest total should be the most satisfactory site.
• Remember each group of directors can decide differently.
2015-16(19/01/2015)
Industries
Report
Factors/Resources affecting the location of a proposed Iron and Steel Plant
on Developen Dweep.
•	 Iron ore: This is a very large deposit of low grade iron ore. Long distance
transportation of the ore would be uneconomic.
• Coal: The only coalfield contains rich deposits of high grade coal. Transportation
of the coal is by railway, which is relatively cheap.
• Limestone: This is widely available over the island, but the purest deposits are
in the Chuna Mountains.
• Water: Both the tributaries of River Neel carry sufficient water to supply a
large iron and steel plant in all seasons. The sea water because of its high salt
content is unsuitable.
• Market: It is expected that the chief market for the Plant’s products will be the
engineering works of Rajdhanipur. Transport costs for the products- mainly
small steel bars and light steel plates would be relatively low.
• Labour supply: This will have to be recruited mainly from the unskilled workers
in the 3 fishing villages of Hil, Rah and Sing. It is expected that most workers
will commute daily from their present homes.
• Port facilities: These are at present minimal. There is a good, deep natural
harbour at port Paschimpur developed to import metal alloys.
Resource
Distance
from X
Distance
from Y
Weighting*
Distance X
weight for
site X
Distance X
weight for
site Y
Iron ore
Limestone
Water
Chief market
Labour supply
* the larger the pull, the higher the weighting
Total =
2015-16(19/01/2015)
People are a nation’s greatest resource. Nature’s bounty
becomes significant only when people find it useful. It
is people with their demands and abilities that turn
them into ‘resources’. Hence, human resource is the
ultimate resource. Healthy, educated and motivated
people develop resources as per their requirements.
Human resources like other resources are not
equally distributed over the world. They differ in their
educational levels, age and sex. Their numbers and
characteristics also keep changing.
Do you know?
The Government of
India has a Ministry
of Human Resource
Development.
The Ministry was
created in 1985
with an aim to
improve people’s
skills. This just
shows how
important people
are as a resource
for the country.
Human Resources
There are
30 children
in my class.
There are 500
children in my
school.
My village
has 1,000
people.
How many
people do you
think, there are
in the whole
world?
6.6 billion people.
How do you
write that in
numbers?
Distribution of Population
The way in which people are
spread across the earth surface
is known as the pattern of
population distribution. More
than 90 per cent of the world’s
population lives in about 30 per
cent of the land surface. The
distribution of population in the
world is extremely uneven.
Some areas are very crowded
and some are sparely populated.
The crowded areas are south and
south east Asia, Europe and north
eastern North America. Very few
people live in high latitude areas,
tropical deserts, high mountains
and areas of equatorial forests.
Many more people live north
of the Equator than south of the
Equator. Almost three-quarters
of the world’s people live in two
continents Asia and Africa.
Sixty per cent of the world’s
people stay in just 10 countries.
All of them have more than a 100
million people.
Activity
Study Fig. 6.1
and find out :
of the world’s total
population which
continent has —
(a)	only 5 per cent
(b)	only 13 per cent
(c)	only 1 per cent
(d)	only 12 per cent
Fig. 6.2: World’s most populous countries
Fig. 6.1: World population by continents
live in Asia
live in Europe
live in Africa
live in Central
and South
America
live in Northern
America
live in Oceania
(Australia, New
Zealand and the
Pacific island)
Of every 100 people in the world...
Human Resources
Locate and label these countries on the outline map of the world.
Source: Census of India, 2011 Provisional Population Totals, Paper 1 of 2011 India Series 1
Resources and Development
Activity
Look at Fig 6.2
and find out:
of these countries
how many are in
Asia? Colour them
on a world map.
Density of Population
Population density is the number of people living in a
unit area of the earth’s surface. It is normally expressed
as per square km. The average density of population in
the  whole world is 51 persons per square km. South
Central Asia has the highest density of population
followed by East and South East Asia
Do you know?
Average density of
population in India
is 382 persons per
square km.
Factors Affecting Distribution of Population
Geographical Factors
Topography: People always prefer to live on plains
rather than mountains and plateaus because these
areas are suitable for farming, manufacturing and
service activities. The Ganga plains are the most densely
populated areas of the world while mountains like
Andes, Alps and Himalayas are sparsely populated.
Climate: People usually avoid extreme climates that are
very hot or very cold like Sahara desert, polar regions of
Russia, Canada and Antarctica.
Soil: Fertile soils provide  suitable land for agriculture.
Fertile plains such as Ganga and Brahmaputra in India,
Hwang-He, Chang Jiang in China and the Nile in Egypt
are densely populated.
Water: People prefer to live in the areas where fresh
water is easily available. The river valleys of the
world are densely populated while deserts have spare
population.
Minerals: Areas with mineral deposits are more
populated. Diamond mines of South Africa and discovery
of oil in the Middle east lead to settling of people in
these areas.
Social, Cultural and Economic Factors
Social: Areas of better housing, education and health
facilities are more densely populated e.g., Pune.
When all the 30 students are
present, our classroom seems
very crowded. But when the
same class is seated in the
school assembly hall, it seems
so open and empty. Why?
Because the size or area of the
hall is much larger than that of
the classroom. However, when
all the students of the school
come into the hall, the hall too
starts looking crowded.
Human Resources
Cultural: Places with religion or cultural significance
attract people. Varanasi, Jerusalem and Vatican city
are some examples.
Economic:
Industrial
areas
provide
employment
opportunities. Large number of people are attracted to
these areas. Osaka in Japan and Mumbai in India are
two densely populated areas.
Population Change
The population change refers to change in the number
of people during a specific time. The world population
has not been stable. It has increased manifold as seen
in the Fig 6.3. Why?  This is actually due to changes in
the number of births and deaths.  For an extremely long
period of human history, until the 1800s, the world’s
population grew steadily but slowly. Large numbers of
babies were born, but they died early too. This was as
there were no proper health facilities. Sufficient food was
not available for all the people. Farmers were not able
to produce enough to meet the food requirements of all
the people. As a result the total increase in population
was very low.
In 1804, the world’s population reached one
billion. A hundred and fifty five years later, in 1959,
the world’s population reached 3 billion. This is often
called population explosion. In 1999, 40 years later,
the population doubled to 6 billion. The main reason
for this growth was that with better food supplies and
medicine, deaths were reducing, while the number of
births still remained fairly high.
Births are usually measured using the birth rate i.e.
the number of live births per 1,000 people. Deaths are
usually measured using the death rate i.e. the number
of deaths per 1,000 people. Migrations is the movement
of people in and out of an area.
Births and deaths are the
natural causes of population
change. The difference between
the birth rate and the death
rate of a country is called the
natural growth rate.
The population increase in
the world is mainly due to rapid
increase in natural growth rate.
Glossary
Life expectancy
It is the number
of years that an
average person can
expect to live.
Fig 6.3: World Population Growth
Resources and Development
Migration is another way by which population size
changes. People may move within a country or between
countries. Emigrants are people who leave a country;
Immigrants are those who arrive in a country.
Countries like the United States of America and
Australia have gained in-numbers by in-migration or
immigration. Sudan is an example of a country that
has experienced a loss in population numbers due to
out-migration or emigration.
The general trend of international migrations is
from the less developed nations to the more developed
nations in search of better employment opportunities.
Within countries large number of people may move
from the rural to urban areas in search of employment,
education and health facilities.
Patterns of Population Change
Rates of population growth vary across the world
(Fig 6.5). Although, the world’s total population is rising
rapidly, not all countries are experiencing this growth.
Some countries like Kenya have high population growth
rates. They had both high birth rates and death rates.
Now, with improving health care, death rates have
fallen, but birth rates still remain high leading to high
growth rates.
In other countries like United Kingdom, population
growth is slowing because of both low death and low
birth rates.
Polpulation Increase
Polpulation steady
Polpulation decrease
Fig 6.4: Balance of Population
Birth rate more than death
rate: population increase
Birth rate and death rate same:
population stays the same
Death rate more than birth
rate:population decreases
Birth Rate
Death Rate
Birth Rate
Death Rate
Death Rate
Birth Rate
Population Increase
Population Steady
Population Decrease
Glossary
Immigration
When a person
enters a new
country.
Emigration
When a person
leaves a country.
Human Resources
Fig. 6.5: World: Differing rates of population growth
Population Composition
How crowded a country is, has little to do with its level of
economic development. For example, both Bangladesh
and Japan are very densely populated but Japan is
economically
developed than Bangladesh.
To understand the role of
people as a resource, we need
to know more about their
qualities. People vary greatly
in their age, sex, literacy
level,
health
condition,
occupation and income level.
It is essential to understand
these
characteristics
people.
Population
composition refers to the
structure of the population.
composition
population helps us to know
I am researching
for medicines to
cure cancer.
I sing at
weddings.
I tell stories
to my
grandchildren.
I build
bridges.
I take
care of my
home.
I am a
farmer.
Think: Every human being is potential resource for the society.
What will be your contribution as a human resource?
Resources and Development
What’s that?
It shows the
pre-sent number
of males and
females in a
country along
with their age
groups.
Can I play detective
and investigate
the population of a
country.
Sure, let’s study
three countries.
What is this triangular
looking diagram?
This is a
population
pyramid.
how many are males or females, which age group they
belong to, how educated they are and what type of
occupations they are employed in, what their income
levels and health conditions are.
An interesting way of studying the population
composition of a country is by looking at the population
pyramid, also called an age-sex pyramid.
A population pyramid shows
The total population divided into various age
groups, e.g., 5 to 9 years, 10 to 14 years.
The percentage of the total population, subdivided
into males and females, in each of those groups.
Fig. 6.6: Population Pyramid
Human Resources
The shape of the population pyramid tells the story
of the people living in that particular country. The
numbers of children (below 15 years) are shown at the
bottom and reflect the level of births. The size of the
top shows the numbers of aged people (above 65 years)
and reflects the number of deaths.
The population pyramid also tells us how many
dependents there are in a country. There are two groups
of dependents — young dependents (aged below 15 years)
and elderly dependents (aged over 65 years). Those of the
working age are the economically active.
The population pyramid of a country in which birth
and death rates bothe are high is broad at the base and
rapidly narrows towards the top. This is because although,
many children are born, a
large percentage of them die
in their infancy, relatively
few become adults and there
are very few old people. This
situation is typified by the
pyramid shown for Kenya
(Fig 6.7).
countries
where
death
rates
(especially
amongst the very young)
are decreasing, the pyramid
is broad in the younger
age groups, because
more infants survive
to adulthood. This can be seen in the pyramid
for India (Fig 6.8). Such populations contain a
relatively large number of young people and which
means a strong and expanding labour force.
In countries like Japan, low birth rates make
the pyramid narrow at the base (Fig 6.9). Decreased
death rates allow numbers of people to reach
old age.
Skilled, spirited and hopeful young people
endowed with a positive outlook are the future of
any nation. We in India are fortunate to have such
a resource. They must be educated and provided
skills and opportunities to become able and
productive.
Fig. 6.7: Population
Pyramid of Kenya
Fig. 6.8: Population Pyramid
of India
Fig. 6.9: Population Pyramid
of Japan
Resources and Development
Exercise
1.	 Answer the following questions.
(i)	 Why are people considered a resource?
(ii) 	What are the causes for the uneven distribution of population in
the world?
(iii) 	The world population has grown very rapidly. Why?
(iv) 	Discuss the role of any two factors influencing population change.
(v)	 What is meant by population composition?
(vi)	 What are population pyramids? How do they help in understanding
about the population of a country?
2.	 Tick the correct answer.
(i)	 Which does the term population distribution refer to?
(a)	How population in a specified area changes over time.
(b)	The number of people who die in relation to the number of people
born in a specified area.
(c)	 The way in which people are spread across a given area.
(ii)	Which are three main factors that cause population change?
(a)	 Births, deaths and marriage
(b)	 Births, deaths and migration
(c)	 Births, deaths and life expectancy
(iii)	In 1999, the world population reached
(a)	 1 billion
(b)	 3 billion
(c)	 6 billion
(iv)	What is a population pyramid?
(a)	 A graphical presentation of the age, sex composition of a
population.
(b)	 When the population density of an area is so high that people live
in tall buildings.
(c)	 Pattern of population distribution in large urban areas.
3. 	Complete the sentences below using some of the following words.
sparsely, favourable, fallow, artificial, fertile, natural, extreme, densely
When people are attracted to an area it becomes .......................
populated
Factors that influence this include ....................... climate; good
supplies of ....................... resources and ....................... land.
Human Resources
4.	 Activity
Discuss the characteristics of a society with ‘too many under 15s’ and one
with ‘too few under 15s’.
Hint : need for schools; pension schemes, teachers, toys, wheel chairs, labour
supply, hospitals.
Some Internet Sources for More Information
www.ndmindia.nic.in
www.environmentdefense.org
www.freefoto.com
www.worldgame.org/worldmeters
www.cseindia.org
www.mnes.nic.in
www.undp.org/popin
Notes
