Glossary
Glossary
Body Language: The way people dress, talk, move, gesticulate, interact, carry themselves.
Commercialisation: The process of transforming something into a product, service or activity
that has economic value and can be traded in the market
Culture: Culture was understood as that which referred to knowledge, belief, art, morals,
law, custom and any other capabilities and habits acquired by man as a member of
society.
Decentralisation: Refers to a process of gradual devolution or transfer of functions, resources
and decision- making powers to the lower-level democratically elected bodies.
Digitalisation: Refers to the process whereby information is produced as a universal binary
code, and can thus be easily processed, stored and circulated at greater speed across
communication technologies like internet, satellite transmission, telephones, fiber optic
lines etc.
Disinvestment: Privatisation of public sector or government companies
Division of labour: Specialisation of tasks in ways that may involve exclusion from some
opportunities. Hence, closure of labour opportunities exist in employment or by gender.
Diversification: Spread of investment into different types of economic activities in order to
reduce risks.
Fordism: Refers to a system of production made popular by the American industrialist Henry
Ford in the early part of 20th century. He popularized the assembly line method of
mass production of a standardized product (cars). This era also led to payment of
better wages to the workers and social welfare policies being implemented by both
industrialists and the state.
Great and Little Tradition: The ways of folks or unlettered peasants constitute the Little
Traditions and that of the elite or the reflective few the Great Tradition. While the Little
Tradition is often localised, Great Tradition has a tendency to spread out. However
studies of festivals in India will show how sanskritic rites (Great Tradition) are often
added to non Sanskritic rites (Little Tradition) without replacing them.
Identity politics: Refers to a range of political activities that are founded in the shared
experiences of a particular marginalized group such as gender, race, ethnic group
Import-substitution development strategy: The import substitution substitutes externally
produced goods and services, especially basic necessities such as food, water, energy.
The notion of import substitution was popularized in the 1950s and 1960s to promote
economic independence of development in developing countries.
Industrialization:  The development of modern forms of industry- factories, machines and
large-scale production processes. Industrialization has beenone of the main sets of
processes influencing the social world over the past two centuries.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
Means of production: The means whereby the production of material goods is carried on
in a society, including not just technology but the social relations between producers
Micro-electronics: The branch of electronics dealing with the miniaturization of components
and circuits. The giant step in the field of micro-electronics came in 1971 with the
invention by an Intel engineer of the microprocessor that is a computer on a chip. In
1971, 2,300 transistors (a device for controlling flow of electricity) were packed on a
chip of the size of a thumbtack, in 1993, there were 35 million transistors. Compare
this with the first electronic computer which weighed 30 tons, was built on metal
stands 9 feet tall and occupied the area of a gymnasium.
Mono crop regime:  Planting a single crop or type of seed over a large area.
Norms: The normative dimension consists of folkways, mores, customs, conventions and
laws.  These are values or rules that guide social  behaviour in different contexts. We
most often follow social norms because we are used to doing it, as a result of
socialisation. All social norms are accompanied by sanctions that promote conformity.
While norms are implicit rules, laws are explicit rules.
Optic fiber: A thin glass strand designed for light transmission. A single hair-thin fiber is
capable of transmitting trillions of bits of information per second while a thin copper
wire which was used earlier could transmit only 144,000 bits of information.
Outsourcing: Giving work out to other companies.
Patrilineality:  A system in which one belongs to one’s father’s lineage or family;
Piece rate wage: Payment on the basis of items produced.
Post-Fordism: Refers to the method of flexible production adopted by multinational
companies who either off-shore their production units or outsource the whole process
of production and distribution to third world countries because of the availability of
cheap labour. This period also marks the growth of the financial sector and growth of
the culture and leisure industry evident in the appearance in cities of shopping malls,
multiplex cinema halls, amusement parks and the phenomenal growth in television
channels.
Raiyatwari system: A system of tax collection in colonial India in which the government
settled the revenue directly with the cultivator.
Reference Group: The social group which an individual or group desires to be like and
therefore adopts their ways of dressing and behaving. Usually the reference group
occupies a dominant position in society.
Sensex or Nifty index: These are indicators of the rise or fall in the share of the major
companies. Sensex is the indicator of the shares of the major companies at the
Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) while Nifty is the indicator for the companies at the
National Stock Exchange (NSE) located in New Delhi.
Social Fact: According to Emile Durkheim they refer to those aspects of social life that
shape our actions as individuals.
Sovereignty: The title to supreme power of a monarch, leader or government over an area
with a clear-cut border.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Glossary
Structure: Was widely seen as web of interactions, which are both regular and recurrent
Taylorism: System invented by Taylor, involving break up of work under management control.
Values: Ideas held by human individuals or groups about what is desirable, proper, good or
bad. Differing values represent key aspects of variations in human culture. What
individuals value is strongly influenced by the specific culture in which they happen to
live.
Urbanisation: The development of towns and cities
Zamindari system:  A system of tax collection in colonial India in which the zamindar would
collect all taxes on his lands and hen hand the revenue over to the British a authorities
(keeping a portion for himself)
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and
Development
in India
TEXTBOOK IN SOCIOLOGY FOR CLASS XII
2015-16(21/01/2015)
First Edition
April  2007
Vaisakha 1929
Reprinted
November 2007
Kartika 1929
December 2008
Pausa 1930
January 2010
Magha 1931
January 2011
Magha 1932
January 2012  Magha 1933
May 2013  Vaisakha 1935
November 2013 Kartika 1935
December 2014 Pausa 1936
PD 10T MJ
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2007
` 105.00
ISBN 81-7450-728-0
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,
re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any
form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
and should be unacceptable.
Publication Team
Head, Publication
N. K. Gupta
Division
Chief Production
Kalyan Banerjee
Officer
Chief Editor
Shveta Uppal
Chief Business
Gautam Ganguly
Manager
Production Assistant :
Rajesh Pippal
Cover and Layout
Shweta Rao
Illustrations
Blue Fish and Joel Gill
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021
Phone :  0361-2674869
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016
and printed at Work Station System (P)
Ltd., Plot No. 35, Sector-4, Industrial
Area, Govind Pura, Bhopal (MP)
2015-16(21/01/2015)
FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that children’s
life at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a
departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system
and causes a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and
textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this
basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of
sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures will
take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system of education
outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to
pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space,
time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the
information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the
sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites
of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive
and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of
knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual  calendar so that the required number of teaching days
are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and evaluation
will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making children’s life at
school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus
designers have tried to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring
and reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration for child
psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance
this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for
contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring
hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates
the hard work done by the textbook development committee responsible for this
textbook. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in Social
Sciences, Professor Hari Vasudevan and the Chief Advisor for this textbook,
Professor Yogendra Singh for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers
contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals
for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations
which have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and
personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National Monitoring
Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education,
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Director
National Council of Educational
Research and Training
New Delhi
20 November 2006
Ministry of Human Resources Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor
Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution.
As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in
the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which
will enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR SOCIAL SCIENCES TEXTBOOK AT THE
HIGHER SECONDARY LEVEL
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Calcutta, Kolkata
CHIEF ADVISOR
Yogendra Singh, Emeritus Professor, Centre for the Study of Social Systems,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
ADVISORS
Maitrayee Chaudhuri, Professor, Centre for the Study of Social Systems, Jawaharlal
Nehru University, New Delhi
Satish Deshpande, Professor, Department of Sociology, Delhi School of Economics,
University of Delhi, Delhi
MEMBERS
Amita Baviskar, Associate Professor, Institute of Economic Growth, University of
Delhi, Delhi
Anjan Ghosh, Fellow, Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Kolkata
Carol Upadhya, Visiting Associate Fellow, National Institute of Advanced Studies,
Bangalore
Khamyambam Indira, Assistant Professor, North East Regional Institution of
Education,  Shillong
Kushal Deb, Associate Professor, Department of Sociology, Indian Institute of
Technology, Mumbai
Latha Govindan Nair, Ex-teacher of Sociology, Sardar Patel Vidyalaya, New Delhi
Nandini Sunder, Professor, Department of Sociology, Delhi School of Economics,
University of Delhi, Delhi
Nitya Ramakrishnan, Advocate, Delhi High Court, Delhi
Sarika Chandrawanshi Saju, Assistant Professor, Regional Institution of Education,
NCERT, Bhopal
Tasong Newmei, Assistant Professor, North-east Regional Institution of Education,
NCERT, Shillong
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Manju Bhatt, Professor, Department of Education in Social Sciences, NCERT,
New Delhi
2015-16(21/01/2015)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The many debts incurred in meeting the challenge of producing this textbook under a
very tight schedule are gratefully acknowledged here. First of all, thanks to all the
colleagues of the editorial team members who took off from their other commitments
to devote their energies to this task.
Professor Yogendra Singh, our Chief Advisor, was, as always, a pillar of support
who gave us necessary confidence to proceed. He and Professor Krishna Kumar, Director
of the NCERT provided the abhay hastha that enabled and guided our collective efforts.
Professor Savita Sinha, Professor and Head, Department of Education in Social Sciences
and Humanities lent unstinting support. Dr. Shveta Uppal, Chief Editor at NCERT,
not only facilitated our work but encouraged us to aim higher than we would have
dared to otherwise.
We are thankful to Seema Banerjee, PGT Sociology, Laxman Public School, New Delhi;
Dev N. Pathak, Bluebell International School, New Delhi; Nirmla Choudhary, P.G.T. Sociology,
Nehru Adarsh Senior Secondary School, Delhi; Kiran Sharma, P.G.T. Sociology Govt. Boys
S. S. School, President Estate, New Delhi for providing their feedback and inputs.
Special thanks are due to Ms. Shweta Rao, who took on the challenge of designing
the book and actually made it possible to realise our efforts. Her contributions are visible
in every page. The council also acknowledges the support and contribution of Jesna
Jayachandran, Research Scholar of the Centre for the Study of Social Systems, Jawaharlal
Nehru University, New Delhi.
Our special thanks to Professor Satish Saberwal and Professor N. Jayaram, members
of the Monitoring Committee from whose meticulous comments and suggestions we
benefited enormously.
Finally, we are grateful to all the institutions and individuals who have kindly
allowed us to use materials from their publications, each of which is acknowledged in
the text. The NCERT is specially grateful  to Mr. R.K. Laxman for allowing us to use his
cartoons, to Dr. Malavika Karlekar for the use of photographs from her book, Visualising
Indian Women 1875-1947, published by Oxford University Press, New Delhi, to
Dr. Radha Kumar for the use of visuals from her book The History of Doing: An Illustrated
Account of Movements for Women’s Rights and Feminism in India 1800-1990 to
Mr. Ravi Agarwal for his collection of photographs. We have also used some material
and photograph from India Today, Outlook and Frontline, The Times of India, The
Hindu, The Hindustan Times. The Council thanks the authors, copyright holders and
publishers of these materials. The NCERT gratefully acknowledges  the library of the
Rail Museum Chanakya Puri, New Delhi. Y.K. Gupta and R.C. Das of  Central Institute
of Educational Technology, NCERT, New Delhi.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contribution of Nazia Khan, DTP
Operator, Dinesh Kumar, Incharge, Computer Station and Rishi Pal Singh, Sr. Proof
Reader, NCERT, in shaping this textbook. We are also grateful to Publication Department,
NCERT for all their support.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
SUGGESTIONS FOR USE
You have already gone through the earlier book. You are therefore familiar with
the spirit of the National Curriculum Framework that the textbooks seek to
communicate. The idea is to move away from learning by rote. The effort in the
textbook is to give “higher priority and space to opportunities for contemplation
and wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on
experience”. Every effort has been made to connect the subject matter to the
contemporary social environment of and to the everyday life of the child. Towards
making this possible we have boxes that draw from reports in newspapers,
magazines, brief extracts from fiction, government reports, apart from the many
examples to the everyday life of children. The exercises and activities in the textbook
are therefore an essential part of the book. An effort has also been made to draw
from sociological writings to give a flavour of sociological research.
This has been a challenging, sometimes difficult task for us and we are aware
that your suggestions will go a long way to improve upon it. Please do write to us
at the following address – The Head, Department of Education in Social Sciences
and Humanities, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016. Or you can
send e-mail to: ncertsociologytexts@gmail.com. We look forward to your responses,
and specially your critical comments, including suggestions for improvements in
the layout and format. We promise to acknowledge all useful suggestions in the
next edition of the textbook.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
CONTENTS
FOREWORD
SUGGESTIONS FOR USE
Chapter 1
Structural Change
Chapter 2
Cultural Change
Chapter 3
The Story of Indian Democracy
Chapter 4
Change and Development in Rural Society
Chapter 5
Change and Development in Industrial Society
Chapter 6
Globalisation and Social Change
Chapter 7
Mass Media and Communications
Chapter 8
Social Movements
Glossary
1 - 16
17-34
35-54
55-72
73-90
91-112
113-134
135-160
161-164
2015-16(21/01/2015)
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Structural
Change
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
nderstanding the present usually involves some grasp of its past. This holds
true probably as much for an individual or social group as for an entire country
such as India. India has a long and rich history. While knowing about its past in
ancient and medieval times is very important, its colonial experience is particularly
significant for comprehending modern India. This is not just because many
modern ideas and institutions reached India through colonialism. It is  also
because such an exposure to modern ideas was contradictory or paradoxical.
For example Indians in the colonial period read about western liberalism and
freedom. Yet they lived under a western, colonial rule that denied Indians liberty
and freedom. It is contradictions of this kind that shaped many of the structural
and cultural changes that chapter 1 and 2 looks at.
As the next few chapters shall show, our social reform and nationalist
movement, our laws, our political life and our Constitution, our industry and
agriculture, our cities and our villages have been shaped by our paradoxical
experience with colonialism. This has had lasting implications for our specific
experience with modernity.  The following are just some of the many instances
we face in our daily life.
We have a parliamentary and a legal system, a police and educational system
built very much on the British model. We drive on the left side of the road like the
British. We have ‘bread-omlette’ and ‘cutlets’ as menu offered in many roadside
eateries and canteens. A very popular manufacturer of biscuits, is actually named
after Britain. Many school uniforms include neck-ties. We often admire the west
and as often resent it. These are just some of the many and complex ways that
British colonialism lives on in contemporary India.
Different dimensions of modernity
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Structural Change
Let us take the
example of the English
language to show how its
impact has been many
sided and paradoxical in
India. This is not a matter
about wrong spellings
alone. English is not only
widely used in India but
impressive
literary writings by
Indians in English. This
knowledge of English has given
Indians an edge in the global market.
But English continues to be a mark
of privilege. Not knowing English is a
disadvantage that tells in the job
market. At the same time for those
who were traditionally deprived of
access to formal education such as
the Dalits, knowledge of English may
open doors of opportunities that were
formerly closed.
In this chapter we focus on
structural changes that colonialism
brought in.  We, therefore, need to shift
from this broad impressionistic view
to a clearer understanding of
colonialism as a structure and system.
Colonialism brought into being new
political, economic and social structural
changes. In this chapter we look at only
two of these structural changes namely
industrialisation and urbanisation. While
the focus is on specific colonial context we
also briefly touch on developments after
independence.
All these structural changes were
accompanied by cultural changes which,
we look at in the next chapter. However
any strict separation of the two is difficult.
As you will see the structural changes are
difficult to discuss without some mention
of the cultural changes too.
Ø Think of everyday objects, such as pieces of furniture
or kinds of food, or phrases in Indian languages that
may be traced to our past as a British colony.
Ø Identify a novel or short story or film or television serial
in any Indian language that recounts the times of
colonialism. Discuss its many dimensions.
Ø You must have seen a court scene in a film or television
serial. Did you notice the procedures? Most are borrowed
from the British system. Not too many years
ago Indian judges wore wigs when in court.
Find out where did this practice come from?
ACTIVITY 1.1
Virtually English
Housewives and college students who know English take up
plum assignments as online scorers in BPOs, writes K. Jeshi
It is a familiar classroom scene. The only unfamiliar thing is
the setting. Computer screens turn blackboards and
housewives take over as teachers to evaluate English essays
written by non-English speaking students in Asia. All, at the
click of the mouse. The encouraging comments given by the
evaluators here motivate students in Japan, Korea and China
to learn English.
Online education, the new wave in the BPO segment, is
bringing cheer to those who want to earn a fast buck. All you
need is a flair for English, creative skills, basic computer
knowledge, the drive to go that extra mile and willingness to
learn.
Source: The HINDU, Thursday, May 04, 2006
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
1.1 UNDERSTANDING COLONIALISM
At one level, colonialism simply means
the establishment of rule by one
country over another. In the
modern period western
colonialism has had the
greatest
impact.
India’s past has
been marked by the
entry of numerous
groups of people
at different times
who have estab-
lished their rule
different
parts
constitutes modern
India today. The
impact of colonial rule
is distinguishable from
all other earlier rules
because the changes it
brought in were far-reaching and
deep. History is full of examples of the
annexation of foreign territory and the domination
of weaker by stronger powers. Nevertheless, there is a vital difference between
the empire building of pre-capitalist times and that of capitalist times. Apart
from outright pillage, the pre-capitalist conquerors benefited from their
domination by exacting a continuous flow of tribute. On the whole they did not
interfere with the economic base. They simply took the tribute that was skimmed
off the economic surplus that was produced traditionally in the subjugated areas.
(Alavi and Shanin, 1982)
In contrast British colonialism which was based on a capitalist system directly
interfered to ensure greatest profit and benefit to British capitalism. Every policy
was geared towards the strengthening and expansion of British capitalism. For
instance it changed the very laws of the land. It changed not just land ownership
laws but decided even what crops ought to be grown and what ought not to be.
It meddled with the manufacturing sector. It altered the way production and
distribution of goods took place. It entered into the forests. It cleared trees and
started tea plantations. It brought in Forest Acts that changed the lives of
pastoralists. They were prevented from entering many forests that had earlier
provided valuable forage for their cattle. The box carries a brief account of the
impact of colonial forest policy in North-East India.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Structural Change
Colonialism also led to considerable movement of people. It led to movement
of people from one part to another within India. For instance people from present
day Jharkhand moved to Assam to work on the tea plantations. A newly emerging
middle class particularly from the British Presidency regions of Bengal and
Madras moved as government employees and professionals like doctors and
lawyers moved to different parts of the country. People were carted in ships from
India to work on other colonised lands in distant Asia, Africa and Americas.
Many died on their way. Most could never return. Today many of their descendents
are known as people of Indian origin.
To facilitate the smooth functioning of its
rule, colonialism introduced a wide array of
changes in every sphere, be it legal or cultural
or architectural. Colonialism was a story
apart in the very scale and intensity of the
changes that it brought about. Some of these
changes were deliberate while some took
place in an unintended fashion. For example
we saw how western education was
introduced to create Indians who would
manage British colonialism. Instead it led to
the growth of a nationalist and anti-colonial
consciousness.
This magnitude and depth of the structural changes that colonialism
unleashed can be better grasped if we try and understand some basic features
BOX 1.1
Forest Policy in the Colonial Period in North-East India
… The advent of the railways in Bengal …marked an important turning point, which saw the
conversion of its forest policy in Assam (Assam was then part of the Bengal province) from one of
laissez faire into one of active intervention. …The demand for railway sleepers transformed the forests in
Assam (this included all the present-day seven sister states) from an unproductive wilderness into a lucrative
source of revenue for the colonial administration.
Between 1861 and 1878, an area of approximately
269 square miles had been constituted as reserved
forests. By 1894, the area had gone up to 3,683 square
miles. And, by the end of the nineteenth century, the
area of forests under the department was 20,061
square miles (constituting 42.2 per cent of the total
area of the province), of which 3,609 square miles
comprised reserved forests…   Significantly, large
areas of these forests are located in the hill areas
occupied by tribal communities who for centuries depended upon and lived in close harmony with nature.
(Nongbri, 2003)
After 1834 till 1920, ships left from the
ports of India on a regualr basis carrying
people of various religions, gender,
classes and castes destined to work for a minimum
of five years on one of the plantations in Mauritius.
For many decades the recruiting ground was
centred in Bihar, in particular, in districts such as
Patna, Gaya, Arrah, Saran, Tirhoot, Champaran,
Monghyr, Bhagalpur and Purnea. (Pineo 1984)
BOX 1.2
Train passing through India’s first creak bridge
near Thane - 1854
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
of capitalism. Capitalism is an economic system in which the means of production
are privately owned and organised to accumulate profits within a market system.
(We have already discussed the capitalist market in the first book – Indian Society.)
Capitalism in the west emerged out of a complex process of European exploration
of the rest of the world, its plunder of wealth and resources, an unprecedented
growth of science and technology, its harnessing to industries and agriculture.
What marked capitalism from the very beginning was its dynamism, its potential
to grow, expand, innovate, use technology and labour in a way best assured to
ensure greatest profit. What marked it too was its global nature. Western
colonialism was inextricably connected to the growth of western capitalism. This
had a lasting impact on the way capitalism developed in a colonised country like
India. In the next section on industrialisation and urbanisation we see how
colonialism led to very distinct patterns.
If capitalism became the dominant economic system, nation states became
the dominant political form. That we all live in nation states and that we all have
a nationality or a national citizenship may appear natural to us today. Before
the First World War passports were not widely used for international travel, and
in most areas few people had one. Societies were, however, not always organised
on these lines. Nation state pertains to a particular type of state, characteristic of
the modern world. A government has sovereign power within a defined territorial
area, and the people are citizens of a single nation. Nation states are closely
associated with the rise of nationalism. The principle of nationalism assumes
that any set of people have a right to be free and exercise sovereign power. It is an
important part of the rise of democratic ideas. You will be reading more about
this in chapter 3. It must have struck you that the practice of colonialism and
the principle of nationalism and democratic rights are contradictory. For colonial
rule implied foreign rule such as British rule over India. Nationalism implied
that the people of India or of any colonised society have an equal right to be
sovereign. Indian nationalist leaders were quick to grasp this irony.  They declared
that freedom or swaraj was their birth- right and fought for both political and
economic freedom.
1.2  URBANISATION AND INDUSTRIALISATION
THE COLONIAL EXPERIENCE
Industrialisation refers to the emergence of machine production, based on the
use of inanimate power resources like steam or electricity. In most standard
western textbook of sociology we learn that in even the most advanced of
traditional civilizations, most people were engaged in working on the land. The
relatively low level of technological development did not permit more than a small
minority to be freed from the chores of agricultural production. By contrast, a
prime feature of industrial societies today is that a large majority of the employed
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Structural Change
population work in factories, offices or shops rather than agriculture.    Over 90
per cent of people in the west live in towns and cities, where most jobs are to be
found and new job opportunities are created. Not surprisingly, therefore, we
usually associate urbanisation with industrialisation.  They often do occur
together but not always so.
For instance in Britain, the first society to undergo industrialisation, was
also the earliest to move from being rural to a
predominantly urban country.
In 1800, well under 20 per cent of the population lived in
towns or cities of more than 10,000 inhabitants. By 1900
this proportion had become 74 per cent. The capital city,
London, was home to about 1.1 million people in 1800; it
increased in size to a population of over 7 million by the
start of the twentieth century. London was then by far the
largest city ever seen in the world, a vast manufacturing,
commercial and financial centre at the heart of a still-
expanding British empire.  (Giddens 2001: 572)
In India the impact of the very same British
industrialisation led to deindustrialisation in some
sectors. And decline of old urban centres. Just as
manufacturing boomed in Britain, traditional
exports of cotton and silk manufactures from India
declined in the face of Manchester competition. This
period also saw the further decline of cities such as
Surat and Masulipatnam while Bombay and
Madras grew. When the British took over Indian
states, towns like Thanjavur, Dhaka, and
Murhidabad lost their courts and, therefore, some
of their artisans and court gentry. From the end of
the 19th century, with the installation of mechanised
factory industries, some towns became much more
heavily populated.
Urban luxury manufactures like the high quality silks
and cottons of Dacca or Murshidabad must have
been hit first by the almost simultaneous collapse of
indigeneous court demand and the external market
on which these had largely depended. Village crafts
in the interior, and particularly, in regions other than
eastern India where British penetration was earliest and deepest, probably
survived much longer, coming to be seriously affected only with the spread of
railways. (Sarkar 1983: 29)
Jaipur
Mumbai
Chennai
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
Unlike Britain where the
impact of industrialisation led to
more people moving into urban
areas, in India the initial impact
of the same British industriali-
sation  led to more people moving
into agriculture. The Census of
India Report shows this clearly.
Sociological writings in India
have often discussed both the
contradictory and unintended
consequences of colonialism.
Comparisons have been made
between the industrialisation in
the west and the growth of a western middle class with that of the Indian
experience. The box below carries
one such observation. It also shows
how industrialisation is not just
about new machine based
production but also a story of the
growth of new social groups in
society
social
relationships. In other words it is
about changes in the  Indian social
structure.
Cities had a key role in the
economic system of empires.
Coastal cities such as Mumbai,
Kolkata and Chennai were
favoured. From here primary
commodities could be easily
exported and manufactured
goods could be cheaply
imported. Colonial cities
were the prime link
between the economic
centre or core in Britain
and periphery or margins
in colonised India. Cities
in this sense were the
concrete expression of
global capitalism. In
British India for example
Bombay was planned and
Find out more about the beginnings of the three cities.
Find out also more about the story of the names they
were called by leading to the very recent changes
from Bombay to Mumbai, Madras to Chennai,
Calcutta to Kolkata, Bangalore to Bangaluru.
Find out about the growth of other colonial urban
centres.
ACTIVITY 1.2
BOX 1.4
The substitutes offered by the
East India Company and
subsequently by the British
government were land ownership and
facilities for education in English. The facts
that the first remained unconnected with
agricultural productivity and the second
with the mainstream of Indian cultural
traditions amply show that the alternatives
were not sufficient in the sense that they
could not create any genuine middle class.
We know only too well that the zamindars
become parasites in land and the
graduates job hunters.
(Mukherjee 1979: 114)
BOX 1.3
The Census of India Report, 1911,
Vol. 1, p. 408.
The extensive importation of cheap European piecegoods and
utensils, and the establishment in India itself of numerous factories of
the Western type, have more or less destroyed many village industries.
The high prices of agricultural produce have also led many village
artisans to abandon their hereditary craft in favour of agriculture…The
extent to which this disintegration of the old village organisation is
proceeding varies considerably in different parts. The change is most
noticeable in the more advanced provinces.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Structural Change
re-developed so that by 1900 over
three-quarters of India’s raw
cotton were shipped through the
city. Calcutta exported jute to
Dundee while Madras sent coffee,
sugar, indigo dyes and cotton to
Britain.
Urbanisation in the colonial
period saw the decline of some
earlier urban centres and the
emergence of new colonial cities.
Kolkata was one of the first of
such cities.  In 1690, an English
merchant named Job Charnock arranged to lease three villages (named Kolikata,
Gobindapur, and Sutanuti) by the river Hugli in order to set up a trading post.
In 1698, Fort William was established by the river for defensive purposes, and a
large open area was cleared around the fort for military engagements. The fort
and the open area (called Maidan) formed the core of the city that emerged rather
rapidly.
THE TEA PLANTATIONS
We have already seen how industrialisation and
urbanisation did not happen in India quite the way it
did in Britain. More importantly, this is not because
we began industrialisation late, but because our early
industrialisation and urbanisation in the modern
period were governed by colonial interests.
We cannot go into details about different industries
here. We simply take the case of the tea industry in
India as an example. Official reports show how the
colonial government often used unfair means to hire
and forcibly keep labourers. And clearly acted on behalf
of the British planters. From fictional and other accounts we get a glimpse of
what life was for planters in this industry.
Significantly the colonial adminis-
trators were clear that harsh measures
were taken against the labourers to
make sure they benefited the planters.
They were also fully aware that the laws
of a colonised country did not have to
stick to the democratic norms that the
British back home had to follow in
Britain.
BOX 1.4
A model of the South Asian colonial city
The European town…had spacious bungalows,
elegant apartment houses, planned streets, trees on
both sides of the street,…clubs for afternoon and evening get-
togethers…The open space was reserved for…Western recreational
facilities, such as race and golf courses, soccer and cricket. When
domestic water supply, electric connections, and sewage links were
available or technically possible, the European town residents
utilised them fully, whereas their use was quite restricted to the
native town.
(Dutt 1993: 361)
BOX 1.5
Tea garden
A woman plucking tea leaves
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
You have a sense of the lives of the labourers. Let us see how the planters’ lived.
BOX 1.6
How were labourers recruited?
Tea industry began in India in 1851. Most of the tea gardens were situated in
Assam. In 1903, the industry employed 4,79,000 permanent and 93,000 temporary
employees. Since Assam was sparsely populated and the tea plantations were often
located on uninhabited hillsides, bulk of the sorely needed labour had to be imported
from other provinces. But to bring thousands of people every year from their far-off homes
into strange lands, possessing an unhealthy climate and infected with strange fevers,
required the provision of financial and other incentives, which the tea-planters of Assam
were unwilling to offer. Instead, they had recourse to fraud and coercion; and they persuaded
the government to aid and abet them in this unholy task by passing penal laws. …The
recruitment of labourers for tea gardens of Assam was carried on for years mostly by
contractors under the provisions of the Transport of Native Labourers Act (No. III) of 1863
of Bengal as amended in 1865, 1870 and 1873.
Read the two boxes below and discuss:
The role of the colonial government  and its legislations to regulate work.
The role of the colonial state to help British tea planters.
Find out where the descendents of the workers work and live today.
EXERCISE FOR BOX 1.6 AND 1.7
BOX 1.7
From Curzon’s Speeches II, pp. 238-9
The labour system in Assam was essentially that of indenture by which the
labourers went to Assam under contract for a number of years. The government
helped the planters by providing for penal sanction in case of non-fulfillment of the contract
by the labourers.
This view is explicitly made by T. Raleigh, Law Member, when speaking on the Assam
Labour and Emigration Bill of 1901: “The labour-contract authorised by this Bill is a
transaction by which, to put it rather bluntly, a man is often committed to Assam before he
knows what he is doing, and is thereupon held to his promise for four years, with a threat
of arrest and imprisonment if he fails to perform it. Conditions like these have no place in
the ordinary law of master and servant. We made them part of the law of British India at the
instance and for the benefit of the planters of Assam… The fact remains that the motive
power in this legislation is the interest of the planter, not the interest of the coolie”.
( ICP 1901, Vol XL, pp.133 cited in Chandra 1966: 361-2 emphasis inserted).
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Structural Change
INDUSTRIALISATION IN INDEPENDENT INDIA
We saw in the earlier section how the colonial state had an important role in the
way industrialisation and urbanisation took place in India. Here we very briefly
touch upon how the independent Indian state played an active role in promoting
industrialisation. And in some sense was responding to the impact that
colonialism had on the growth of industry in India. Chapter 5 will deal with
Indian industrialisation and its shift from the early years of independence to
developments after 1990 with liberalisation.
For Indian nationalists the issue of economic exploitation
under colonial rule was a central issue. Images of pre-
colonial fabled riches of India contrasted with the poverty
of British India. The Swadeshi movement strengthened the
loyalty to the national economy.  Modern ideas made people
realise that poverty was preventable. Indian nationalists
saw rapid industrialisation of the economy as the path
towards both growth and social equity. Development of
heavy and machine-making industries, expansion of the public sector and holding
of a large cooperative sector were considered very important.
A modern and prosperous India, as visualised by Jawaharlal Nehru, was to
be built on an edifice of giant steel plants or gigantic dams and power stations.
Read Nehru’s remarks on the Bhakra Nangal dam:
Our engineers tell us that probably nowhere else in the world is there a dam as high as
this. The work bristles with difficulties and complications. As I walked around the site I
thought that these days the biggest temple and mosques and gurdwara is the place
where man works for the good of mankind. Which place can be greater than this, this
Bhakra Nangal, where thousands and lakhs of men have worked, have shed their blood
and sweat and laid down their lives as well? (Nehru 1980: 214)
BOX 1.8
How did the planter’s live?
Parbatpuri had always been an important offloading and loading point. The doughty British
managers and their mems always came down from the estates surrounding Parbatpuri when a
steamer docked there. In spite of the inaccessibility of the gardens, they had lived lives of luxury. Huge, sprawling
bungalows, set on sturdy wooden stilts to protect the inmates from wild animals, were surrounded by velvety lawns
and jewel bright flower beds…They had trained a large number of malis, bawarchis and bearers to serve them to
perfection. Their wide verandahed houses gleamed and glistened under the ministrations of this army of liveried
servants.
Of course, everything from scouring powder to self-raising flour, from saftey pins to silverware, from delicate
Nottingham lace tablecloths to bath salts, had come up the river on the steamers.  Indeed, even the large cast-iron
bathtubs that were invitingly placed in huge bathrooms, tubs which were filled every morning by busy bistiwallahs
carrying buckets up from the bungalow’s well, had been brought up via steamer.
(Phukun 2005)
For many of you Amul Butter and
other Amul milk products may be
familiar names. Find out how this
milk industry emerged?
ACTIVITY 1.3
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
Nearly a decade before the country’s Independence, in 1938 a National
Planning Committee with Jawaharlal Nehru as the Chairman and K.T. Shah
as the general editor was set up by the Indian National Congress. The Committee started
functioning in 1939, but it could not make much headway as the chairman was arrested by
the British and the war broke out. Notwithstanding these obstacles, 29 sub-committees divided
into eight groups were set up to deal with all aspects of national life and to work in accordance
with a predetermined plan. The major areas on which the Committee focussed its attention
were:
Agriculture and other sources of primary production
Industries or other secondary sources of production
Human factor: labour and population
Exchange and finance
Public utilities: transport and communication
Social services: health and housing
Education: general and technical
Woman’s role in a planned economy
Among the sub-committees some submitted their final reports and several others interim
reports before India became independent. Several reports were published by 1948-49.
The Planning Commission was set up in March 1950 by a resolution of the Government of
India, which is defining the scope of the Commission’s work.
BOX 1.9
Many new industrial towns emerged in India in the years after Independence. May be some of you live in such
towns.
Find out more about towns like Bokaro, Bhilai, Rorkella, Durgapur.  Find out whether such industrial towns
exist in your region.
Do you know of townships built around fertilizer plants and oil wells.
If no such town exists in your region, find out the reasons for the absence.
ACTIVITY 1.4
URBANISATION IN INDEPENDENT INDIA
You would be more than aware of increasing urbanisation in India. Recent years
of globalisation have led to enormous expansion and change of cities. We shall
be dealing with that later in chapter 6. Here we draw from a sociological account
of the different kinds of urbanisation in India.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Structural Change
Writing on the different kinds
of urbanisation witnesses in the
first
decades
after
independence sociologist M.S.A.
Rao argued that in India many
villages all over India are
becoming increasingly subject to
the impact of urban influences.
But the nature of urban impact
varies according to the kind of
relations a village has with a city
or town. He describes three
different situations of urban
impact as mentioned in the box.
A view of an
urban village
Firstly, there are villages in which a sizeable number of people have sought
employment in far-off cities. They live there leaving behind the members of
their families in their natal villages. In Madhopur, a village in north central
India, 77 out of 298 households have migrants, and a little less than half of all the
migrants work in two cities of Bombay and Calcutta. About 75 percent of the total migrants
send money regularly, and 83 per cent visit the village from four to five times a year to
once in two years... A considerable number of emigrants reside not only in Indian cities
but also in overseas towns. For instance, there are many overseas migrants from Gujarat
villages living in African and British towns. They have built fashionable houses in their
natal villages, invested money on land and industry, and have donated literally to the
establishment of educational institutions and trusts...
The second kind of urban impact is to be seen in villages which are situated near an
industrial town...When an industrial town like Bhilai comes up in the midst of villages,
some villages are totally uprooted while the lands of others are partially acquired. The
latter are found to receive an influx of immigrant workers, which not only stimulates a
demand for houses and a market inside the village but creates problems of ordering
relationships between the native residents and the immigrants...
...The growth of metropolitan cities accounts for the third type of urban impact on the
surrounding villages...While a few villages are totally absorbed in the process of expansion,
only the land of many others, excluding the inhabited area, is used for urban development...
(Rao 1974: 486-490)
BOX 1.10
EXERCISE FOR BOX 1.10
Read the above account carefully. May be you have seen other ways or similar ways that
urbanisation takes place. Write a brief account of this. Discuss each other’s accounts in class.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
POPULATION OF SELECTED METROPOLITAN CITIES (URBAN AGGLOMERATIONS)
DECADAL GROWTH RATE POPULATION OF SELECTED METROPOLITAN CITIES IN
PERCENTAGE
{Above chart is indicating the decadal growth rate of population of selected
metropolitan cities upto 2001. Below we are indicating that growth rate from
2001 to 2011.
It is like this: Greater Mumbai (now devided into two parts):  (i) Mumbai –05.75%,
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Structural Change
CONCLUSION
It will be obvious to you that colonialism is not just a topic in history but
something which lives on in complex ways in our lives even today. It is also evident
from the above account that industrialisation and urbanisation implies not just
changes in production systems, technological innovations, density of settlements
but also ‘a way of life’. (Wirth 1938). You shall be reading more about
industrialisation and urbanisation in independent India in chapter 5 and 6.
1.    How has colonialism impacted our lives? You can either focus on one
aspect like culture or politics or treat them together.
Industrialisation and urbanisation are linked processes. Discuss.
Identify any town or city with which you are familiar. Find out both the
history of its growth and its contemporary status.
You may be living in a very small town, may be in a very big city, a semi
urban settlement or a village.
n Describe the place where you live.
n What are the features, which make you think it is a town and not a
city, a village and not a town, or a city and not a village?
n Is there any factory where you live?
n Is agriculture the main job that people do?
n Is it the occupational nature that has a determining influence?
Is it the buildings?
Is it the availability of educational opportunities?
Is it the way people live and behave?
Is it the way people talk and dress?
Questions
(ii) Suburb Mumbai 8.01%, Kolkata –23.12%, Delhi 20.96%, Chennai 07.77%,
Hyderabad 04.71%, Bangaluru 27.95%, Pune 30.34%, Kanpur –09.72% and
Nagpur –08.12%. Here we can see that some cities population growth is in minus
also.]
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
REFERENCES
Alavi, Hamza and Teodor Shanin Ed. 1982. Introduction to the Sociology of
Developing Societies. The Macmillan Press. London.
Chandra, Bipan. 1977. The Rise and Growth of Economic Nationalism. People’s
Publishing House. New Delhi.
Dutt, A.K. 1993. “From Colonial City to Global City: The Far from Complete
Spatial Transformation of Calcutta” in  Brunn S.D.and Williams J.F. Ed. Cities
of the World. pp. 351-388. Harper Collins. New York.
Giddens, Anthony. 2001. Sociology (Fourth edition). Cambridge. Polity.
Mukherjee, D.P. 1979. Sociology of Indian Culture. Rawat. Jaipur.
Nehru, Jawaharlal. 1980. An Anthology. Ed. by S. Gopal. Oxford University
Press. New Delhi,
Nongbri, Tiplut. 2003. Development, Ethnicity and Gender: Select Essays on
Tribes in India. Rawat. Jaipur/Delhi.
Mitra and Phukan. 2005. The Collector’s Wife. Penguin Books. New Delhi.
Pineo, H.I.T.F. 1984. Land way: The Life History of Indian Cane Workers in
Mauritius. Moka: Mahatma Gandhi Institute.
Rao, M.S.A. Ed. 1974. Urban Sociology in India: Reader and Source Book. Orient
Longman. Delhi.
Sarkar, Sumit. 1983. Modern India 1885 -1947. Macmillan. Madras.
Wirth, Louis. 1938. ‘Urbanism as away of life’. American Journal of Sociology.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Cultural Change
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
e saw in the last chapter how colonialism brought in changes that altered
the structure of Indian society. Industrialisation and urbanisation transformed
the lives of people.  Factories replaced fields as places of work for some. Cities
replaced villages as places to live for many. Living and working arrangements
or structures changed.  Changes also took place in culture, ways of life, norms,
values, fashions and even body language. Sociologists understand, social
structure, as  a ‘continuing arrangement of persons in relationships defined or
controlled by institutions’ and  ‘culture’ as ‘socially established norms or patterns
of behaviour’. You have already studied about the structural changes that
colonialism brought about in chapter 1. You will observe how important those
structural changes are for understanding the cultural changes that this chapter
seeks to understand.
This chapter looks at two related developments, both a complex product of
the impact of colonial rule. The first deals with the deliberate and conscious
efforts made by the 19 th century social reformers and early 20th century
nationalists to bring in changes in social practices that discriminated against
women and ‘lower’ castes. The second with the less deliberate yet decisive changes
in cultural practices that can broadly be understood as the four processes of
sanskritisation, modernisation, secularisation and westernisation.
Sanskritisation pre-dates the coming of colonial rule. The other three processes
can be understood better as complex responses of the people of India to the
changes that colonialism brought about.
2.1 SOCIAL REFORM MOVEMENTS IN THE
TH AND EARLY 20
TH CENTURY
You have already seen the far-
reaching impact of colonialism
on our lives. The social reform
movements which emerged in
India in the 19th century arose to
the challenges that colonial
Indian society faced.  You
probably are familiar with what
were termed social evils that
plagued Indian society. The well-
known issues are that of sati,
child marriage, widow remarriage and caste discrimination. It is not that attempts
were not made to fight social discrimination in pre-colonial India. They were
central to Buddhism, to Bhakti and Sufi movements. What marked these 19th
century social reform attempts was the modern context and mix of ideas. It was a
creative combination of modern ideas of western liberalism and a new look on
traditional literature.
Raja Ram Mohun Roy       Pandita Ramabai      Sir Syed Ahmed Khan
© NCERT
not to be republished
Cultural Change
Sociologist Satish Saberwal elaborates upon the modern context by sketching
three aspects to the modern framework of change in colonial India:
modes of communication
forms of organisation, and
the nature of ideas
New technologies speeded up various forms of communication. The printing
press, telegraph, and later the microphone, movement of people and goods
through steamship and railways helped quick movement of new ideas. Within
India, social reformers from Punjab and Bengal exchanged ideas with reformers
from Madras and Maharashtra.  Keshav Chandra Sen of Bengal visited Madras
in 1864. Pandita Ramabai travelled to different corners of the country. Some of
them went to other countries. Christian missionaries reached remote corners
of present day Nagaland, Mizoram and Meghalaya.
The mix of ideas
Ram Mohun Roy attacked the practice of sati on the basis of both appeals to humanitarian and
natural rights doctrines as well as Hindu shastras.
Ranade’s writings entitled The Texts of the Hindu Law on the Lawfulness of the Remarriage of Widows and
Vedic Authorities for Widow Marriage elaborated the shastric sanction for remarriage of widows.
The content of new education was modernising and liberal. The literary content of the courses in the humanities
and social sciences was drawn from the literature of the European Renaissance, Reformation and
Enlightenment. Its themes were humanistic, secular and liberal.
Sir Sayed Ahmed Khan’s interpretation of Islam emphasised the validity of free enquiry (ijtihad) and the alleged
similarities between Koranic revelations and the laws of nature discovered by modern science.
Kandukiri Viresalingam’s The Sources of Knowledge reflected his familiarity with navya-nyaya logic. At the
same time he translated Julius Huxley.
BOX 2.1
New technologies and
organisations that speeded up
various forms of communication
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
Modern social organisations like the Brahmo Samaj in Bengal and
Arya Samaj in Punjab were set up. The All-India Muslim Ladies
Conference (Anjuman-E-Khawatn-E-Islam) was founded in 1914.  Indian
reformers debated not just in public meetings but through public media
like newspapers and journals. Translations of writings of social reformers
from one Indian language to another took place. For instance, Vishnu
Shastri published a Marathi translation of Vidyasagar’s book in Indu
Prakash in 1868.
New ideas of liberalism and freedom, new ideas of homemaking and
marriage, new roles for mothers and daughters, new ideas of self-
conscious pride in culture and tradition emerged. The value of education
became very important. It was seen as very crucial for a nation to become
modern but also retain its ancient heritage.  The idea of female education
was debated intensely. Significantly, it was the social reformer Jotiba
Phule who opened the first school for women in Pune. Reformers argued
that for a society to progress women have to be educated. Some of them
believed that in pre-modern India, women were educated. Others
contested this on the grounds that this was so only of a privileged few.
Thus attempts to justify female education were made by recourse to
both modern and traditional ideas. They actively debated the meanings
of tradition and modernity. Jotiba Phule thus recalled the glory of pre-
Aryan age while others like Bal Gangadhar Tilak emphasised the glory
of the Aryan period. In other words 19th century reform initiated a period
of questioning, reinterpretations and both intellectual and social growth.
The varied social reform movements did have common themes. Yet
there were also significant differences. For some the concerns were
confined to the problems that the upper caste, middle class women and
men faced.  For others the injustices suffered by the discriminated castes were
central questions. For some social evils had emerged because of a decline of the
Vidyasagar
Viresalingam
Jotiba Phule
© NCERT
not to be republished
Cultural Change
true spirit of Hinduism. For others caste and gender oppression was intrinsic
to the religion. Likewise Muslim social reformers actively debated the meaning
of polygamy and purdah. For example, a resolution against the evils of polygamy
was proposed by Jahanara Shah Nawas at the All India Muslim Ladies
Conference. She argued:
…the kind of polygamy which is practiced by certain sections of
the Muslims is against the true spirit of the Quran…and it is the
duty of the educated women to exercise their influence among
the relations to put an end to this practice.
The resolution condemning polygamy caused
considerable debate in the Muslim press. Tahsib-e-
Niswan, the leading journal for women in the Punjab,
came out in favour of the resolve, but others disapproved.
(Chaudhuri 1993: 111). Debates within communities
were common during this period. For instance, sati was
opposed by the Brahmo Samaj. Orthodox members of
the Hindu community in Bengal formed an organisation
called Dharma Sabha and petitioned the British arguing
that reformers had no right to interpret sacred texts.
Yet another view increasingly voiced by Dalits was a
complete rejection of the Hindu fold. For instance, using
the tools of modern education, Muktabai, a 13 year old
student in Phule’s school writes in 1852:
Let that religion
Where only one person is privileged
And the rest are deprived
Perish from this earth
And let it never enter our minds
To be proud of such a religion…
Find out about some of the social
reformers mentioned below? What
issues did they fight for? How did
they conduct their campaign? Was
there any opposition?
Viresalingam
Pandita Ramabai
Vidyasagar
Dayanand Saraswati
Jyotiba Phule
Sri Narayan Guru
Sir Sayed Ahmed Khan
Any other
ACTIVITY 2.1
2.2 HOW DO WE APPROACH THE STUDY OF
SANSKRITISATION, MODERNISATION,
SECULARISATION AND WESTERNISATION
In this chapter each of the four concepts, namely sanskritisation, modernisation,
secularisation and westernisation, are dealt with in different sections. But as
the discussion unfolds, it will become obvious to you that in many ways they
overlap and in many situations they co-exist. In many situations they operate
very differently. It is not surprising to find the same person being modern in
some ways and traditional in another. This co-existence is often seen as natural
to India and many other non-western countries.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
But you know that sociology does not rest
content with naturalist explanation. (Recall the
discussion in chapter 1, Book 1 NCERT 2006) As
the last chapter has shown colonial modernity had
its own paradoxes. Take the example of western
education. Colonialism led to the growth of an
English educated Indian middle class. They read
the thinkers of western enlightenment, philosophers
of liberal democracy and dreamt of ushering in a
liberal and progressive India. And yet, humiliated
by colonial rule they asserted their pride in
traditional learning and scholarship. You have
already seen this trend in the 19th century reform
movements.
As this chapter will show, modernity spelled not
merely new ideas but also rethinking and
reinterpretation of tradition. Both culture and
tradition are living entities. People learn them and
in turn modify them. Take the everyday example of
how the sari or jain sem or sarong is worn in India
today. Traditionally the sari, a loose unstitched piece
of cloth was differently worn in different regions.  The standard way that the
modern middle class woman wears it was a novel combination of the traditional
sari with the western ‘petticoat’ and ‘blouse’.
While you read the way the four processes
are used in sociology, it may be interesting to
discuss in class what you think the terms
mean.
What kind of behaviour would you define as:
Western
Modern
Secular
Sanskritised
Return to Activity 2.2 after you finish the
chapter.
Did you find any difference between
common sense usage of the terms and
their sociological meaning?
ACTIVITY 2.2
Think of other instances of the mix and
match both from everyday life and from
the wider level.
ACTIVITY 2.3
The mix
and match
of the
traditional
and modern
My father’s clothes represented his
inner life very well. He was a south
Indian Brahmin gentleman. He wore
neat white turbans, a Sri Vaisnava
caste mark ..yet wore Tootal ties,
Kromentz buttons and collar studs,
and donned English serge jackets over
his muslin dhotis which he wore
draped in traditional Brahmin style.
Source: A.K. Ramanujan in Marriot ed.
1990: 42
© NCERT
not to be republished
Cultural Change
India’s structural and cultural diversity is self-evident. This diversity shapes
the different ways that modernisation or westernisation, sanskritisation or
secularisation effects or does not effect different groups of people. The following
pages seek to capture these differences. The constraint of space prevents a
further detailing out. It is up to you to explore and identify the complex ways
modernisation impacts people in different parts of the country or impacts
different classes and castes in the same region. And even women and men from
the same class or community.
We begin with the concept sanskritisation. The reason for doing so is because
it refers to a process that pertains to social mobility that existed before the
onset of colonialism. And persisted in diverse ways subsequently. The other
three changes as we shall shortly see, arose in a context marked by changes
that colonialism brought about. This included direct exposure to modern western
ideas of freedom and rights. As mentioned earlier this exposure heightened the
sense of injustice on the one hand and humiliation on the other. Often this led
to a desire to go back to one’s traditional past and heritage. It is within this mix
that we can understand India’s tryst with modernisation, westernisation and
secularisation.
2.3  DIFFERENT KINDS OF SOCIAL CHANGE
SANSKRITISATION
The term sanskritisation was coined by M.N. Srinivas. It may be briefly defined
as the process by which a ‘low’ caste or tribe or other group takes over the
customs, ritual, beliefs, ideology and style of life of a high and, in particular, a
‘twice-born (dwija) caste’.
The impact of Sanskritisation is many-sided. Its influence can be seen in
language, literature, ideology, music, dance, drama, style of life and ritual.
It is primarily a process that takes place within the Hindu space though
Srinivas argued that it was visible even in sects and religious groups outside
Hinduism. Studies of different areas, however, show that it operated differently
in different parts of the country. In those areas where a highly Sanskritised
caste was dominant, the culture of the entire region underwent a certain
amount of Sanskritisation.  In regions where the non-Sanskritic castes were
dominant, it was their influence that was stronger. This can be termed the
process of  ‘de-Sanskritisation’. There were other regional variations too. In
Punjab culturally Sanskritic influence was never very strong. For many
centuries until the third quarter of the 19 th century the Persian influence was
the dominant one.
Srinivas argued that, “the Sanskritisation of a group has usually the effect
of improving its position in the local caste hierarchy. It normally presupposes
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
either an improvement in the economic or political position
of the group concerned or a higher group self-
consciousness resulting from its contact with a source
of the ‘Great Tradition’ of Hinduism such as a pilgrim
centre or a monastery or a proselytising sect.” But in a
highly unequal society such as India there were and
still are obstacles to any easy taking over of the customs
of the higher castes by the lower. Indeed, traditionally,
the dominant caste punished those low castes, which
were audacious enough to attempt it. The story below
captures the problem.
Kumud Pawade in her autobiography recounts how
a Dalit woman became a Sanskrit teacher. As a student
she is drawn towards the study of Sanskrit, perhaps
because it is the means through which she can break into a field that was not
possible for her to enter on grounds of gender and caste. Perhaps she was
drawn towards it because it would enable her to read in the original what the
texts have to say about women and the Dalits. As she proceeds with her studies,
she meets with varied reactions ranging from surprise to hostility, from guarded
acceptance to brutal rejection. As she says:
The result is that although I try to forget my caste, it is impossible to forget. And then I
remember an expression I heard somewhere: “What comes by birth, but can’t be cast off
by dying - that is caste?”
Sanskritisation suggests a process whereby people want to improve their
status through adoption of names and customs of culturally high-placed groups.
The ‘reference model’ is usually financially better of. In both, the aspiration or
desire to be like the higher placed group occurs only when people become wealthier.
Sanskritisation as a concept has been criticised at different levels. One, it
has been criticised for exaggerating social mobility or the scope of ‘lower castes’
to move up the social ladder. For it leads to no structural change but only
positional change of some individuals. In other words inequality continues to
persist though some individuals may be able to improve their positions within
the unequal structure. Two, it has been pointed out that the ideology of
sanskritisation accepts the ways of the ‘upper caste’ as superior and that of the
‘lower caste’ as inferior. Therefore, the desire to imitate the ‘upper caste’ is seen
as natural and desirable.
Third, ‘sanskritisation’ seems to justify a model that rests on inequality and
exclusion. It appears to suggest that to believe in pollution and purity of groups
of people is justifiable or all right. Therefore, to be able to look down on some
groups just as the ‘upper castes’ looked down on the ‘lower castes’, is a mark of
privilege. In society where such a world-view exists, imagining an equal society
becomes difficult. The study on the next page shows how the very idea of purity
and pollution are valued or seen as worthwhile ideas to have.
Kumudtai’s journey into Sanskrit
began with great interest and eagerness
with Gokhale Guruji, her teacher at
school…At the University, the Head of
the Department was a well-known
scholar and he took great pleasure in
taunting Kumudtai…Despite the
adverse comments she successfully
completed her Masters in Sanskrit….
Source: Kumud Pawade (1938)
© NCERT
not to be republished
Cultural Change
Although Goldsmith-castes are people higher than me, our caste rules prohibit our taking food
or water from them. We have a belief that Goldsmiths are so greedy that they wash excrement
to dig out gold. Although higher in caste, they are therefore, more polluting than we are. We
also don’t take food from other higher castes who do polluting things: Washermen, who work
with dirty clothes, and Oilpressers, who crush and kill seeds to make oil.
section
Sanskritisation very carefully. Do
you think that this process is
gendered, i.e., it affects women
differently from men. Do you think
that even if it does lead to
positional change among men, the
reverse may be true about
women?
ACTIVITY 2.4
It shows how such discriminatory ideas become a way of life. Instead of
aspiring for an equal society, the exclusion and discrimination seek to give
their own meaning to their excluded status. In other words they aspire to be in
a position from where they can in turn look down on other
people. This reflects an essentially undemocratic vision.
Fourth, since sanskritisation results in the adoption
of upper caste rites and rituals it leads to practices of
secluding girls and women, adopting dowry practices
instead of bride-price and practising caste discrimination
against other groups, etc.
Fifth, the effect of such a trend is that the key
characteristics of dalit culture and society are eroded. For
example the very worth of labour which ‘lower castes’ do
is degraded and rendered ‘shameful’. Identities based on
the basis of work, crafts and artisanal abilities, knowledge
forms of medicine, ecology, agriculture, animal husbandry,
etc., are regarded useless in the industrial era.
With the growth of the anti-Brahminical movement and the development of
regional self-consciousness in the twentieth century there was an attempt in
several Indian languages to drop Sanskrit words and phrases. A crucial result
of the Backward Classes Movement was to emphasise the role of secular factors
in the upward mobility of caste groups and individuals. In the case of the
dominant castes, there was no longer any desire to pass for the Vaisyas,
Kshatriyas and Brahmins. On the other hand, it was prestigious to be a member
of the dominant caste. Recent years have seen likewise assertions of Dalits who
now pride their identity as Dalits. However, sometimes as among the poorest
and the most marginalised of the dalit caste groups, caste identity seems to
compensate their marginality in other domains. In other words they have gained
some pride and self-confidence but otherwise remain excluded and
discriminated.
WESTERNISATION
You have already read about our western colonial past. You have seen how it
often brought about changes that were paradoxical and strange.  M.N. Srinivas
defines westernisation as “the changes brought about in Indian society and
culture as a result of over 150 years of British rule, the term subsuming
changes occurring at different levels…technology, institutions, ideology and
values”.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
There
different
kinds
westernisation. One kind refers to the
emergence of a westernised sub-cultural
pattern through a minority section of Indians
who first came in contact with Western
culture. This included the sub culture of
Indian intellectuals who not only adopted
many cognitive patterns, or ways of thinking,
and styles of life, but supported its
expansion.  Many of the early 19th century
reformers were of this kind. The boxes show
the different kinds of westernisation.
There were, therefore, small sections of
people who adopted western life styles or
were affected by western ways of thinking.
Apart from this there has been also the
general spread of Western cultural traits,
such as the use of new technology, dress,
food, and changes in the habits and styles
of people in general. Across the country a
very wide section of middle class homes have
a television set, a fridge, some kind of sofa
set, a dining table and chair in the living
room.
Westernisation does involve the imitation
of external forms of culture. It does not
necessarily mean that people adopt modern
values of democracy and equality.
Ways of living
Devaki recalls that when she was
small, in her house boiled eggs were
eaten in eggcups and her mother would make
the porridge and serve it separately on the table
with the hot milk and sugar, to be mixed in each
person’s bowl. This was distinctly different from
other households. Devaki says, where boiled
eggs were not eaten in egg cups and where the
porridge, milk and sugar were all mixed together,
cooked in a pan, and then served.. She
remembers asking her mother why they ate
porridge like that and her mother saying that this
was the way they used to eat porridge in the
estate. (Abraham 2006: 146)
(This is drawn from an ethnographic study of
the Thiyya community in Kerala)
BOX 2.3
Ways of thinking
…John Stuart Mill’s essay ‘On
Liberty’ soon after its publication
became a text in Indian colleges. Indians came
to know about Magna Carta, and the struggle for
liberty and equality in Europe and America.
BOX 2.2
Can you think of Indians who are very western in their clothes and appearances but who do
not have democratic and egalitarian values that are part of modern attitudes. We are giving
two examples below. Can you think of other instances from both real and reel life?
We may find people who are western educated but holding very prejudiced views about
particular ethnic or religious communities. A family can adopt external forms of western culture
like the way the interiors of houses are done up but may have very conservative ideas about
women’s role in society. The practice of female foeticide combines discriminatory attitude
towards women and the use of very modern technology.
You should also discuss that whether this contradiction is only true for the Indians or non-
western societies. Or is it not equally true that racist and discriminatory attitudes exist in
western societies.
ACTIVITY 2.5
© NCERT
not to be republished
Cultural Change
Apart from ways of life and thinking the west influenced Indian art and
literature. Artists like Ravi Varma, Abanindranath Tagore, Chandu Menon and
Bankimchandra Chattopadhya were all grappling with the colonial encounter.
The box below captures the many ways that style, technique and the very theme
of an artist like Ravi Varma were shaped by western and indigeneous traditions.
It discusses the portrait of a family in a matrilineal community of Kerala but
one that significantly resembles the very typical patrilineal nuclear family of
the modern west consisting of the father, mother and children.
In 1870 Ravi Varma received his first paid commission
to paint the portrait of Kizhakke Palat Krishna Menon’s
family. …This is a transitional work which blends
elements of a flatter, two-dimensional style popular within earlier water-
colours with the newer techniques of perspective and illusionism, made
possible by the use of a medium like oil.
BOX 2.4
Raja Ravi Varma
You can see the many
diverse levels that cultural
change, resulting from our
colonial encounter with the
west, took place. In the
contemporary context often
conflicts between generations
are seen as cultural conflicts
resulting from westernisation.
The following account in the
next page captures this gap.
Have you seen this or faced
this? Is Westernisation the
only reason for generational
conflicts?
conflicts
necessarily bad?
…Another feature is the technique of spatial organisations of the
seated and figures in deference to age and hierarchy, which is once
again reminiscent of nineteenth century European portraits of the
bourgeois family. …How strange then this portrait was painted in
matrilineal Kerala at a time when most of the Nayars, Krishna Menon’s
caste, would have been unused to living in patrilocal nuclear
families…
Source: G . Arunima “Face value: Ravi Varma’s
portraiture and the project of colonial modernity”. The
Indian Economic and Social History Review 40, 1 (2003)
pp. 57 - 80)
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
Srinivas suggested that while ‘lower castes’ sought to be Sanskritised, ‘upper
castes’ sought to be Westernised. In a diverse country such as India this
generalisation is difficult to maintain. For instance, studies of Thiyyas (by no
means considered ‘upper caste’) in Kerala show conscious efforts to westernise.
Elite Thiyyas appropriated British culture as a move towards a more
cosmopolitan life that critiqued caste. Likewise, Western education often implied
opening up to new opportunities for different groups of people in the North-
East. Read the following account.
Often westernisation among the middle class makes generational difference
more complex
BOX 2.5
…And though they are of my own flesh and blood, they sometimes seem like total strangers to me. I no
longer have anything in common with them…neither with their ways of thinking, nor with the way they dress
up, talk or behave. They are the new generation. And my mental makeup is such that any sort of mutuality
between them and me becomes impossible. Yet I love them with all my heart. I give them whatever they
desire, for their happiness is all I want. Rabindranth’s words set my heart in a tremulous feeling: “This is your
time; for now is the beginning of my end.” I have nothing in common with my children Pallav, Kallol and
Kingkini. Pallav lives in a different country, in a different culture altogether.  We, for instance, had worn the
mekela-chadar  from the age of twelve. But now my daughter Kingkini, a student of Business Management
at Gauhati University wears pant and buggy shirts. And Kallol likes to sport a mass of unruly hair on his
head. When I feel listening to a Meera-Bhajan, Kallol and Kingkini choose to play their favourite pop numbers
by Whitney Houston. At times, when I feel like singing a few lines of Bargeet, Kinkin likes to play western
tunes on her guitar.
Source: Anima Dutta 1999 “As Days Roll On” in Women: A Collection of Assamese Short Stories, Diamond
Jubilee Volume, (Guwahati, Spectrum Publications)
© NCERT
not to be republished
Cultural Change
We usually refer to the colonial impact to discuss westernisation. However
often we find new forms of westernisation in the contemporary period.
Activity 2.6 draws attention to this.
BOX 2.6
My grandfather, like most Nagas who had come into close contact with Europeans, was convinced
that education was the only way to get ahead in life. He aspired for his children the kind of life he
had seen being lived by the British administration and missionaries. He sent my mother away to
school first in neighbouring Assam, then as far away as Shimla. My mother was encouraged by one of the more
educated men in her village who told her that with an education in these new times, she could even become like the
Indian lady who spoke before the world- Vijaylakshmi Pandit, sister of Nehru, who represented India at the UN.   My
father by dint of his own intelligence and hard work put himself through the local mission school and college in
Shillong. All Nagas of my parents’ generation who were able to, chose to get educated in English. For them it was
more than a getway to upward mobility. In a region where tribes that live no more than 20 kms apart speak
completely different languages, it was a medium through which they could communicate amongst themselves and
with the world. They became the voice of their people and made English the official state language. (Ao 2005: 111)
Observe the many small and big ways that westernisation affects our lives.
You have already seen how British colonialism affected our lives. How
westernisation meant emulating or wanting to be like the British. Increasingly
we find westernisation being more Americanisation. Read a recent letter to
the editor of a newspaper given below and discuss.
The new Raj
Presumably to set itself apart from the Continent, Britain and Ireland, from where
its founders had come, the US chose to partly reverse the date-month-year format
and create its own month-date-year one. …The 11th of September, the day of the
attack on the World Trade Centre in New York, automatically became “9/11”.  As
this was the shorthand which the US used, the rest of the world used it too,
never mind that in most countries the number of a month in a year follows that of
a day in a month. How do we explain the fact that the shorthand used in the
Mumbai train blasts is “7/11”? We were a British colony, so we mostly use the
DD-MM-YY format…
The Hindu August 21, 2006.
At one time many Indians sought to speak English the British way. Has there
been a change in this? Is American accent more influential now?
ACTIVITY 2.6
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
MODERNISATION AND SECULARISATION
The term modernisation has a long history. From the 19 th and
more so the 20th century the term began to be associated with
positive and desirable values. People and societies wanted to
be modern. In the early years, modernisation referred to
improvement in technology and production processes.
Increasingly, however, the term had a wider usage. It referred
to the path of development that much of west Europe or North
America has taken. And suggested that other societies both
have to and ought to follow the same path of development.
In India the beginnings of capitalism, as we saw in chapter 1,
took place within the colonial context. The story of our
modernisation and secularisation is, therefore, quite distinct
from their growth in the west.  This is evident when we discussed westerisation
and the efforts of the 19th century social movements earlier in this chapter.
Here we look into the two processes of modernisation and secularisation together
for they are linked. They are both part of a set of modern ideas. Sociologists
have tried to define what exactly constitutes the modernisation process.
‘[M]odernity’ assumes that local ties and parochial perspectives give way to universal
commitments and cosmopolitan attitudes; that the truths of utility, calculation, and science
take precedence over those of the emotions, the sacred, and the non-rational; that the
individual rather than the group be the primary unit of society and politics; that the associations
in which men live and work be based on choice not birth; that mastery rather than fatalism
orient their attitude toward the material and human environment; that identity be chosen
and achieved, not ascribed and affirmed; that work be separated from family, residence,
and community in bureaucratic organisation….(Rudolph and Rudolph, 1967)
In other words it means that people are
influenced not just by local but universal
contexts. How you behave, what you think is
no longer decided by your family or tribe or
caste or community. What job you wish to do
is decided not by the job your parent does,
but by what you wish to do. Work gets based
on choice, not birth. On whom you are depend
on what you achieve, not by who you are. A
scientific attitude gains ground. A rational
approach matters. Is this entirely true?
In India often the job we do is not by
choice. A scavenger does not choose his/her
job. (chapter 5 book 1, NCERT 2007) We
often marry within a caste or community.
Religious beliefs continue to dominate our
Take any matrimonial column
from any newspaper or
websites like shaadi.com and
try and see the pattern. How
often is caste or community
mentioned? If it is mentioned
many times does it mean that
caste continues to play the
same kind of role as it did
traditionally? Or has the role of
caste changed? Discuss.
ACTIVITY 2.7
What kind of modernity?
They (upper caste founders of
various oganisations and
conferences) pretend to be
modernists as long as they are in
the service of the British
government. The moment they
retire and claim their pensions,
they get into their brahmanical
‘touch-me-not attire’…
Jotiba Phule’s letter to the Conference
of Marathi Authors
© NCERT
not to be republished
Cultural Change
lives. At the same time we do have a scientific tradition. We also have a vibrant
secular and democratic political system. At the same time we have caste and
community based mobilisation. How do we understand these processes?  This
chapter has been trying to understand this mix.
It would be simplistic, however, to term the complex combinations just as a
mix of tradition and modernity as though tradition and modernity themselves
are fixed entities. Or as though India has or had just one set of traditions. We
have already seen that both plurality and a tradition of argumentation have
been defining features of ‘traditions’ in India.  They are in fact constantly being
redefined. We have already observed this with 19th century social reformers.
This process, however, persists today.  The box below describe such a process
in contemporary Arunachal Pradesh.
In the modern west, secularisation has usually meant a process of decline
in the influence of religion. It has been an assumption of all theorists of
modernisation that modern societies become increasingly secular. Indicators
of secularisation have referred to levels of involvement with religious
organisations (such as rates of church attendance), the social and material
influence of religious organisations, and the degree to which people hold religious
beliefs. Recent years have, however, seen an unprecedented growth of religious
consciousness and conflict world over.
However even in the past, a view that assumed that modern ways would
necessarily lead to decline in religious ways has not been entirely true. You will
recall how western and modern forms of communication, organisation and
ideas led to the emergence of new kinds of religious reform organisations.
Furthermore, a considerable part of ritual in India has direct reference to the
pursuit of secular ends.
With the advent of progress and the influences of modernisation, attitudes have changed to religion
and to the celebration of the many festivals. Rituals, procedures of ceremonies, taboos associated
with these ceremonies, the value and amount of sacrifices to be made, are now all subjects of
constant change, especially in the mushrooming urban areas.
These new pressures on the concept of tribal identity have meant that traditional practices and their preservation have
become almost a necessary expression of being tribal. Festivals have emerged as an emphatic projection of that
sense of a unified tribe identity. It is as if the collective celebration of the festival has become a fitting response to the
clarion call of “Loss of Culture, Loss of Identity’ that is doing the rounds in today’s tribal society.
It is currently a common practice for Festival Celebration Committees to be formed in place of the Traditionally loose-
knit work gang for the celebration of the festival. Traditionally, seasonal cycles determined the days of the celebration;
now dates for the celebration have been formalised with each marked on the official government calendar.
At these festival celebrations, flags of no definite design, chief guests and speeches, and Miss Festival contests
have become the new necessities. With rational concepts and worldviews infiltrating the minds of the tribal people,
the practice and performance of the old faith is under due and undue scrutiny.
BOX 2.7
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
Rituals have also secular dimensions as distinct from secular goals.
They provide men and women with occasions for socialising with their
peers and superiors, and for showing off the family’s wealth, clothing
and jewellery.  During the last few decades in particular, the economic,
political and status dimensions of ritual have become increasingly
conspicuous, and the number of cars lined up outside a wedding house
and the VIPs who attended the wedding, provide the index to the
household’s standing in the local community.
There has also been considerable debate about what is
seen by some as secularisation of caste. What does this
mean? In traditional India caste system operated within a
religious framework. Belief systems of purity and pollution
were central to its practice. Today it often functions as
political pressure groups. Contemporary India has seen
such formation of caste associations and caste based political parties. They seek
to press upon the state their demands. Such a changed role of caste has been
described as secularisation of caste. The box below illustrates this process.
Observe advertisements during
traditional festivals such as Diwali,
Durga Puja, Ganesh Puja,
Dusserah, Karwa Chauth, Id,
Christmas.  Collect different
advertisements from the print
media. Watch the electronic
media also. Note what the
messages of these advertise-
mnents are about.
ACTIVITY 2.8
Connecting to God
By Raja Simhan T.E.
Are you distressed because your planned trip to the Meenakshi
Amman temple in Madurai on your wedding anniversary will not
materialise! Stop worrying. You are just a mouse click away from
ordering an online puja on the Web and getting the blessings of the
deity…. .com offers puja service in over 600 temples spread all over
the country. People all over the world can order for a puja to be
performed at a temple of their choice, in Kanyakumari or in Uttar
Pradesh, to their favourite deity… The puja is performed as per the
browser’s requirement through a network of franchisees (mostly
temple priests) spread across the country, and the ‘prasaadham’ is
delivered to anywhere in the world, within 5-7 days….For residents
of India who cannot pay through credit cards.com performs the puja
and collects the payment through cheque or demand draft…..The
online puja service costs anywhere from $9.75 for a basic puja
performed at any temple that you wish to a $75 for combination
pujas.
Source: The Business Line, Financial Daily from The Hindu group of
publications (Wednesday, September 20, 2000)
© NCERT
not to be republished
Cultural Change
Everyone recognises that the traditional social system in India was organised around caste
structures and caste identities. In dealing with the relationship between caste and politics, however
the doctrinaire moderniser suffers from a serious xenophobia. He begins with the questions: is
caste disappearing? Now, surely no social system disappears like that. A more useful point of departure
would be: what form is caste taking under the impact of modern politics, and what form is politics taking in a
caste-oriented society?
Those in India who complain of ‘casteism in politics’ are really looking for a sort of politics, which has no
basis in society. …Politics is a competitive enterprise, its purpose is the acquisition of power for the realisation
of certain goals, and its process is one of identifying and manipulating existing and emerging allegiances in
order to mobilise and consolidate positions. The important thing is organisation and articulation of support,
and where politics is mass-based the point is to articulate support through the organisations in which the
masses are to be found. It follows that where the caste structure provides one of the principal  organisational
clusters along which the bulk of the population is found to live, politics must strive to organise through such
a structure.
Politicians mobilise caste groupings and identities in order to organise their power. …Where there are other
types of groups and other bases of association, politicians approach them as well. And as they everywhere
change the form of such organisations, they change the form of caste as well.
(Kothari 1977: 57-70)
BOX 2.8
EXERCISE FOR BOX 2.8
Read the text above carefully.  Look at the italicised sentences. Summarise the central argument
being made. Give examples of your own.
CONCLUSION
This chapter has sought to show the distinct ways that social change has taken
place in India. The colonial experience had lasting consequences. Many of these
were unintended and paradoxical. Western ideas of modernity shaped the
imagination of Indian nationalists. It also prompted a fresh look at traditional
texts by some. It also led to a rejection of these by others. Western cultural
forms found their place in spheres ranging from how families lived to what
codes of conduct should men, women and children have to artistic expressions.
The ideas of equality and democracy made a huge impact as evident in both the
reform movements and the nationalist movement. This led not just to adoption
of western ideas, but also an active questioning and reinterpretation of tradition.
The next chapter on the India’s experience with democracy will again show how
a Constitution based on radical ideas of equality and social justice functioned
in a society that is deeply unequal. It will further show the complex ways that
both tradition and modernity constantly got and is getting redefined.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
Write a critical essay on sanskritisation.
Westernisation is often just about adoption of western attire and life style.
Are there other aspects to being westernised? Or is that about
modernisation? Discuss.
Write short notes on:
 Rites and secularisation
 Caste and secularisation
 Gender and sanskritisation
REFERENCES
Ramanujan, A.K. 1990. ‘Is There an Indian Way of Thinking: An Informal essay’ in
Marriot McKim India Through Hindu Categories. Sage. New Delhi.
Abraham, Janaki. 2006. ‘The Stain of White: Liasons, memories and White Men as
Relatives’ Men and Masculinities. Vol 9. No. 2. pp 131-151.
Ao, Ayinla Shilu. 2005. ‘Where the Past Meets the Future’ in Ed. Geeti Sen Where
the Sun Rises When Shadows Fall. IIC Quarterly Monsoon Winter 32, 2&3.
pp. 109-112.
Chakravarti, Uma. 1998. Rewriting History: The Life and Times of Pandita
Ramabai. Kali for Women. New Delhi.
Chaudhuri, Maitrayee. 1993. The Indian Women’s Movement: Reform and Revival.
Radiant. New Delhi.
Dutt, A.K. 1993. ‘From Colonial City to Global City: The Far from Complete Spatial
Transformation of Calcutta’ in  Brunn S.D. and Williams J.F. Ed. Cities of the
World. pp. 351-388. Harper Collins. New York.
Khare, R.S. 1998. Cultural Diversity and Social Discontent: Anthropological
Studies on Contemporary India. Sage. New Delhi.
Kothari, Rajni.  1997. ‘Caste and Modern Politics’ in Sudipta Kaviraj Ed. Politics in
India. pp. 57-70. Oxford University Press. Delhi.
Pandian, M.S.S. 2000. ‘Dalit Assertion in Tamil Nadu: An Exploratory Note’
Journal of Political Economy. Vol XII. Nos. 3 and 4.
Raman, Vasanthi. 2003. ‘The Diverse Life-Worlds of Indian Childhood’ in Margrit
Pernau, Imtiaz Ahmad, Helmult Reifeld (Eds), Family and Gender: Changing
values in Germany and India. Sage. New Delhi.
Riba, Moji.  2005. “Rites, in passing …” IIC Quarterly Monsoon-Winter 32, 2&3.
pp.113-121.
Rudolph and Rudolph. 1967. The Modernity of Tradition: Political Development in
India. University of Chicago Press. Chicago.
Saberwal, Satish. 2001. ‘Framework in Change: Colonial Indian Society’ in Ed.
Susan Visvanathan Structure and Transformation: Theory and Society in India.
pp.33-57. Oxford. Delhi.
Questions
© NCERT
not to be republished
The Story of Indian
Democracy
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
We are all familiar with the idea that democracy is a government of the people,
by the people, and for the people. Democracies fall into two basic categories,
direct and representative. In a direct democracy, all citizens, without the
intermediary of elected or appointed officials, can participate in making public
decisions. Such a system is clearly only practical with relatively small numbers
of people – in a community organisation or tribal council, for example, the local
unit of a trade union, where members can meet in a single room to discuss
issues and arrive at decisions by consensus or majority vote.
Modern society, with its size and complexity, offers few opportunities for
direct democracy. Today, the most common form of democracy, whether for a
town of 50,000 or nations of 1 billion, is representative democracy, in which
citizens elect officials to make political decisions, formulate laws, and administer
programmes for the public good. Ours is a representative democracy. Every
citizen has the important right to vote her/his representative. People elect their
representatives to all levels from Panchayats, Municipal Boards, State Assemblies
and Parliament. There has increasingly been a
feeling that democracy ought to involve people
more regularly and should not just mean casting
a vote every five years. Both the concepts of
participatory democracy and decentralised
governance  have thus become popular.
Participatory democracy is a system of
democracy in which the members of a group or
community participate collectively in the taking
of major decisions. This chapter will discuss the
panchayati raj system as an example of a major
initiative towards decentralised and grassroot
democracy.
Both the procedures as well as the values
that form Indian democracy have developed over
the long years of India’s anti-colonial struggle.
In the last sixty years, since independence, the
success of Indian democracy has been seen as a
remarkable feat for a country with such great
diversity as well as inequality. This chapter
cannot possibly provide a comprehensive
account of its rich and complex past and
present.
In this chapter we, therefore, try and provide only a synoptic view of
democracy in India. We first look at the Indian Constitution, the bedrock of
Indian democracy. We focus on its key values, briefly look at the making of the
Constitution, drawing upon some snippets of the debates representing different
views. Second we look at the grassroot level of functioning democracy, namely
the Panchayat Raj system. In both expositions you will notice that there are
photograph of someone voting...from
some old ncert book
An old lady voting in election
2015-16(21/01/2015)
The Story of Indian Democracy
different groups of people representing competing interest and often also different
political parties. This is an essential part of any functioning democracy. The
third part of this chapter seeks to discuss how competing interests function,
what the terms interest groups and political parties mean and what their role is
in a democratic system such as ours.
3.1 THE INDIAN CONSTITUTION
THE CORE VALUES OF INDIAN DEMOCRACY
Like so many other features of modern India we need to begin the story about
modern Indian democracy from the colonial period. You have just read about
the many structural and cultural changes that British colonialism brought
about deliberately. Some of the changes that came about happened in an
unintended fashion. The British did not intend to introduce them.  For instance,
they sought to introduce western education to create a western educated Indian
middle class that would help the colonial rulers to continue their rule. A western
educated section of Indians did emerge. But, instead of aiding British rule, they
used western liberal ideas of democracy, social justice and nationalism to
challenge colonial rule.
This should not, however, suggest that democratic values and democratic
institutions are purely western. Our ancient epics, our diverse folk tales from
one corner of the country to another are full of dialogues, discussions and
contrasting positions. Think of any folk tale, riddles, folk song or any story
from any epic that reveals different viewpoints? We just draw from one example
from the epic Mahabharata.
However, as we saw in chapter 1
and 2 social change in modern India
is not just about Indian or western
ideas. It is a combination as well as
reinterpretation of western and
Indian ideas. We saw that in the case
of the social reformers. We saw the
use of both modern ideas of equality
and traditional ideas of justice.
Democracy is no exception. In
colonial India the undemocratic and
discriminatory
administrative
practice of British colonialism
contrasted sharply with the vision of
freedom which western theories of
democracy espoused and which the
western educated Indians read
about. The scale of poverty and
The tradition of questioning
When, in the Mahabharata, Bhrigu tells
Bharadvaja that caste division relates to
differences in physical attributes of different human
beings, reflected in skin colour, Bharadvaja
responds not only by pointing to the considerable
variations in skin colour within every caste (‘if
different colours indicate different castes, then all
castes are mixed castes’), but also by the more
profound questions: “We all seem to be affected
by desire, anger, fear, sorrow, worry, hunger and
BOX 3.1
labour; how do we have caste differences then?”
(Sen 2005:10-11)
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
intensity of social discrimination within India also led to deeper questioning of
the meaning of democracy. Is democracy just about political freedom? Or is it
also about economic freedom and social justice? Is it also about equal rights to
all irrespective of caste, creed, race and gender? And if that is so how can such
equality be realised in an unequal society?
Society has been aiming to lay a new foundation as was summarised by
the French revolution in three words, fraternity, liberty and equality. The
French Revolution was welcomed because of this slogan. It failed to produce
equality. We welcomed the Russian revolution because it aims to produce
equality. But it cannot be too much emphasised that in producing equality,
society cannot afford to sacrifice fraternity or liberty. Equality will be of no
value without fraternity or liberty. It seems that the three can coexist only if
one follows the way of the Buddha…
(Ambedkar 1992)
EXERCISE FOR BOX 3.2
Many of these issues were thought of much before India became free. Even
as India fought for its independence from British colonialism a vision of what
Indian democracy ought to look like emerged. As far back as in 1928, Motilal
Nehru and eight other Congress leaders drafted a constitution for India. In
1931, the resolution at the Karachi session of the Indian National Congress
dwelt on how independent India’s constitution should look like. The Karachi
Resolution reflects a vision of democracy that meant not just formal holding of
elections but a substantive reworking of the Indian social structure in order to
have a genuine democratic society.
The Karachi Resolution clearly spells out the vision of democracy that the
nationalist movement in India had. It articulates the values that were further
given full expression in the Indian Constitution.  You will notice how the Preamble
of the Indian Constitution seeks to ensure not just political justice but also
social and economic justice. You will likewise notice that equality is not just
about equal political rights but also of status and opportunity.
BOX 3.2
Read the text above and discuss how diverse intellectual ideas from the west and from India
were being used to interrogate and construct new models of democracy. Can you think of
other reformers and nationalists who were trying to do the same?
2015-16(21/01/2015)
The Story of Indian Democracy
Appendix No. 6
What Swaraj will Include
Karachi Congress Resolution, 1931
Swaraj as conceived by the Congress should include real economic freedom of the masses.
The Congress declares that no constitution will be acceptable to it unless it provides or
enables the Swaraj Government to provide for:
Freedom of expression, association and meeting.
Freedom of religion.
Protection of all cultures and languages.
All citizens shall be equal before the law.
No disability in employment or trade or profession on account of religion, caste or sex.
Equal rights and duties for all in regard to public wells, schools, etc.
All to have right to bear arms in accordance with regulations.
No person to be deprived of property or liberty except in accordance with law.
Religious neutrality of State.
Adult Suffrage.
Free compulsory primary education.
No titles to be conferred.
Capital punishment to be abolished.
Freedom of movement for every citizen of India and right to settle and  acquire property
in any part thereof, and equal protection of law.
Proper standard of life for industrial workers and suitable machinery for settlement of
disputes between employers and workers and protection against old age, sickness, etc.
All labour to be free from conditions of serfdom.
Special protection of women workers.
Children not to be employed in mines and factories.
Rights of peasants and workers to form unions.
Reform of system of land revenue and tenure and rent, exempting rent and revenue
for uneconomical holdings and reduction of dues payable for smaller holdings.
Inheritance tax on graduated scale.
Reduction of military expenditure by at least half.
No servant of State ordinarily to be paid above Rs 500 per month.
Abolition of Salt tax.
Protection of indigenous cloth against competition of foreign cloth.
Total prohibition of intoxicating drinks and drugs.
Currency and exchange in national interest.
Nationalisation of key industries and services, railways, etc.
Relief of agricultural indebtedness and control of usury.
Military training for citizens.
Karachi resolution condensed to be printed on membership forms.
BOX 3.3
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
BOX 3.4
Democracy works at many levels. In this chapter
we began with the vision of the Indian Constitution
for this is the bedrock upon which democracy rests
in India. Significantly, the Constitution emerged from
intense and open discussions within the Constituent
Assembly. Thus, its vision or ideological content as
well as the process or procedure by which it was
formed was democratic. The next section briefly looks
at some of the debates.
CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES:
A HISTORY
In 1939, Gandhiji wrote an article in the ‘Harijan’
called ‘The Only Way’ in which he said “… the
Constituent Assembly alone can produce a constitution indigenous to the
country and truly and fully representing the will of the people” one based on
“unadulterated adult franchise for both men and women”. The popular demand
in 1939 for a Constituent Assembly was, after several ups and downs conceded
by Imperialist Britain in 1945. In July 1946, the elections were held. In August
1946, The Indian National Congress’ Expert Committee moved a resolution in
the Constituent Assembly.  This contained the declaration that India shall be a
Republic where the declared social, economic and political justice will be
guaranteed to all the people of India.
On matters of social justice, there were lively debates on whether government
functions should be prescribed and the state should be bound down to them.
Issues debated ranged from right to employment, to social security, land reforms
to property rights, to the organisation of panchayats. Here are some snippets
from the debates:
PREAMBLE
WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to constitute India into a ‘ [ SOVEREIGN
SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC] and to secure to all its citizen:
JUSTICE, social, economic and political;
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship;
EQUALITY of status and opportunity;
And to promote among them all
FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the {unity and integrity of the Nation}’
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twenty-sixth day of November, 1949, do HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT
AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION.
EXERCISE FOR BOXES 3.3 AND 3.4
Read both the Karachi Resolution and the Preamble carefully. Identify the key ideas that exist in it.
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan addressing
the Constituent Assembly
2015-16(21/01/2015)
The Story of Indian Democracy
EXERCISE FOR BOX 3.5
Read the above snippets of the debates carefully. Discuss how different concerns were being
expressed and debated. How relevant are these issues today?
Snippets from the debates
K.T. Shah said that the right to useful employment  could and should be
made real by a categoric obligation on the part of the state to provide
useful work to every citizen who was able and qualified.
B. Das spoke against classifying the functions of the government as justiciable and
non justiciable, “I think it is the primary duty of Government to remove hunger and
render social justice to every citizen and to secure social security……..”. The teeming
millions do not find any hope that the Union Constitution…. will ensure them freedom
from hunger, will secure them social justice, will ensure them a minimum standard of
living and a minimum standard of public health”
Ambedkar’s answer was as follows: “ The Draft Constitution as framed only provides
a machinery for the government of the country. It is not a contrivance to install any
particular party in power as has been done in some countries. Who should be in
power is left to be determined by the people, as it must be, if the system is to satisfy
the tests of democracy. But whoever captures power will not be free to do what he
likes with it. In the exercise of it, he will have to respect these Instruments of Instructions
which are called Directive Principles. He cannot ignore them. He may not have to
answer for their breach in a court of law. But he will certainly have to answer for them
before the electorate at election time. What great value these directive principles
possess will be realised better when the forces of right contrive to capture power.”
On land reform Nehru said, that the social forces were such that law could not stand
in the way of reform, an interesting reflection on the dynamics between the two. “If
law and Parliaments do not fit themselves into the changing picture, they cannot
control the situation”.
On the protection of the tribal people and their interests, leaders like Jaipal Singh
were assured by Nehru in the following words during the Constituent Assembly
debates: “It is our intention and our fixed desire to help them as possible; in as
efficient a way as possible to protect them from possibly their rapacious neighbours
occasionally and to make them advance”
Even as the Constituent Assembly adopted the title Directive Principles of State Policy
to the rights that courts could not enforce, additional principles were added with
unanimous acceptance. These included K. Santhanam’s  clause that the state shall
organise village  panchayats  and endow them with the powers and authority to be
effective units of local self government.
T. A. Ramalingam Chettiar added the clause for promotion of cottage industries on
co-operative lines in rural areas.  Veteran parlimentarian Thakurdas Bhargava added
that the state should organise agriculture and animal husbandry on modern lines.
BOX 3.5
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
COMPETING INTERESTS: THE CONSTITUTION AND SOCIAL CHANGE
India exists at so many levels. The multi-religious and multicultural composition
of the population with distinct streams of tribal culture is one aspect of the
plurality. Many divides classify the Indian people. The impact that culture,
religion, and caste have on the urban–rural divide, rich-poor divide and the
literate-illiterate divide is varied.  Deeply stratified by caste and poverty, there
are groupings and sub-groupings among the rural poor. The urban working
class comprises a very wide range. Then, there is the well-organised domestic
business class as also the professional and commercial class. The urban
professional class is highly vocal. Competing interests operate on the Indian
social scene and clamour for control of the State’s resources.
However, there are some basic objectives laid down in the Constitution and
which are generally agreed in the Indian political world as being obviously just.
These would be empowerment of the poor and marginalised, poverty alleviation,
ending of caste and positive steps to treat all groups equally.
Competing interests do not always reflect a clear class divide. Take the
issue of the close down of a factory because it emits toxic waste and affects the
health of those around. This is a matter of life, which the Constitution protects.
The flipside is that the closure will render people jobless. Livelihood again, is a
matter of life that the Constitution protects. It is interesting that at the time of
drawing up the Constitution, the Constituent Assembly was fully aware of this
complexity and plurality but was intent on securing social justice as a guarantee.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
The Story of Indian Democracy
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
CONSTITUTIONAL NORMS AND SOCIAL JUSTICE: INTERPRETATION TO
AID SOCIAL JUSTICE
It is useful to understand that there is a difference between law and justice. The
essence of law is its force. Law is law because it carries the means to coerce or
force obedience. The power of the state is behind it. The essence of justice is
fairness. Any system of laws functions through a hierarchy of authorities. The
basic norm from which all other rules and authorities flow is called the Constitution.
It is the document that constitutes a nation’s tenets. The Indian Constitution is
India’s basic norm. All other laws are made as per the procedures the Constitution
prescribes. These laws are made and implemented by the authorities specified by
the Constitution. A hierarchy of courts (which too are authorities created by the
Constitution) interpret the laws when there is a dispute. The Supreme Court is
the highest court and the ultimate interpreter of the Constitution.
The Supreme Court has enhanced the substance of Fundamental Rights in
the Constitution in many important ways. The Box below illustrates a few instances.
The Constitution is not just a ready referencer of do’s and don’ts for social
justice. It has the potential for the meaning of social justice to be extended.
Social movements have also aided the Courts and authorities to interpret the
contents of rights and principles in keeping with the contemporary
understanding on social justice. Law and Courts are sites where competing
views are debated. The Constitution remains a means to channelise and civilise
political power towards social welfare.
You will realise that the Constitution has the capacity to help people because
it is based on basic norms of social justice. For instance, the Directive Principle on
village panchayats was moved as an amendment in the Constituent Assembly by
K. Santhanam.  After forty odd years it became a Constitutional imperative after
the 73rd Amendment in 1992.  You shall be dealing with this in the next section.
A Fundamental Right includes all that is incidental to it. The terse words of Article 21 recognising
the right to life and liberty have been interpreted as including all that goes into a life of quality,
including livelihood, health, shelter, education and dignity. In various pronouncements different attributes of
‘life’ have been expanded and ‘life’ has been explained to mean more than mere animal existence. These
interpretations have been used to provide relief to prisoners subjected to torture and deprivation, release
and rehabilitation of bonded labourers, against environmentally degrading activities, to provide primary
health care and primary education.
In 1993 the Supreme Court held that Right to Information is part of and incidental to the Right to Expression
under Article 19(1) (a).
Reading Directive Principles into the content of Fundamental Rights. The Supreme Court read the Directive
Principle of “equal pay for equal work” into the Fundamental Right to Equality under Article 14 and has
provided relief to many plantation and agricultural labourers and to others.
BOX 3.6
2015-16(21/01/2015)
The Story of Indian Democracy
3.2 THE PANCHAYATI RAJ AND THE CHALLENGES
OF RURAL SOCIAL TRANSFORMATION
IDEALS OF PANCHAYATI RAJ
Panchayati Raj translates literally to ‘Governance by five individuals’. The idea
is to ensure at the village or grass root level a functioning and vibrant democracy.
While the idea of grassroot democracy is not an alien import to our country, in
a society where there are sharp inequalities democratic participation is hindered
on grounds of gender, caste and class. Furthermore, as you shall see in the
newspaper reports later in the chapter, traditionally there have been caste
panchayats in villages. But they have usually represented dominant groups.
Further more, they often held
conservative views and often have,
and continue to take decisions that
go against both democratic norms
and procedures.
When the constitution was being
drafted panchayats did not find a
mention in it. At this juncture, a
number of members expressed their
sorrow, anger and disappointment
over this issue. At the same time,
drawing on his own rural experience
Dr. Ambedkar argued that local elites
and upper castes were so well
entrenched in society that local self-
government only meant a continuing
exploitation of the downtrodden
masses of Indian society. The upper
castes would no doubt silence this
segment of the population further.
The concept of local government was
dear to Gandhiji too. He envisaged
each village as a self-sufficient unit
conducting its own affairs and saw
gram-swarajya to be an ideal model
to be continued after independence.
It was, however, only in 1992 that
grassroots democracy or decentralised governance was ushered in by the 73rd
Constitutional Amendment. This act provided constitutional status to the
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). It is compulsory now for local self-government
bodies in rural and municipal areas to be elected every five years. More
The three tier system of Panchayati Raj
Institution
The structure is like a pyramid. At the base
of the structure stands the unit of democracy or Gram
Sabha. This consists of the entire body of citizens in a
village or grama. It is this general body that elects the
local government and charges it with specific
responsibilities. The Gram Sabhas ideally ought to
provide an open forum for discussions and village-level
development activities and play a crucial role in ensuring
inclusion of the weaker sections in the decision-making
processes.
The 73rd Amendment provided a three-tier system of
Panchayati Raj for all states having a population of over
twenty lakhs.
It became mandatory that election to these bodies be
conducted every five years.
It provided reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and thirty three percent seats for
women.
It constituted District Planning Committee to prepare
drafts and develop plans for the district as a whole.
BOX 3.7
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
importantly, control of local resources is given to the elected
local bodies.
The 73rd and 74th amendments to the Constitution
ensured the reservation of one third of the total seats for
women in all elected offices of local bodies in both the rural
and urban areas. Out of this, 17 per cent seats are reserved
for women belonging to the scheduled castes and tribes.
This amendment is significant as for the first time it brought
women into elected bodies which also bestowed on them
decision making powers. One third of the seats in local bodies,
gram panchayats, village panchayats, municipalities, city
corporations and district boards are reserved for women.
The 1993-94 elections, soon after the 73 rd amendment
brought in 800,000 women into the political processes in a
single election. That was a big step indeed in enfranchising
women. A constitutional amendment prescribed a three-tier
system of local self-governance (read Box 3.7 on the last page)
for the entire country, effective since 1992-93.
POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF PANCHAYATS
According to the Constitution, Panchayats should be
given powers and authority to function as institutions
of self-government. It, thus, requires all state
governments to revitalise local representative
institutions.
The following powers and responsibility were delegated
to the Panchayats:
Ø to prepare plans and schemes for economic
development
Ø to  promote schemes that will  enhance  social
justice
Ø to levy, collect and appropriate taxes, duties, tolls
and fees
Ø help in the devolution of governmental responsibilities,
especially that of finances to local
authorities
Social welfare responsibilities of the Panchayats
include the maintenance of burning and burial grounds,
recording statistics of births and deaths, establishment
of child welfare and maternity centres, control of cattle
A woman Panch with her reward
2015-16(21/01/2015)
The Story of Indian Democracy
pounds, propagation of family planning and promotion of agricultural activities.
The development activities include the construction of roads, public buildings,
wells, tanks and schools. They also promote small cottage industries and take
care of minor irrigation works. Many government schemes like the Integrated
Rural Development Programme (IRDP) and Integrated Child Development Scheme
(ICDS) are monitored by members of the panchayat.
The main income of the Panchayats is from tax levied on property, profession,
animals, vehicles, cess on land revenue and rentals. The resources are further
increased by the grants received through the Zilla Panchayat. It is also considered
compulsory for Panchayat offices to put up boards outside their offices, listing
the break up of funds received, and utilisation of the financial aid received.
This exercise was taken up to ensure that people at the grassroot level should
have the ‘right to information’ – opening all functioning to the public eye. People
had the right to scrutinise allocation of money. And ask reasons for decisions
that were taken for the welfare and development activities of the village.
Nyaya Panchayats have been constituted in some states. They possess the
authority to hear some petty, civil and criminal cases. They can impose fines
but cannot award a sentence. These village courts have often been successful
in bringing about an agreement amongst contending parties. They have been
particularly effective in punishing men who harass women for dowry and
perpetrate violence against them.
PANCHAYATI RAJ IN TRIBAL AREAS
BOX 3.8
Kalavati, a Dalit by caste was apprehensive about standing for elections. She is
a Panchayat member and realises that her confidence and self-esteem has
grown ever since she became a member of the panchayat. Most importantly
‘she has a name’. Before she became a member of the panchayat she was only called as
‘Ramu’s mother’ or ‘Hiralal’s wife’. If she lost the election for the post of the Pradhan she felt
‘sakhiyan ki nak kat jaye’ (her friends would lose face).
Source: This was recorded by Mahila Samakhya, an NGO working towards Rural Womens’
Empowerment.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
BOX 3.9
Van Panchayats
In Uttarakhand women do most of the work since the men are often posted far away in the
defence services. Most of the villagers are still dependent on firewood for cooking.  As you may
know, deforestation is a big problem in the mountainous regions. Women sometimes walk many miles to
collect firewood and fodder for their animals. To overcome this problem women have set up van-panchayats.
Members of the van-panchayats develop nurseries and nurture tree saplings for planting on the hill slopes.
Members also police nearby forests to keep an eye on illegal felling of trees. The Chipko movement – where
women hugged trees to prevent them from being cut had its beginnings in this area.
Panchayati Raj training for illiterate women
Innovative modes of communicating the strength of the Panchyat Raj system
The story of two villages, Sukhipur and Dhukipur are unravelled through a
cloth ‘phad’  or a scroll (a traditional folk medium of story telling). Village Dhukipur (sad village)
has a corrupt Pradhan (Bimla), who has spent the money received from the panchayat for
building a school, on constructing a house for herself and her family. The rest of the village are
sad and poor. On the other hand Sukhipur (happy village) has a content populace as the
Pradhan (Najma) has invested rural reconstruction money in developing good infrastructure
for her village. Here the primary health centre is functioning, it has a ‘pucca’ building and also
has a good road so that buses can reach the village.
Pictorial pictures on the ‘phad’,
accompanied with folk music
were useful tools to convey the
message for able governance
participation.
innovative method of story
telling was very affective in
bringing
awareness
unlettered women. Most
importantly the campaign
conveyed the message, that it
was not enough to merely vote,
or to stand for election, or to
win. But important to know why
one is voting for a particular
person, what are the traits to look for, and what does he or she stand for .The value for
integrity is also emphasised  through the story and song media of the ‘phad’.
This training programme was conducted by Mahila Samakhya an NGO working towards
Rural  Womens Empowerment.
BOX 3.10
2015-16(21/01/2015)
The Story of Indian Democracy
Many tribal areas have had a rich tradition of grassroot democratic functioning.
We give an illustrative example from Meghalaya. All the three major ethnic tribal
groups, namely, the Khasis, Jaintias and the Garos have their own traditional
political institutions that have existed for hundreds of years. These political
institutions were fairly well-developed and functioned at various tiers, such as
the village level, clan level and state level. For instance, in the traditional political
system of the Khasis each clan had its own council known as the ‘Durbar Kur’
which was presided over by the clan headman. Though there is a long tradition
of grassroot political institutions in Meghalaya, a large chunk of tribal areas lie
outside the provisions of the 73rd Amendment. This may be because the
concerned policy makers did not wish to interfere with the traditional tribal
institutions.
However, as sociologist Tiplut Nongbri remarks that tribal institutions in
themselves need not necessarily be democratic in its structure and functioning.
Commenting on the Bhuria Committee Report that went into this issue Nongbri
remarks that while the Committee’s concern for the traditional tribal institutions
is appreciable, it fails to take stock of the complexity of the situation. For
notwithstanding the strong egalitarian ethos that characterised tribal societies
the element of stratification is not altogether absent. Tribal political institutions
are not only marked by open intolerance to women but the process of social
change has also introduced sharp distortions in the system, making it difficult
to identify which is traditional and which is not. (Nongbri 2003: 220) This
again brings you back to the changing nature of tradition that we discussed in
chapter 1 and 2.
DEMOCRATISATION AND INEQUALITY
It will be clear to you that democratisation is not easy in a society that has had a
long history of inequality based on caste, community and gender. You have dealt
with the different kinds of inequality in the earlier book. In chapter 4 you will get
a fuller sense of rural Indian structure. Given this unequal and undemocratic
social structure, it is not surprising that in many cases, certain members belonging
to particular groups, communities, castes of the village are not included or
informed about meetings and activities of the village.  The Gram Sabha members
are often controlled by a small coterie of rich landlords usually hailing from the
upper castes or landed peasantry. They make decisions on development activities,
allocate funds, leaving the silent majority as mere onlookers.
The reports in the boxes below show different kind of experiences at the
grassroot level.  One shows how traditional panchayats are being used. Another
reports on how the new institution of Panchayati Raj, in some cases, are truly
bringing in radical changes. Yet another on how democratic measures do not
often work out in practice because interest groups resist change and money
matters.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
Bound by Honour
Caste panchayats are reasserting themselves as guardians of village morality….The first case
that hit the headlines was in October 2004, when the Rathi khap panchayat in Asanda village of
Jhajjar district ordered Sonia, who had already been married a year by then, to dissolve her marriage with
Ram Pal, abort her unborn child and accept her husband as a brother if she wanted to stay in the village. The
couple’s fault: sharing the same gotra even though the Hindu Marriage Act recognises such unions. Sonia and
Ram Pal could live together again only after the high court directed the Haryana government to provide them
security.
…One such jaati panchayat of Ansaris in Muzafarnagar decided in June last year that Imrana’s rape by her
father-in-law had made her a mother to her husband. Another in a Meerut village ruled that Gudiya, pregnant
with the child of her second husband, should return to her first who had reappeared after five years.
Source: Sunday Times of India, New Delhi, October 29th 2006
BOX 3.11
Role of wealth and privilege? Role of villagers?
This time around, Soompa sarpanch seat fell within the quota reserved for women. Nevertheless
panchayat residents considered this as a contest between the candidates’ husbands and a face-
off among ‘equals’. On one hand was the incumbent sarpanch, Ram Rai Mewada who owns a liqour shop in
Kekri and on the other Chand Singh Thakur, a rich landowner from the same village. Interestingly, Mewada
had been exposed by the village residents for faking muster rolls in the drought relief works during 2002-03.
Although no action was taken against him, the villagers were determined to see him out of office this time and
thus put up the thakur for a stiff competition.  The residents of Sooma unanimousy decided that the thakur was
best suited to oppose Mewada…
BOX 3.12
EXERCISE FOR BOXES 3.11, 3.12 AND 3.13
Read the boxes above carefully and discuss:
The role of wealth
The role of people
The role of women
BOX 3.13
Role of social  movements and organisations for greater participation and
information
One such meeting took place on January 24 in Dhorela village (Kushalpura panchayat). The meeting
was publicised by going from door-to-door and through announcements by gathering children, teaching them
slogans where a worker from a very well reputed NGO led them around the village as they urged people to
come to the chaupal for the meeting. …Tara’s (the local NGO supported candidate) ghoshana patra (manifestoe)
was read out and she made a short speech. Her ghoshana patra, …included not just taking of bribes as sarpanch,
not spending more than Rs. 2,000 on campaigning, etc.  …
Distribution of alcohol and gur, and the use of jeeps are frequently used means of buying votes and contribute
to campaign expenditure. …The entire chain of corruption is explained to the gathered villagers: low cost
elections not only allow the poor to participate, they also make corruption-free panchayats possiblity.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
The Story of Indian Democracy
3.3 POLITICAL PARTIES, PRESSURE GROUPS AND
DEMOCRATIC POLITICS
You will recall that this chapter began with the oft quoted definition of democracy
as a form of government that is of the people, by the people and for the people.
As the chapter unfolded you would have noticed how this definition captures
the spirit of democracy but conceals the many divisions between one group of
people and another. You have seen how interests and concerns are different.
We have seen in section II on the Indian Constitution how different groups
sought to represent their interests within the Constituent Assembly. We also
saw in the story of Indian democracy the contending interests of different groups.
A look at the newspaper every morning will show you many instances where
different groups seek to make their voices heard. And draw the attention of the
government to their grievances.
The question, however, arises whether all
interest groups are comparable. Can an illiterate
peasant or literate worker make her case to the
government as coherently and convincingly as an
industrialist? Neither the industrialist nor the
peasant or worker, however, represents their case
as individuals.  Industrialists form associations
such as Federation of Indian Chambers and
Commerce (FICCI) and Association of Chambers
of Commerce (ASSOCHAM). Workers form trade
unions such as the Indian Trade Union Congress
(INTUC) or the Centre for Indian Trade Unions
(CITU). Farmers form agricultural unions such as
Shetkari Sangathan. Agricultural labourers have
their own unions.  You will read about other kinds
of organisations and social movements like tribal
and environmental movements in the last chapter.
In a democratic form of government political
parties are key actors. A political party may be
defined as an organisation oriented towards
achieving legitimate control of government through
an electoral process. Political Party is an
organisation established with the aim of achieving
governmental power and using that power to pursue
a specific programme. Political parties are based
on certain understanding of society and how it ought
to be. In a democratic system the interests of
different groups are also represented by political parties, who take up their case.
Different interest groups will work towards influencing political parties. When
ACTIVITY 3.1
Follow any one newspaper or magazine for
a week. Note down the many instances
where there is a clash of interests.
Identify the issue over which the dispute
occurs.
Identify the way the groups concerned take
up their cause.
Is it a formal delegation of a political party
to meet the Prime Minister or any other
functionary?
Is it a protest on the streets?
Is it through writing or providing information
in newspapers?
Is it through public meetings?
Identify the instances whether a political
party, a professional association, a non
governmental organisation or any other
body  takes up an issue.
Discuss the many actors in the story of
Indian democracy.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
certain groups feel that their interests are not being taken up, they may move to
form an alternative party. Or they form pressure groups who lobby with the
government. Interest Groups are organised to pursue specific interests in the
political arena, operating primarily by lobbying the members of legislative bodies.
In some situations, there may be political organisations which seek to achieve
power but are denied the opportunity to do so through standard means. These
organisations are best regarded as movements until they achieve recognition.
BOX 3.14
Every year at the tail end of February the Finance Minister of the Government of India presents
the Budget to the Parliament. Prior to this there are reports every day in the newspaper of the
meetings that the various  confederation of Indian industrialists, of trade unions, farmers, and
more recently womens’ groups  had with the Ministry of Finance.
EXERCISE FOR BOX 3.14
Can they be understood as pressure groups?
BOX 3.15
Max Weber on Parties
Whereas the genuine place of classes is within the economic order, the place of status groups is
within the social order…But parties live in a house of power…
Party actions are always directed towards a goal which is striven for in a planned manner. The goal may be a
‘cause’ (the party may aim at realising a program for ideal or material purposes), or the goal may be ‘personal’
(sinecures, power, and from these, honour for the leader and followers of the party).
(Weber 1948: 194)
It is obvious that all groups will not have the same access or the same ability
to pressurise the government. Some, therefore, argue that the concept of pressure
groups underestimate the power that dominant social groups such as class or
caste or gender have in society. They feel that it would be more accurate to suggest
that dominant class or classes control the state. This does not negate the fact
that social movements and pressure groups also continue to play a very important
role in a democracy. Chapter 8 shows this.
EXERCISE FOR BOX 3.16
Read the box on the next page carefully. You can also draw from other similar events in other towns and cities.
Identify the interests of the poor, the serving class, the middle class and the rich.
How do the different groups see the role of the street?
Discuss what you think is the role of the government?
Ø What is the role of consultancy firms like McKinsey? Whose interests do they represent?
Ø What is the role of political parties?
Ø Do you think the poor can influence political parties more than they can influence consultancy firms? Is
it because political parties are accountable to the people that is i.e., they can be voted out?
2015-16(21/01/2015)
The Story of Indian Democracy
BOX 3.13
We illustrate how these contending interests function through the concrete
example of developments in the city of Mumbai.
BOX 3.16
Recent years have seen a great focus on making Indian cities global cities. The prime minister,
Dr. Manmohan Singh addressing the media on his first visit to Mumbai after taking over as the
prime minister said that it was his dream to see Mumbai transformed into a city like Shanghai.   …
For urban planners and dreamers, Mumbai urgently needs north-south and east-west connectivity. Towards
this, they argue for the need to construct an ‘express ring freeway’ to circle the city ‘such that a freeway can be
accessed from any point in the city in less than 10 minutes’.  ‘Quick entry and exit’, and ‘efficient traffic dispersal’are
seen as critical to the smooth functioning of the city….
For the less privileged the streets have a different role to play. They are more than freeways of connectivity.
Streets, for good or bad, all too often become effectively bazaars, and melas combining the different purposes
of pilgrimage, recreation (transportation) and economic exchange. As people blur the boundaries between
public and private space by living on the street, buying and selling, eating, drinking tea, playing cricket or even
just standing, urban planners point to how these activities impeded traffic and cause congestion.
In order to decongest, poor people are shifted to the outskirts. In the Vision Mumbai document prepared by the
private consultancy from McKinsey…mass housing for the poor is being planned in the salt pan lands outside
the city. What happens to their livelihood? The long quote below captures the voice of the poor.
“We are in fact human earthmovers and tractors. We levelled the land first. We have contributed to the city. We
carry your shit out of the city. I don’t see citizens’ groups dredging sewers and digging roads. The city is not for
the rich only. We need each other. I don’t beg. I wash your clothes. Women can go to work because we are there
to look after their children. The staff in Mantralay, the collectorate, the BMC, even the police live in slums.
Because we are there, women can walk safely at night….Groups such as Bombay First talk about Mumbai a
world class city. How can it be a world-class city without a place for its poor? (Anand 2006: 3422)
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
Questions
Interest groups are part and parcel of a functioning democracy. Discuss.
Read the snippets from the debates held in the Constituent Assembly.
Identify the interest groups. Discuss what kind of interest groups exist in
contemporary India. How do they function?
Create a’ phad’ or a scroll with your own mandate when standing for
school election. (this could be done in small groups of 5, like a panchayat)
Have you heard of Bal Panchayats  and Mazdoor Kissan Sanghathan? If
not, find out and write a note about them in about 200 words.
The 73rd amendment has been monumental in bringing a voice to the
people in the villages. Discuss.
Write an essay on the ways that the Indian Constitution touches peoples’
everyday life, drawing upon different examples.
REFERENCES
Anand, Nikhil. 2006. ‘Disconnecting Experience: Making World Class Roads in
Mumbai’. Economic and Political Weekly (August 5th). pp. 3422-3429.
Ambedkar, Babasaheb. 1992. ‘The Buddha and His Dharma’ in V. Moon (Ed.)
Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar: Writings and Speeches. Vol. 11. Bombay Educational
Department. Government of Maharashtra.
Sen, Amartya. 2004. The Argumentative Indian: Writings on Indian History,
Culture and Identity. Allen Lane. Penguin Group. London.
Weber, Max. 1948. Essays in Sociology Ed. with an introduction by H.H. Gerth
and C. Wright Mills. Routledge and Kegan Paul. London.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Change and
Development in
Rural Society
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
I  ndian society is primarily a rural society though urbanisation is growing.  The
majority of India’s people live in rural areas (67 per cent, according to the 2001
Census). They make their living from agriculture or related occupations. This
means that agricultural land is the most important productive resource for a
great many Indians. Land is also the most important form of property. But land
is not just a ‘means of production’ nor just a ‘form of property’.  Nor is agriculture
just a form of livelihood.  It is also a way of life. Many of our cultural practices
and patterns can be traced to our agrarian backgrounds. You will recall from
the earlier chapters how closely interrelated structural and cultural changes
are. For example, most of the New Year festivals in different regions of India –
such as Pongal in Tamil Nadu, Bihu in Assam, Baisakhi in Punjab and Ugadi in
Karnataka to name just a few – actually celebrate the main harvest season and
herald the beginning of a new agricultural season. Find out about other harvest
festivals.
There is a close connection between agriculture and culture. The nature and
practice of agriculture varies greatly across the different regions of the country.
These variations are reflected in the different regional cultures. One can say that
both the culture and social structure in rural India are closely bound up with
agricultural and the agrarian way of life.
Agriculture is the single most important source of livelihood for the majority
of the rural population. But the rural is not just agriculture. Many activities that
support agriculture and village life are also sources of livelihood for people in
rural India. For example, a large number of artisans such as potters, carpenters,
weavers, ironsmiths, and goldsmiths are found in rural areas. They were once
part and parcel of the village economy. Their numbers have been steadily lessening
since the colonial period. You have already read in Chapter 1 how the influx of
manufactured goods replaced hand-made products.
Rural life also supported many other specialists and crafts persons as story-
tellers, astrologers, priests, water-distributors, and oil-pressers. The diversity
Different means of agriculture and related festivals.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Change and Development in Rural Society
of occupations in rural India was reflected
in the caste system, which in most regions
included specialist and ‘service’ castes such
as Washermen, Potters, and Goldsmiths.
Some of these traditional occupations have
declined. But increasing interconnection of
the rural and urban economies have led to
many diverse occupations. Many people
living in rural areas are employed in, or have
livelihoods based in, rural non-farm
activities. For instance, there are rural
residents employed in government services
such as the Postal and Education
Departments, factory workers, or in the
army, who earn their living through non-
agricultural activities.
ACTIVITY 4.1
Think of an important festival that is celebrated in your
region that has its roots in agrarian society. What is
the significance of the various practices or rituals that
are associated with that festival, and how are they
linked to agriculture?
Most towns and cities in India have grown and
encompassed surrounding villages. Can you identify
an area of the city or town where you live that used to
be a village, or areas that were once agricultural land?
How do you think this growth takes place, and what
happens to the people who used to make a living from
that land?
The Diversity of Occupations
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
4.1 AGRARIAN STRUCTURE: CASTE AND
CLASS IN RURAL INDIA
Agricultural land is the single most important resource and form of property
in rural society. But it is not equally distributed among people living in a
particular village or region. Nor does everyone have access to land. In fact, the
distribution of landholdings in most regions is highly unequal among
households. In some parts of India the majority of rural households own at
least some land – usually very small plots. In other areas as much as 40 to 50
per cent of families do not own any land at all. This means that they are
dependent on agricultural labour or other kinds of work for their livelihoods.
This of course means that a few families are well-to-do. The majority live just
above or below the poverty line.
In most regions of India, women are usually excluded from ownership of
land, because of the prevailing patrilineal kinship system and mode of
inheritance. By law women are supposed to have an equal share of family
property. In reality they only have limited rights and some access to land only
as part of a household headed by a man.
The term agrarian structure is often used to refer to the structure or
distribution of landholding. Because agricultural land is the most important
productive resource in rural areas, access to land shapes the rural class
structure. Access to land largely determines what role one plays in the process
of agricultural production. Medium and large landowners are usually able to
earn sufficient or even large incomes from cultivation (although this depends
on agricultural prices, which can fluctuate greatly, as well as other factors
such as the monsoon). But agricultural labourers are more often than not
paid below the statutory minimum wage and earn very little. Their incomes
are low. Their employment is insecure. Most agricultural labourers are
daily-wage workers. And do not have work for many days of the year. This is
known as underemployment. Similarly, tenants (cultivators who lease their
land from landowners) have lower incomes than owner-cultivators. Because
they have to pay a substantial rent to the landowner – often as much as 50 to
75 per cent of the income from the crop.
Agrarian society, therefore, can be understood in terms of its class structure.
But we must also remember structure that it is through the caste system. In
rural areas, there is a complex relationship between caste and class. This
relationship is not always straightforward. We might expect that the higher
castes have more land and higher incomes. And that there is a correspondence
between caste and class as one moves down the hierarchy. In many areas this
is broadly true but not exactly. For instance, in most areas the highest caste,
the Brahmins, are not major landowners, and so they fall outside the agrarian
structure although they are a part of rural society. In most regions of India,
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Change and Development in Rural Society
the major landowning groups belong to the upper castes. In each region, there
are usually just one or two major landowning castes, who are also numerically
very important. Such groups were termed by the sociologist M.N. Srinivas as
dominant castes. In each region, the dominant caste is the most powerful group,
economically and politically, and dominates local society. Examples of dominant
landowning groups are the Jats and Rajputs of U.P., the Vokkaligas and
Lingayats in Karnataka, Kammas and Reddis in Andhra Pradesh, and Jat Sikhs
in Punjab.
While dominant landowning groups are usually middle or high ranked
castes, most of the marginal farmers and landless belong to lower caste groups.
In official classification they belong to the Scheduled Castes or Tribes (SC/
STs) or Other Backward Classes (OBCs). In many regions of India, the former
‘Untouchable’ or dalit castes were not allowed to own land and they provided
most of the agricultural labour for
the dominant landowning groups.
This also created a labour force that
allowed the landowners to cultivate
the land intensively and get higher
returns.
The rough correspondence
between caste and class means that
typically the upper and middle castes
also had the best access to land and
resources, and hence to power and
privilege. This had important
implications for the rural economy
and society. In most regions of the country, a ‘proprietary caste’ group owns
most of the resources and can command labour to work for them. Until recently,
practices such as begar or free labour were prevalent in many parts of northern
India.  Members of low ranked caste groups
had to provide labour for a fixed number of
days per year to the village zamindar or
landlord.  Similarly, lack of resources, and
dependence on the landed class for economic,
social, and political support, meant that many
of the working poor were tied to landowners
in ‘hereditary’ labour relationships (bonded
labour), such as the halpati system in Gujarat
(Breman, 1974) and the jeeta system in
Karnataka. Although such practices have
been abolished legally, they continue to exist
in many areas. In a village of northern Bihar,
the majority of the landowners are
Bhumihars, who are also the dominant caste.
BOX 4.1
There is a direct correspondence between
agricultural productivity and the agrarian structure.
In areas of assured irrigation, those with plentiful
rainfall or artificial irrigation works (such as rice-growing
regions in river deltas, for instance the Kaveri basin in Tamil
Nadu) more labour was needed for intensive cultivation.  Here
the most unequal agrarian structures developed. The agrarian
structure of these regions was characterised by a large
proportion of landless labourers, who were often ‘bonded’
workers belonging to the lowest castes. (Kumar 1998).
ACTIVITY 4.2
Think about what you have
learned about the caste
system. Outline the various
linkages between the
agrarian or rural class
structure and caste. Discuss
in terms of different access
to resources, labour,
occupation.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
4.2 THE IMPACT OF LAND REFORMS
THE COLONIAL PERIOD
There are historical reasons why each region of India came to be dominated by
just one or two major groups. But it is important to realise that this agrarian
structure has changed enormously over time, from the pre-colonial to the colonial
and after independence. While the same dominant castes were probably also
cultivating castes in the pre-colonial period, they were not the direct owners of
land. Instead, ruling groups such as the local kings or zamindars (landlords
who were also politically powerful in their areas, and usually belonged to
Kshatriya or other high castes) controlled the land. The peasants or cultivators
who worked the land had to hand over a substantial portion of the produce to
them. When the British colonised India, in many areas they ruled through
these local zamindars. They also granted property rights to the zamindars.
Under the British, the zamindars were given more control over land than they
had before. Since the colonisers also imposed heavy land revenue (taxes) on
agriculture, the zamindars extracted as much produce or money as they could
out of the cultivators. One result of this zamindari system was that agricultural
production stagnated or declined during much of the period of British rule. For
peasants fled from oppressive landlords and frequent famines and wars
decimated the population.
Many districts of colonial India were administered through the zamindari
system. In other areas that were under direct British rule had what was called
the raiyatwari system of land settlement (raiyat means cultivator in Telugu). In
this system, the ‘actual cultivators’ (who were themselves often landlords and
not cultivators) rather than the zamindars were responsible for paying the tax.
Because the colonial government dealt directly with the farmers or landlords,
rather than through the overlords, the burden of taxation was less and cultivators
had more incentive to invest in agriculture.  As a result, these areas became
relatively more productive and prosperous.
This background about land revenue administration in colonial India – much
of which you have learned in your history books – is important to keep in mind
when studying the agrarian structure of present-day India. This is because it is
through a series of changes starting in this period that the current structure
evolved.
INDEPENDENT INDIA
After India became independent, Nehru and his policy advisors embarked on a
programme of planned development that focused on agrarian reform as well as
industrialisation. The policy makers were responding to the dismal agricultural
situation in India at that time. This was marked by low productivity, dependence
on imported food grains, and the intense poverty of a large section of the rural
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Change and Development in Rural Society
population. They felt that a major reform in the agrarian structure, and especially
in the landholding system and the distribution of land, was necessary if
agriculture were to progress. From the 1950s to the 1970s, a series of land
reform laws were passed – at the national level as well as in the states – that
were intended to bring about these changes.
The first important legislation was the abolition of the zamindari system,
which removed the layer of intermediaries who stood between the cultivators
and the state. Of all the land reform laws that were passed, this was probably
the most effective, for in most areas it succeeded in taking away the superior
rights of the zamindars over the land and weakening their economic and political
power. This did not happen without a struggle, of course, but ultimately the
effect was to strengthen the position of the actual landholders and cultivators
at the local level. However, zamindari abolition did not wipe out landlordism or
the tenancy or sharecropping systems, which continued in many areas. It only
removed the top layer of landlords in the multi-layered agrarian structure.
Among the other major land reform laws that were
introduced were the tenancy abolition and regulation acts.
They attempted either to outlaw tenancy altogether or to
regulate rents to give some security to the tenants. In most
of the states, these laws were never implemented very
effectively. In West Bengal and Kerala, there was a radical
restructuring of the agrarian structure that gave land rights
to the tenants.
The third major category of land reform laws were the
Land Ceiling Acts. These laws imposed an upper limit on the amount of land
that can be owned by a particular family. The ceiling varies from region to
region, depending on the kind of land, its productivity, and other such factors.
Very productive land has a low ceiling while unproductive dry land has a higher
ceiling limit. According to these acts, the state is supposed to identify and take
possession of surplus land (above the ceiling limit) held by each household,
and redistribute it to landless families and households in other specified
categories, such as SCs and STs. But in most of the states these acts proved to
be toothless. There were many loopholes and other strategies through which
most landowners were able to escape from having their surplus land taken over
by the state. While some very large estates were broken up, in most cases
landowners managed to divide the land among relatives and others, including
servants, in so-called ‘benami transfers’ – which allowed them to keep control
over the land (in fact if not in name). In some places, some rich farmers actually
divorced their wives (but continued to live with them) in order to avoid the
provisions of the Land Ceiling Act, which allowed a separate share for unmarried
women but not for wives.
The agrarian structure varies greatly across India, and the progress of land
reforms has also been uneven across the states. On the whole, however, it can
ACTIVITY 4.3
Find out about the Bhoodan
movement
Find out about Operation
Barga.
Discuss
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
be said that the agrarian structure, although it has changed substantially from
colonial times to the present, remains highly unequal. This structure puts
constraints on agricultural productivity. Land reforms are necessary not only
to boost agricultural growth but also to eradicate poverty in rural areas and
bring about social justice.
4.3 THE GREEN REVOLUTION AND ITS SOCIAL
CONSEQUENCES
We saw that land reforms have had only a limited impact on rural society and
the agrarian structure in most regions. In contrast the Green Revolution of the
1960s and 1970s brought about significant changes in the areas where it took
place. The Green Revolution, as you know, was a government programme of
agricultural modernisation. It was largely funded by international agencies that
was based on providing high-yielding variety(HYV) or hybrid seeds along with
pesticides, fertilisers, and other inputs, to farmers. Green Revolution
programmes were introduced only in areas that had assured irrigation, because
sufficient water was necessary for the new seeds and methods of cultivation. It
was also targeted mainly at the wheat and rice-growing areas. As a result, only
certain regions such as the Punjab, western U.P., coastal Andhra Pradesh, and
parts of Tamil Nadu, received the first wave of the Green Revolution package.
The rapid social and economic transformations that were seen in these areas
stimulated a spate of studies by social scientists, and vigorous debates about
the impact of the Green Revolution.
Agricultural productivity increased sharply because of the new technology.
India was able to become self-sufficient in foodgrain production for the first
time in decades. The Green Revolution has been considered a major achievement
of the government and of the scientists who contributed to the effort. However,
there were certain negative social effects that were pointed out by sociologists
who studied the Green Revolution areas, as well as adverse environmental
impacts.
In most of the Green Revolution areas, it was primarily the medium and
large farmers who were able to benefit from the new technology. This was because
inputs were expensive, and small and marginal farmers could not afford to
spend as much as large farmers to purchase these inputs. When agriculturists
produce primarily for themselves and are unable to produce for the market, it
is known as ‘subsistence agriculture’ and they are usually termed ‘peasants’.
Agriculturists or farmers are those who are able to produce surplus, over and
above the needs of the family, and so are linked to the market. It was the
farmers who were able to produce a surplus for the market who were able to
reap the most benefits from the Green Revolution and from the commercialisation
of agriculture that followed.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Change and Development in Rural Society
Thus, in the first phase of the Green Revolution, in the 1960s and 1970s, the
introduction of new technology seemed to be increasing inequalities in rural
society. Green Revolution crops were highly profitable, mainly because they
yielded more produce. Well-to-do farmers who had access to land, capital,
technology, and know-how, and those who could invest in the new seeds and
fertilisers, could increase their production and earn more money. However, in
many cases it led to the displacement of tenant-cultivators. For landowners
began to take back land from their tenants and cultivate it directly because
cultivation was becoming more profitable. This made the rich farmers better
off, and worsened the condition of the landless and marginal holders.
In addition, the introduction of machinery such as tillers, tractors, threshers,
and harvesters (in areas such as Punjab and parts of Madhya Pradesh) led to
the displacement of the service caste groups who used to carry out these
agriculture-related activities. This process of displacement also increased the
pace of rural-urban migration.
The ultimate outcome of the Green Revolution was a process of
‘differentiation’, in which the rich grew richer and many of the poor stagnated
or grew poorer. It should be noted that employment and wages for agricultural
workers did increase in many areas, because the demand for labour increased.
Moreover, rising prices and a shift in the mode of payment of agricultural workers
from payment in kind (grain) to cash, actually worsened the economic condition
of most rural workers.
Following the first phase of the Green Revolution, the second phase is
currently being introduced in the dry and semi-arid regions of India. In these
areas there has been a significant shift from dry to wet (irrigated) cultivation,
along with changes in the cropping pattern and type of crops grown. Increasing
commercialisation and dependence on the market in these areas (for instance,
where cotton cultivation has been promoted) has increased rather than reduced
livelihood insecurity, as farmers who once grew food for consumption now depend
on the market for the incomes. In market-oriented cultivation, especially where
a single crop is grown, a fall in prices or a bad crop can spell financial ruin for
farmers. In most of the Green Revolution areas, farmers have switched from a
multi-crop system, which allowed them to spread risks, to a mono-crop regime,
which means that there is nothing to fall back on in case of crop failure.
Another negative outcome of the Green Revolution strategy was the worsening
of regional inequalities. The areas that underwent this technological
transformation became more developed while other areas stagnated. For
instance, the Green Revolution was promoted more in the western and southern
parts of the country, and in Punjab, Haryana, and western U.P., than in the
eastern parts of the country (Das, 1999). As a result, we find agriculture in
states such as Bihar and in eastern U.P., and in dry regions such as Telengana,
to be relatively undeveloped. These are also the regions that continue to have
an entrenched ‘feudal’ agrarian structure, in which the landed castes and
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
landlords maintain power over the lower castes, landless workers and small
cultivators. The sharp caste and class inequalities, together with exploitative
labour relations, in these regions has given rise to various kinds of violence
(including inter-caste violence) in recent years.
Often it is thought that imparting
knowledge of ‘scientific’ farming
methods will improve the conditions
of Indian far mers. We should
remember that Indian farmers have
been cultivating the land for centuries,
much before the advent of the Green
Revolution. They have very deep and
extensive traditional knowledge about
the land they till and the crops they
sow. Much of this knowledge, like the
many traditional varieties of seeds
that were developed over the centuries
by farmers, is being lost as hybrid,
high-yielding, and genetically modified varieties of seeds are being promoted as
more productive and ‘scientific’ (Gupta 1998; Vasavi 1999b). In view of the
negative environmental and social impact of modern methods of cultivation
that have been observed, a number of scientists as well as farmers’ movements
now suggest a return to traditional, more organic seeds and methods of
cultivation. Many rural people themselves believe that hybrid varieties are less
healthy than the traditional ones.
4.4 TRANSFORMATIONS IN RURAL SOCIETY
AFTER INDEPENDENCE
Several profound transformations in the nature of social relations in rural
areas took place in the post-Independence period, especially in those regions
that underwent the Green Revolution. These included:
an increase in the use of agricultural labour as cultivation became more
intensive;
a shift from payment in kind (grain) to payment in cash;
a loosening of traditional bonds or hereditary relationships between farmers
or landowners and agricultural workers (known as bonded labour);
and the rise of a class of ‘free’ wage labourers’.
The change in the nature of the relationship between landlords (who usually
belonged to the dominant castes) and agricultural workers (usually low caste),
was described by the sociologist Jan Breman as a shift from ‘patronage to
BOX 4.2
Local commentary increasingly contrasts the
sampurna (wholeness) of the organic produce
with that of the hybrid produce. An elderly woman,
Bhargawa Hugar, in the village of Madbhavi, said:
What…they used to grow some wheat, red sorghum…plant a
few tubers, chilli plants…cotton. Now there’s only hibrad
(hybrid)…where’s the javari (organic/local)? Hybrid
seeds…hybrid crops…even the children are hybrid. Hybrid
seeds are sown on the earth…the children born are also
hybrid. (Vasavi 1994: 295-96)
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Change and Development in Rural Society
exploitation’ (Breman, 1974). Such changes took place in many areas where
agriculture was becoming more commercialised, that is, where crops were being
grown primarily for sale in the market. The transformation in labour relations is
regarded by some scholars as indicative of a transition to capitalist agriculture.
Because the capitalist mode of production is based on the separation of the
workers from the means of production (in this case, land), and the use of ‘free’
wage labour. In general, it is true that farmers in the more developed regions
were becoming more oriented to the market. As cultivation became more
commercialised these rural areas were also becoming integrated into the wider
economy. This process increased the flow of money into villages and expanding
opportunities for business and employment. But we should remember that this
process of transformation in the rural economy in fact began during the colonial
period. In many regions in the 19th century large tracts of land in Maharashtra
were given over to cotton cultivation, and cotton farmers became directly linked
to the world market. However, the pace and spread of change rapidly increased
after Independence, as the government promoted modern methods of cultivation
and attempted to modernise the rural economy through other strategies. The
state invested in the development of rural infrastructure, such as irrigation
facilities, roads, and electricity, and on the provision of agricultural inputs,
including credit through banks and cooperatives. The overall outcome of these
efforts at ‘rural development’ was not only to transform the rural economy and
agriculture, but also the agrarian structure and rural society itself.
Cultivation in different parts of the country
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
One way in which rural social structure was
altered by agricultural development in the
1960s and 1970s was through the enrichment
of the medium and large farmers who adopted
the new technologies, discussed in the previous
section. In several agriculturally rich regions,
such as coastal Andhra Pradesh, western Uttar
Pradesh, and central Gujarat, well-to-do
farmers belonging to the dominant castes
began to invest their profits from agriculture
in other types of business ventures. This
process of diversification gave rise to new
entrepreneurial groups that moved out of rural
areas and into the growing towns of these
developing regions, giving rise to new regional
elites that became economically as well as
politically dominant (Rutten 1995). Along with
this change in the class structure, the spread
of higher education, especially private
professional colleges, in rural and semi-urban
areas, allowed the new rural elites to educate
their children – many of whom then joined
professional or white collar occupations or
started businesses, feeding into the expansion
of the urban middle classes.
Thus, in areas of rapid agricultural
development there has been a consolidation of
the old landed or cultivating groups, who have
transformed themselves into a dynamic
entrepreneurial, rural-urban dominant class.
But in other regions such as eastern U.P. and
Bihar, the lack of effective land reforms,
political mobilisation, and redistributive
measures has meant that there have been
relatively few changes in the agrarian structure
and hence in the life conditions of most people.
In contrast, states such as Kerala have
Changing technologies in agriculture
undergone a different process of development, in which political mobilisation,
redistributive measures, and linkages to an external economy (primarily the
Gulf countries) have brought about a substantial transformation of the rural
countryside. Far from the rural being primarily agrarian, the rural in Kerala
is a mixed economy that integrates some agriculture with a wide network of
retail sales and services, and where a large number of families are dependent
on remittances from abroad.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Change and Development in Rural Society
4.5 CIRCULATION OF LABOUR
Another significant change in rural society that is linked to the commercialisation
of agriculture has been the growth of migrant agricultural labour. As ‘traditional’
bonds of patronage between labourers or tenants and landlords broke down,
and as the seasonal demand for agricultural labour increased in prosperous
Green Revolution regions such as the Punjab, a pattern of seasonal migration
emerged in which thousands of workers circulate between their home villages
and more prosperous areas where there is more demand for labour and higher
wages. Labourers migrate also due to the increasing inequalities in rural areas
from the mid-1990s, which have forced many households to combine multiple
occupations to sustain themselves. As a livelihood strategy, men migrate out
periodically in search of work and better wages, while women and children are
often left behind in their villages with elderly grandparents. Migrant workers
come mainly from drought-prone and less productive regions, and they go to
work for part of the year on farms in the Punjab and Haryana, or on brick kilns
in U.P., or construction sites in cities such as New Delhi or Bangalore. These
migrant workers have been termed ‘footloose labour’ by Jan Breman, but this
does not imply freedom. Breman’s (1985) study shows, to the contrary, that
landless workers do not have many rights, for instance, they are usually not
paid the minimum wage. It should be noted here that wealthy farmers often
prefer to employ migrant workers for harvesting and other such intensive
operations, rather than the local working class, because migrants are more easily
exploited and can be paid lower wages. This preference has produced a peculiar
pattern in some areas where the local landless labourers move out of the home
villages in search of work during the peak agricultural seasons, while migrant
workers are brought in from other areas to work on the local farms. This pattern
is found especially in sugarcane growing areas. Migration and lack of job security
have created very poor working and living conditions for these workers.
Look at this house
‘Sukrutham’ in a village in
Kerala. It is located in
Yakkar Village, 3
kilometres from Palakkad
district town
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
The largescale circulation of labour has had several significant effects on
rural society, in both the receiving and the supplying regions. For instance, in
poor areas where male family members spend much of the year working outside
of their villages, cultivation has become primarily a female task. Women are
also emerging as the main source of agricultural labour, leading to the
‘feminisation of agricultural labour force.’ The insecurity of women is greater
because they earn lower wages than men for similar work. Until recently, women
were hardly visible in official statistics as earners and workers. While women
toil on the land as landless labourers and as cultivators, the prevailing patrilineal
kinship system, and other cultural practices that privilege male rights, largely
exclude women from land ownership.
4.6 GLOBALISATION, LIBERALISATION,
AND RURAL SOCIETY
The policy of liberalisation that India has been
following since the late 1980s have had a very
significant impact on agriculture and rural
society. The policy entails participation in the
World Trade Organisation (WTO), which aims
to bring about a more free international trading
system and requires the opening up of Indian
markets to imports. After decades of state
support and protected markets, Indian farmers
have been exposed to competition from the
global market. For instance, we have all seen
imported fruits and other food items on the
shelves of our local stores – items that were not
available a few years ago because of import
barriers. Recently, India has also decided to
import wheat, a controversial decision that
reverses the earlier policy of self-reliance in
foodgrains. And bring back bitter memories of
dependencey on American foodgrains in the
early years after Independence.
These are indicators of the process of
globalisation of agriculture, or the incorporation
of agriculture into the larger global market – a
process that has had direct effects on farmers
and rural society. For instance, in some regions
such as Punjab and Karnataka, farmers enter
into contracts with multinational companies
(such as PepsiCo) to grow certain crops (such
Retail in rural areas
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Change and Development in Rural Society
as tomatoes and potatoes), which the companies then buy from them for
processing or export. In such ‘contract farming’ systems, the company identifies
the crop to be grown, provides the seeds and other inputs, as well as the know-
how and often also the working capital. In return, the farmer is assured of a
market because the company guarantees that it will purchase the produce at a
predetermined fixed price. Contract farming is very common now in the
production of specialised items such as cut flowers, fruits such as grapes, figs
and pomegranates, cotton, and oilseeds. While contract farming appears to
provide financial security to farmers, it can also lead to greater insecurity as
farmers become dependent on these companies for their livelihoods. Contract
farming of export-oriented products such as flowers and gherkins also means
that agricultural land is diverted away from food grain production. Contract
farming has sociological significance in that it disengages many people from
the production process and makes their own indigenous knowledge of agriculture
irrelevant. In addition, contract farming caters primarily to the production of
elite items, and because it usually requires high doses of fertilisers and pesticides,
it is often not ecologically sustainable.
Farming of Flowers
Another, and more widespread aspect of the globalisation of agriculture is
the entry of multinationals into this sector as sellers of agricultural inputs
such as seeds, pesticides, and fertilisers. Over the last decade or so, the
government has scaled down its agricultural development programmes, and
‘agricultural extension’ agents have been replaced in the villages by agents of
seed, fertiliser, and pesticide companies. These agents are often the sole source
of information for farmers about new seeds or cultivation practices, and of
course they have an interest in selling their products. This has led to the
increased dependence of farmers on expensive fertilisers and pesticides, which
has reduced their profits, put many farmers into debt, and also created an
ecological crisis in rural areas.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
While farmers in India for centuries have periodically faced distress due to
drought, crop failures, or debt, the phenomenon of farmers’ suicides appears
to be new. Sociologists have attempted to explain this phenomenon by looking
at the structural and social changes that have been occurring in agriculture
and agrarian society. Such suicides have become ‘matrix events’, that is, a
range of factors coalesce together to form an event. Many of the farmers who
have committed suicides were marginal farmers who were attempting to increase
their productivity, primarily by practising green revolution methods. However,
undertaking such production meant facing several risks: the cost of production
has increased tremendously due to a decrease in agricultural subsidies, the
markets are not stable, and many farmers borrow heavily in order to invest in
expensive inputs and improve their production. The loss of either the crop (due
to spread of disease or pests, excessive rainfall, or drought),
and in some cases the lack of an adequate support or market
price, means that farmers are unable to bear the debt burden
or sustain their families. Such distress is compounded by
the changing culture in rural areas in which increased
incomes are required for marriages, dowries, and to sustain
new activities and expenses such as education and medical
care (Vasavi 1999a).
The pattern of farmers’ suicides point to the significant
crises that the rural areas are experiencing. Agriculture for
many is becoming untenable, and state support for agriculture has declined
substantially. In addition, agricultural issues are no longer key public issues,
and lack of mobilisation means that agriculturists are unable to form powerful
pressure groups that can influence policy making in their favour.
Farmers’ suicides
The spate of farmers’ suicides that has been
occurring in the different parts of the country
since 1997-98 can be linked to the ‘agrarian distress’ caused
by structural changes in agriculture and changes in economic
and agricultural policies. These include: the changed pattern
of landholdings; changing cropping patterns especially due
to the shift to cash crops; liberalisation policies that have
exposed Indian agriculture to the forces of globalisation; heavy
dependence on high-cost inputs; the withdrawal of the state
from agricultural extension activities to be replaced by
multinational seed and fertiliser companies; decline in state
support for agriculture; and individualisation of agricultural
operations. According to official statistics, there have been
8,900 suicides by farmers between 2001 and 2006 in Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and Maharashtra (Suri 2006:1523).
BOX 4.3
ACTIVITY 4.4
Read the newspaper carefully.
Listen to the television or radio
news. How often are rural areas
covered? What kind of issues
are usually reported?
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Change and Development in Rural Society
Read the passage given and answer the questions:
The harsh working conditions suffered by labourers in Aghanbigha were an outcome of
the combined effect of the economic power of the maliks as a class and their overwhelming
power as members of a dominant caste. A significant aspect of the social power of the
maliks  was their ability to secure the intervention of various arms of the state to advance
their interests. Thus, political factors decissively contributed to widening the gulf between
the dominant class and the underclass.
i. Why do you think the maliks were able to use the power of the state to
advance their own interests?
ii. Why did labourers have harsh working conditions?
What measures do you think the government has taken, or should take, to
protect the rights of landless agricultural labourers and migrant workers?
There are direct linkages between the situation of agricultural workers and
their lack of upward socio-economic mobility. Name some of them.
What are the different factors that have enabled certain groups to
transform themselves into new wealthy, entrepreneurial, dominant classes?
Can you think of an example of this transformation in your state?
Hindi and regional language films were often set in rural areas. Think of a
film set in rural India and describe the agrarian society and culture that is
shown in it. How realistic do you think the portrayal is? Have you seen any
recent film set in rural areas? If not how would you explain it?
Visit a construction site in your neighbourhood, a brickyard, or other such
place where you are likely to find migrant workers. Find out where the
workers come from. How are they recruited from their home villages, who
is the ‘mukadam’? If they are from rural areas, find out about their lives in
their villages and why they have to migrate to find work.
Visit your local fruit-seller, and ask her/him about the fruits she/he sells, where
they come from, and their prices. Find out what has happened to the
prices of local products after fruits began to be imported from outside of
India (such as apples from Australia). Are there any imported fruits that are
cheaper than Indian fruits.
Collect information and write a report on the environmental situation in
rural India. Examples of topics: pesticides; declining water table; impact
of prawn farming in coastal areas; salination of soil and waterlogging in
canal irrigated areas; loss of biodiversity. Possible source: State of India’s
Environment Reports: Reports from Centre for Science and Development
Down to Earth.
Questions
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
REFERENCES
Agarwal, Bina.  1994.  A Field of One’s Own; Gender and Land Rights in South Asia.
Cambridge University Press. New Delhi.
Breman,  Jan. 1974.  Patronage and Exploitation; Changing Agrarian Relations in
South Gujarat. University of California Press. Berkeley.
Breman,  Jan.  1985. Of Peasants, Migrants and Paupers; Rural labour Circulation
and Capitalist Production in West India. Oxford University Press. Delhi.
Breman, Jan and Sudipto Mundle (Eds.). 1991. Rural Transformation in Asia. Oxford
University Press. Delhi.
Das, Raju J. 1999.  ‘Geographical unevenness of India’s Green Revolution’, Journal
of Contemporary Asia. 29 (2).
Gupta, Akhil. 1998. Postcolonial Developments: Agriculture in the Making of Modern
India. Oxford University Press. Delhi.
Kumar, Dharma. 1998. Colonialism, Property and the State. Oxford University Press.
Delhi.
Rutten, Mario. 1995.  Farms and Factories; Social Profile of Large Farmers and
Rural Industrialists in West India. Oxford University Press. Delhi.
Srinivas, M.N. 1987. The Dominant Caste and Other Essays. Oxford University Press.
Delhi.
Suri, K.C.  2006.  ‘Political economy of agrarian distress’. Economic and Political
Weekly. 41:1523-29.
Thorner, Alice. 1982.  ‘Semi-feudalism or capitalism? Contemporary debate on classes
and modes of production in India’. Economic and Political Weekly. 17:1961-68, 1993-
99, 2061-66.
Thorner, Daniel. 1991. Agrarian structure. In Dipankar Gupta (Ed.), Social
Stratification. Oxford University Press. Delhi.
Vasavi, A.R. 1994. Hybrid Times, Hybrid People: Culture and Agriculture in South
India, Man, Journal of the Royal Anthropological Society. (29) 2.
Vasavi, A.R.  1999a.  ‘Agrarian distress in Bidar: State, Market and Suicides’.
Economic and Political Weekly. 34:2263-68.
Vasavi, A.R.  1999b.  Harbingers of Rain: Land and Life in south India. Oxford
University Press. Delhi.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Change and
Development in
Industrial Society
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
W hich was the last film you saw? We are sure you can tell us the name of the
hero and heroine but can you remember the name of the sound and light
technicians, the make up artists or the dance choreographers? Some people like
the carpenters who make the sets are not even mentioned in the credits. Yet,
without all these people, the film could not be made. Bollywood may be a place of
dreams for you and me, but for many, it is their place of work. Like any industry,
the workers there are part of unions. For instance, the dancers, stunt artists and
the extras are all part of a junior artists association, whose demands include 8
hours shifts, proper wages and safe working conditions. The products of this
industry are advertised and marketed through film distributors and cinema hall
owners or through shops in the form of music cassettes and videos. And the
people who work in this industry, as in any other, live in the same city, but
depending on who they are and how much they earn, they do very different things
in that city. Film stars and textile mill owners live in places like Juhu, while extras
and textile workers may live in places like Girangaon. Some go to five star hotels
and eat Japanese sushi and some eat vada pav from the local handcart. The
residents of Bombay are divided by where they live, what they eat and how much
their clothes cost. But they are also united by certain common things that a city
provides – they watch the same films and cricket matches, they suffer from the
same air pollution and they all have aspirations for their children to do well.
How and where people work and what kind of jobs they have is an important
part of who they are. In this chapter, we will see how changes in technology or
the kind of work that is available has changed social relations in India. On the
other hand, social institutions like caste, kinship networks, gender and region
also influence the way that work is organised or the way in which products are
marketed. This is a major area of research for sociologists.
For instance, why do we find more women in certain jobs like nursing or
teaching than in other sectors like engineering? Is this just a coincidence or is
it because society thinks that women are suited for caring and nurturing work
as against jobs which are seen as ‘tough’ and masculine? Yet nursing is physically
much harder work than designing a bridge. If more women move into engineering,
how will that affect the profession? Ask yourself why some coffee advertisements
in India display two cups on the package whereas in America they show one
cup? The answer is that for many Indians drinking coffee is not an individual
wake up activity, but an occasion to socialise with others. Sociologists are
interested in the questions of who produces what, who works where, who sells
to whom and how. These are not individual choices, but outcomes of social
patterns. In turn, the choices that people make influences how society works.
5.1 IMAGES OF INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY
Many of the great works of sociology were written at a time when industrialisation
was new and machinery was assuming great importance. Thinkers like Karl
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Change and Development in Industrial Society
Marx, Max Weber and Emile Durkheim associated a number of social features
with industry, such as urbanisation, the loss of face-to-face relationships that
were found in rural areas where people worked on their own farms or for a
landlord they knew, and their substitution by anonymous professional
relationships in modern factories and workplaces. Industrialisation involves a
detailed division of labour. People often do not see the end result of their work
because they are producing only one small part of a product. The work is often
repetitive and exhausting. Yet, even this is better than having no work at all,
i.e., being unemployed. Marx called this situation alienation, when people do
not enjoy work, and see it as something they have to do only in order to survive,
and even that survival depends on whether the technology has room for any
human labour.
Industrialisation leads to greater equality, at least in some spheres. For
example, caste distinctions do not matter any more on trains, buses or in cyber
cafes. On the other hand, older forms of discrimination may persist even in
new factory or workplace settings. And even as social inequalities are reducing,
economic or income inequality is growing in the
world. Often social inequality and income
inequality overlap, for example, in the domination
of upper caste men in well-paying professions like
medicine, law or journalism.  Women often get
paid less than men for similar work.
While
early
sociologists
industrialisation as both positive and negative,
by the mid 20th century, under the influence of
modernisation theory, industrialisation came
to be seen as inevitable and positive.
Modernisation theory argues that societies are
at different stages on the road to modernisation,
but they are all heading in the same direction.
Moder n society, for these theorists, is
represented by the West.
5.2  INDUSTRIALISATION IN INDIA
THE SPECIFICITY OF INDIAN INDUSTRIALISATION
The experience of industrialisation in India is in many ways similar to the western
model and in many ways different. Comparative analysis of different countries
suggests that there is no standard model of industrial capitalism. Let us start
with one point of difference, relating to what kind of work people are doing. In
developed countries, the majority of people are in the services sector, followed by
industry and less than 10% are in agriculture (ILO figures). In India, in
According to the convergence thesis put
forward by modernisation theorist Clark Kerr,
an industrialised India of the 21st century
shares more features with China or the United
States in the 21st century than it shares with
19th century India. Do you think this is true?
Do culture, language and tradition disappear
with new technology or does culture influence
the way people adapt to new products? Write
a page of your own reflections on these
issues, giving examples.
ACTIVITY 5.1
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
1999-2000, nearly 60% were employed in the primary sector (agriculture and
mining), 17% in the secondary sector (manufacturing, construction and utilities),
and 23% in the tertiary sector (trade, transport, financial services etc.) However,
if we look at the contribution of these sectors to economic growth, the share of
agriculture has declined sharply, and services contribute approximately more
than half. This is a very serious situation because it means that the sector where
the maximum people are employed is not able to generate much income for
them. (Government of India, Economic Survey 2001-2002). In India, in 2006-07
the share of employment in agriculture
was 15.19%, in mining and quarriying
0.61%, in production 13.33%, in
manufacturing it was 6.10%, in trade,
hotel and restaurant it was 13.18%, in
transport, storage, communication it was
5.06%, in community, social and
personal services it was 8.97%, in
financial insurance, real state, business
services it was 2.22% and electricity and
water it was 0.33% (Source- Planning
Commission 11th Five Year Plan, 2007-
12, Vol. I, Page 66).
Another major difference between
developing and developed countries is the
number of people in regular salaried
employment. In developed countries, the
majority are formally employed. In India,
over 50% of the population is self-
employed, only about 14% are in regular salaried employment, while approx-
imately 30% are in casual labour (Anant 2005: 239). The adjacent chart shows
the changes between 1977-78 and 1999-2000.
Economists and others often make a distinction between the organised or
formal and unorganised or informal sector. There is a debate over how to define
these sectors. According to one definition, the organised sector consists of all
units employing ten or more people throughout the year. These have to be
registered with the government to ensure that their employees get proper salaries
or wages, pension and other benefits. In India, over 90% of the work, whether it
is in agriculture, industry or services is in the unorganised or informal sector.
What are the social implications of this small size of the organised sector?
First, it means that very few people have the experience of employment in
large firms where they get to meet people from other regions and backgrounds.
Urban settings do provide some corrective to this – your neighbours in a city
may be from a different place – but by and large, work for most Indians is still in
smallscale workplaces. Here personal relationships determine many aspects of
work. If the employer likes you, you may get a salary raise, and if you have a
fight with him or her, you may lose your job. This is different from a large
Percentage Showing Distribution of All Workers by
Status of Employment: Self-employed, Regular,
and Casual Workers in Rural and Urban Areas in
different Years
Years
1993-94 1999-2000 2004-05 2009-10
Rural
Self-employed
All wage workers*
Regular
Casual
Urban
Self-employed
All wage workers*
Regular
Casual
Source: Second Annual Report to the people on
Employment, 2011.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Change and Development in Industrial Society
organisation with well-defined rules, where recruitment is more transparent and
there are mechanisms for complaints and redressal if you disagree with your
immediate superior. Second, very few Indians have access to secure jobs with
benefits. Of those who do, two-thirds work for the government. This is why
government jobs are so popular. The rest are forced to depend on their children
in their old age. Government employment in India has played a major role in
overcoming boundaries of caste, religion and region. One sociologist has argued
that the reason why there have never been communal riots in a place like Bhilai
is because the public sector Bhilai Steel Plant employs people from all over India
who work together. Others may question this. Third, since very few people are
members of unions, a feature of the organised sector, they do not have the experience
of collectively fighting for proper wages and safe working conditions. The government
has laws to monitor conditions in the unorganised sector, but in practice they are
left to the whims and fancies of the employer or contractor.
INDUSTRIALISATION IN THE EARLY YEARS OF INDIAN INDEPENDENCE
The first modern industries in India were cotton, jute, coal mines and railways.
After independence, the government took over the ‘commanding heights of the
economy.’ This involved defence, transport and communication, power, mining
and other projects which only government had the power to do, and which was
also necessary for private industry to flourish. In India’s mixed economy policy,
some sectors were reserved for government, while others were open to the private
sector. But within that, the government tried to ensure, through its licensing
policy, that industries were spread over different regions. Before independence,
industries were located mainly in the port cities like Madras, Bombay, Calcutta.
But since then, we see that places like Baroda, Coimbatore, Bangalore, Pune,
Faridabad and Rajkot have become important industrial centres. The government
also tried to encourage the small-scale sector through special incentives and
assistance. Many items like paper and wood products, stationery, glass and
ceramics were reserved for the small-scale sector. In 1991, large-scale industry
employed only 28 per cent of the total workforce engaged in manufacture, while
the small-scale and traditional industry employed 72 per cent (Roy 2001:11).
GLOBALISATION, LIBERALISATION AND CHANGES IN INDIAN INDUSTRY
Since the 1990s, however, the government has followed a policy of liberalisation.
Private companies, especially foreign firms, are encouraged to invest in sectors
earlier reserved for the government, including telecom, civil aviation, power etc.
Licenses are no longer required to open industries. Foreign products are now easily
available in Indian shops. As a result of liberalisation, many Indian companies
have been bought over by multinationals. At the same time some Indian companies
are becoming multinational companies. An instance of the first is when, Parle drinks
was bought by Coca Cola. Parle’s annual turnover was Rs. 250 crores, while
Coca Cola’s advertising budget alone was Rs. 400 crores. This level of advertising
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
has naturally increased the consumption of coke across India replacing many
traditional drinks. The next major area of liberalisation may be in retail. Do you
think that Indians will prefer to shop in departmental stores, or will they go out
of business?
The government is trying to sell its share in several public sector companies,
a process which is known as disinvestment. Many government workers are
scared that after disinvestment, they will lose their jobs. In Modern Foods,
which was set up by the government to make healthy bread available at cheap
prices, and which was the first company to be privatised, 60% of the workers
were forced to retire in the first five years.
Let us see how this fits in with worldwide trends. More and more companies
are reducing the number of permanent employees and outsourcing their work
to smaller companies or even to homes. For multinational companies, this
outsourcing is done across the globe, with developing countries like India
providing cheap labour.  Because small companies have to compete for orders
from the big companies, they keep wages low, and working conditions are often
poor. It is more difficult for trade unions to organise in smaller firms. Almost all
companies, even government ones, now practice some form of outsourcing and
contracting. But the trend is especially visible in the private sector.
To summarise, India is still largely an agricultural country. The service
sector – shops, banks, the IT industry, hotels and other services are employing
more people and the urban middle class is growing, along with urban middle
class values like those we see in television serials and films. But we also see
that very few people in India have access to secure jobs, with even the small
number in regular salaried employment becoming more insecure due to the rise
in contract labour. So far, employment by the government was a major avenue
for increasing the well-being of the population, but now even that is coming
down. Some economists debate this, but liberalisation and privatisation worldwide
appear to be associated with rising income inequality. You will be reading more
about this in the next chapter on globalisation.
BOX 5.1
Retail chains scramble to enter Indian market
Clamoring to enter India’s red-hot retail sector, the world’s largest chains, including Wal-Mart Stores,
Carrefour and Tesco, are seeking the best way to enter the country, despite a government ban on
foreign direct investment in the market. Recent large investments by major Indian businesses, like Reliance Industries
and Bharti Airtel, have increased the sense of urgency for foreign retailers…..Last week, Bharti Airtel indicated that
it was in talks with Wal-Mart, Carrefour and Tesco to set up a retailing joint venture….India’s retail sector is attractive
not only because of its fast growth, but because family-run street corner stores have 97% of the nation’s business.
But this industry trait is precisely why the government makes it hard for foreigners to enter the market. Politicians
frequently argue that global retailers would destroy thousands of small local players and fledgling domestic chains.
Source: International Herald Tribune, 3 August 2006
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Change and Development in Industrial Society
At the same time as secure employment in large industry is declining, the
government is embarking on a policy of land acquisition for industry. These
industries do not necessarily provide employment to the people of the
surrounding areas, but they cause major pollution. Many farmers, especially
adivasis, who constitute approximately 40% of those displaced, are protesting
at the low rates of compensation and the fact that they will be forced to become
casual labour living and working on the footpaths of India’s big cities.  You will
recall the discussion on competing interests in chapter 3. (11)
In the following sections, we will look at how people find work, what they
actually do in their workplaces and what kind of working conditions they face.
5.3  HOW PEOPLE FIND JOBS
If you open the Times of India on a Wednesday morning, you will find a section
called Times Ascent. Here, jobs are advertised, and tips are given about how to
motivate yourself or your workers to perform better.
Box 5.2 on the next page shows an example of a public sector job. The
person will get benefits like house rent allowance (HRA). The qualifications
required for the job are specified in great detail. In such jobs there are clear
avenues for promotions, and you can expect that seniority will matter.
Let us look at a private sector job in Box 5.3 on the next page. This is also
regular salaried employment and the employer is a well-known hotel. But here
the salary and qualifications required are flexible, and the job is likely to be on
contract. Look at the language used in this advertisement, such as loyalty
program. Each organisation tries to create its own work culture.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
BOX 5.3
Radisson Hotel Delhi has
immediate openings
for their loyalty program.
Customer Service Executives
Senior Tele-sales Executives
Candidates with a good command over English and
a flair for sales may apply.
Prior experience preferred.
We offer a 5 star work environment, ongoing
development and training, motivating atmosphere,
day time jobs and good salary/incentives.
Part time & full time options available.
Please call between 9.30 am to 6.30 pm
30th- 31st August & 1st September, 2006
Ph: 66407361/66407351/66407353
Or Fax your CV to 26779062
Or Email: memberhelpdesk@radisssondel.com
Radisson
BOX 5.2
Dyal Singh College
(Delhi University Maintained College)
Lodi Road, New Delhi 110003
Applications are invited for the post of PRINCIPAL in the scale of pay Rs. 16,400-22400 (with a minimum of
Rs. 17,300 p.m.) plus D.A., CCA, H.R.A., T.A. and other benefits as permissible under the rules of the University of Delhi.
QUALIFICATIONS
A Master’s Degree in a relevant subject with at least 55% marks or an quivalent grade of ‘B’ in the
seven point scale with letter grade O, A, B, C, D, E & F.
Ph.D. or equivalent degree
(iii)
Total experience of fifteen years of teaching and/or post-doctoral research in Universities/Colleges
and other institution of higher education.
Applications stating full details of qualifications, experience, age, etc. with all the supporting documents should
reach “The Chairman, Governing Body, Dyal Singh College, Lodi Road, New Delhi – 110 003” in a sealed cover
within 15 days from the date of publication of this advertisement.
Chairman
Governing Body
But only a small percentage of people get
jobs through advertisements or through the
employment exchange. People who are self–
employed like plumbers, electricians and
carpenters at one end and teachers who give
private tuitions, architects and free-lance
photographers at the other end, all rely on
personal contacts. They hope that their work
will be an advertisement for them. Mobile
phones have made life much easier for
plumbers and others who can now cater to a
wider circle of people.
Job recruitment as a factory worker takes
a different pattern. In the past, many workers
got their jobs through contractors or jobbers.
In the Kanpur textile mills, these jobbers were
known as mistris, and were themselves
workers. They came from the same regions and
communities as the workers, but because they
had the owner’s backing they bossed over the
workers. On the other hand, the mistri also put
community related pressures on the worker.
Nowadays, the importance of the jobber has
come down, and both management and
unions play a role in recruiting their own
people. Many workers also expect that they
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Change and Development in Industrial Society
can pass on their jobs to their children. Many factories employ badli workers
who substitute for regular permanent workers who are on leave. Many of these
badli workers have actually worked for many years for the same company but
are not given the same status and security. This is what is called contract work
in the organised sector.
However, the contractor system is most visible in the hiring of casual labour
for work on construction sites, brickyards and so on. The contractor goes to
villages and asks if people want work. He will loan them some money. This loan
includes the cost of transport of the workside. The loaned money is treated as
an advance wage and the worker works without wages until the loan is repaid.
In the past, agricultural labourers were tied to their landlord by debt. Now,
however, by moving to casual industrial work, while they are still in debt, they
are not bound by other social obligations to the contractor. In that sense, they
are more free in an industrial society. They can break the contract and find
another employer. Sometimes, whole families migrate and the children help
their parents.
Labour gangs in the brickyards of South Gujarat
Approximately 30,000-40,000
workers are employed here on
a seasonal basis. The
brickyards are owned by upper
castes like Parsis or Desais.
Members of the potter caste
are also acquiring brickyards
as an extension of their
traditional work with mud. The
workers are usually local or
migrants dalits. They are
employed by contractors and
work in gangs of nine to eleven members. While the men knead the mud and mould the brick,
the little children carry each brick to the place where they are dried. A gang of women and girls
then carry the bricks to the kiln where they are fired by men, and from there again to the trucks
where the bricks are loaded.
Each gang makes 2500-3000 bricks a day. A quick gang can finish this number in ten hours while
a slow gang will take 14 hours. From the age of six, children are woken during the night to carry
the fresh bricks made by their father. While wet, those bricks weigh roughly three kilos. The little
children run with one brick each, away from the base plate and into the darkness. When they
reach the age of about nine, they are promoted to carrying two bricks. Sometimes, says the
sociologist Jan Breman, their parents wake them up crying from the rags that form their beds.
BOX 5.4
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
5.4  HOW IS WORK CARRIED OUT?
In this section, we will explore how work actually takes place. How are all the
products we see around us manufactured? What is the relationship between
managers and workers in a factory or in an office? In India, there is a whole
range of work settings from large companies where work is automated to small
home-based production.
The basic task of a manager is to control workers and get more work out of
them. There are two main ways of making workers produce more. One is to
extend the working hours. The other is to increase the amount that is produced
within a given time period. Machinery helps to increase production, but it also
creates the danger that eventually machines will replace workers. Both Marx
and Mahatma Gandhi saw mechanisation as a danger to employment.
Another way of increasing output is by organising work. An American called
Frederick Winslow Taylor invented a new system in the 1890s, which he called
‘Scientific Management’. It is also known as Taylorism or industrial engineering.
Under his system, all work was broken down into its smallest repetitive elements,
and divided between workers. Workers were timed with the help of stopwatches
Gandhi on Machinery, in Hind Swaraj 1924:
“What I object to is the craze for machinery, not
machinery as such. The craze is for what they
call labour-saving machinery. Men go on ‘saving
labour’ till thousands are without work and thrown
on the open streets to die of starvation. I want to
save time and labour, not for a fraction of
mankind, but for all. I want the concentration of
wealth, not in the hands of the few, but in the
hands of all.”
1934: “When as a nation we adopt the spinning-
wheel, we not only solve the question of
unemployment but we declare that we have no
intention of exploiting any nation, and we also
end the exploitation of the poor by the rich.”
Give an example of how machinery creates a
problem for workers. What alternative did Gandhi
have in mind? How does adopting the spinning
wheel prevent exploitation?
ACTIVITY 5.2
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Change and Development in Industrial Society
and had to fulfil a certain target every day. Production was further speeded up
by the introduction of the assembly line. Each worker sat along a conveyor belt
and assembled only one part of the final product. The speed of work could be
set by adjusting the speed of the conveyor belt. In the 1980s, there was an
attempt to shift from this system of direct control to indirect control, where
workers are supposed to motivate and monitor themselves. But often we find
that the old Taylorist processes survive.
Workers in textile mills, which is one of the oldest industries in India, often
described themselves as extensions of the machine.  Ramcharan, a weaver who
had worked in the Kanpur cotton mills since the 1940s, said:
You need energy. The eyes move, the neck, the legs and the hands, each part moves.
Weaving is done under a continuous gaze - one cannot go anywhere, the focus must be
on the machine. When four machines run all four must move together, they must not
stop. (Joshi 2003)
The more mechanised
an industry gets, the
fewer
people
employed, but they too
have to work at the pace
of the machine. In Maruti
Udyog Ltd. two cars roll
off the assembly line every
minute. Workers get only
45 minutes rest in the
entire day - two tea
breaks of 7.5 minutes
each and one lunch break
of half an hour. Most of
them are exhausted by the
age of 40 and take
voluntary retirement.
While production has
gone up, the number of permanent jobs in the factory has gone down. The firm
has outsourced all services like cleaning, and security, as well as the manufacture
of parts.  The parts suppliers are located around the factory and send the parts
every two hours or just-in-time. Outsourcing and just-in-time keeps costs low
for the company, but the workers are very tense, because if the supplies fail to
arrive, their production targets get delayed, and when they do arrive they have
to run to keep up. No wonder they get exhausted.
Now let us look at the services sector. Software professionals are middle class
and well educated. Their work is supposed to be self-motivated and creative.
But, as we see from the box, their work is also subject to Taylorist labour
processes.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
As a result of these working hours, in places like Bangalore, Hyderabad and
Gurgaon, where many IT firms or call centres are located, shops and restaurants
have also changed their opening hours, and are open late. If both husband and
wife work, then children have to be put in crèches. The joint family, which was
supposed to have disappeared with industrialisation, seems to have re-emerged,
as grandparents are roped in to help with children.
One important debate in sociology is whether industrialisation and the shift
to services and knowledge-based work like IT leads to greater skills in society.
We often hear the phrase ‘knowledge economy’ to describe the growth of IT in
India. But how do you compare the skills of a farmer who knows how to grow
many hundreds of crops relying on his or her understanding of the weather,
the soil and the seeds, with the knowledge of a software professional? Both are
skilled but in different ways. The famous sociologist Harry Braverman argues
that the use of machinery actually deskills workers. For example, whereas earlier
architects and engineers had to be skilled draughtsmen, now the computer
does a lot of the work for them.
5.5  WORKING CONDITIONS
We all want power, a solid house, clothes and other goods, but we should
remember that these come to us because someone is working to produce them,
often in very bad conditions. The government has passed a number of laws to
regulate working conditions. Let us look at mining where a number of people
are employed. Coal mines alone employ 5.5 lakh workers. The Mines Act 1952
specifies the maximum number of hours a person can be made to work in a
week, the need to pay overtime for any extra hours worked and safety rules.
These rules may be followed in the big companies, but not in smaller mines and
BOX 5.5
‘Time Slavery’ in the IT Sector
10-12 hours is an average workday, and it is not uncommon for employees to stay overnight in the
office (known as a ‘night out’), when faced with a project deadline. Long working hours are central
to the industry’s ‘work culture’. In part this is due to the time difference between India and the client site, such that
conference calls tend to take place in the evening when the working day in the U.S. begins. Another reason is that
overwork is built into the structure of outsourced projects: project costs and timelines are usually under-estimated
in terms of mandays, and because mandays are based on an eight-hour day, engineers have to put in extra hours
and days in order to meet the deadlines. Extended working hours are legitimised by the common management
practice of ‘flexi-time’, which in theory gives the employee freedom to choose his or her working hours (within
limits) but which in practice means that they have to work as long as necessary to finish the task at hand. But even
when there is no real work pressure, they tend to stay late in office either due to peer pressure or because they
want to show the boss that they are working hard.
(Carol Upadhya, Forthcoming )
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Change and Development in Industrial Society
quarries. Moreover, sub-contracting is widespread. Many contractors do not
maintain proper registers of workers, thus avoiding any responsibility for
accidents and benefits. After mining has finished in an area, the company is
supposed to cover up the open holes and restore the area to its earlier condition.
But they don’t do this.
Workers in underground
mines face very dangerous
conditions, due to flooding,
fire, the collapse of roofs and
sides, the emission of gases
and ventilation failures.
Many workers develop
breathing problems and
diseases like tuberculosis
and silicosis. Those working
in overground mines have to
work in both hot sun and
rain, and face injuries due to
mine blasting, falling objects
etc. The rate of mining
accidents in India is very
high compared to other
countries.
In many industries, the workers are migrants. The fish processing plants
along the coastline employ mostly single young women from Tamil Nadu,
Karnataka and Kerala. Ten-twelve of them are housed in small rooms, and
sometimes one shift has to make way for another. Young women are seen as
submissive workers. Many men also migrate singly, either unmarried or leaving
BOX 5.6
Time running out for 54 trapped miners in Jharkhand
IANS, September 7, 2006
54 miners at the Bhatdih colliery of Nagada were trapped Wednesday night following a blast due to
the accumulation of gases. It was about 8 p.m. when the explosion, caused by the pressure due to the accumulation
of methane and carbon monoxide, shook the colliery belonging to the Bharat Coking Coal Limited (BCCL). The
intensity was so high that a one-tonne trolley in inclination number 17 was thrown out.
Four rescue teams have been constituted. But they don’t have adequate number of oxygen masks to enter the
deep mine where the incident occurred.
Most of the trapped miners are between the ages of 20 and 30.
Family members and union leaders have blamed the BCCL management for the incident. ‘This is one of the
BCCL’s poisonous mines. No safety measures have been adopted by the management. Water sprinkling facilities
and gas testing machines should be available in the colliery. But no such arrangements have been made here,’
said a union member.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
their families in the village.  In 1992, 85% of the 2 lakh Oriya migrants in Surat
were single. These migrants have little time to socialise and whatever little time
and money they can spend is with other migrant workers. From a nation of
interfering joint families, the nature of work in a globalised economy is taking
people in the direction of loneliness and vulnerability. Yet for many young women,
it also represents some independence and economic autonomy.
5.6  HOME-BASED WORK
Home-based work is an important part of the economy. This includes the
manufacture of lace, zari or brocade, carpets, bidis, agarbattis and many such
products. This work is mainly done by women and children. An agent provides
raw materials and also picks up the finished product. Home workers are paid on
a piece-rate basis, depending on the number of pieces they make.
Let us look at the bidi industry.  The
process of making bidis starts in forested
villages where villagers pluck tendu leaves
and sell it to the forest department or a
private contractor who in turn sells it to
the forest department. On average a
person can collect 100 bundles (of 50
leaves each) a day. The government then
auctions the leaves to bidi factory owners
who give it to the contractors. The
contractor in turn supplies tobacco and
leaves to home-based workers. These
workers, mostly women, roll the bidis –
first dampening the leaves, then cutting
them, filling in tobacco evenly and then
tying them with thread. The contractor
picks up these bidis and sells them to the
manufacturer who roasts them, and puts
brand
label.
manufacturer then sells them to a
distributor who distributes the packed
bidis to wholesalers who in turn sell to
your neighbourhood pan shops.
ACTIVITY 5.3
Find out how tobacco is grown, cured and
how it reaches the bidi worker.
Different brands of bidi
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Change and Development in Industrial Society
5.7  STRIKES AND UNIONS
Many workers are part of trade unions. Trade unions in India have to overcome
a number of problems such as regionalism and casteism. Datta Iswalkar, a
mill worker described how caste had been overcome but not entirely in the
Bombay mills:
They would sit and chew paan with him (Vishnu, a Mahar worker in Modern Mills) but
they would not drink water from his hands! They never treated him badly, they were
friends with him, but they would never go to his house. Or eat out of a lunchbox bought
by any of the Mahars. The funny thing is the Marathi workers were unable to judge the
caste of the North Indian workers. So they could not practice untouchability with them!
(Menon and Aadarkar, 2004: 113)
In response to harsh working conditions, sometimes workers went on strike.
In a strike, workers do not go to work, in a lock-out the management shuts the
gate and prevents workers from coming. To call a strike is a difficult decision as
managers may try to use substitute labour. Workers also find it hard to sustain
themselves without wages.
Let us see from the following
pie diagram how the value of the
finished bidi is distributed
(Bhandari 2005: 410).  The
manufacturer
maximum amount, because of
the image of the brand, showing
the power of images.
Life history of a bidi worker
Madhu is a 15-year old school dropout. She stopped going to school after failing in Class VIII. Her
father, a tailor, expired last year. He was suffering from tuberculosis. This made it necessary for the
children and mother to work. Her elder brother aged 17 works in a grocery shop and the younger one aged 14 is
engaged in chocolate packaging. Madhu and her mother roll bidis. Madhu started rolling bidis at an early age and
she enjoys it as it provides her the opportunity to sit close to her mother and other women and listen to them chat.
She fills tobacco into the rolled tendu leaves. She spends most of her time in this activity apart from the time spent
doing household chores. Due to long hours of sitting in the same posture daily, she suffers from backache. Madhu
wants to restart her schooling. (Bhandari 2005: 406)
BOX 5.7
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
BOX 5.8
Let us look at one famous strike, the Bombay Textile strike of 1982, which
was led by the trade union leader, Dr. Datta Samant, and affected nearly a
quarter of a million workers and their families. The strike lasted nearly two
years. The workers wanted better wages and also wanted the right to form their
own union. According to the Bombay Industrial Relations Act (BIRA), a union
had to be ‘approved’ and the only way it could be ‘approved’ was if it gave up the
idea of strikes. The Congress-led Rashtriya Mill Mazdoor Sangh (RMMS) was the
only approved union and it helped to break the strike by bringing in other workers.
The Government also refused to listen to the worker’s demands. Slowly after two
years, people started going back to work because they were desperate. Nearly
one lakh workers lost their jobs, and went back to their villages or took up casual
labour, others moved to smaller towns like Bhiwandi, Malegaon and
Icchalkaranji, to work in the powerloom sector. Mill owners did not invest in
machinery and modernisation. Today, they are trying to sell off the mill land to
real estate dealers to build luxury apartments, leading to a battle over who will
define the future of Bombay – the workers who built it or the mill owners and
real estate agents.
Jayprakash Bhilare, ex-millworker, General Secretary of the Maharashtra Girni Kamgar
Union: Textile workers were getting only their basic wage and DA, and no other allowance.
We were getting only five days Casual Leave. Other workers in other industries had
started getting allowances for travelling, health benefits etc. and 10-12 days Casual Leave. This agitated
the textile workers. …On 22 October 1981, the workers of Standard Mills marched to the house of
Dr. Datta Samant to ask him to lead them. At first Samant declined, saying the industry was covered by
the BIRA and he did not know enough of the textile industry. These workers were in no mood to take no
for an answer. They kept a night-long vigil outside his home and in the morning Samant finally relented.
Lakshmi Bhatkar, participant in the strike: I supported the strike. We would sit outside the gate every
day and discuss what was to be done. We would go for the morchas that were organised from time to
time….the morchas were huge – we never looted or hurt anybody. I was asked to speak sometimes but
I was not able to make speeches. My legs would shake too much! Besides I was afraid of my children –
what would they say? They would think here we are starving at home and she has her face printed in the
newspapers.….There was a morcha to Century Mills showroom once. We were arrested and taken to
Borivali. I was thinking about my children. I could not eat. I thought to myself that we are not criminals,
we were millworkers. Fighting for the wages of our blood.
Kisan Salunke, ex-millworker, Spring Mills: Century Mills was opened by the RMMS barely a month-
and-half after the strike began. They could do this because they had the full backing of the state and the
government. They brought outsiders into the mill and they kept them inside without letting them out at
all…. Bhonsle (Chief Minister of Maharashtra then) offered a 30–rupee raise.  Datta Samant called a
meeting to discuss this. All the leading activists were there. We said, ‘No, we don’t want this. If there is
no dignity, if there is no discussion with the strike leaders, we will not be able to go back to work without
any harassment.”
Datta Iswalkar, President of the Mill Chawls Tenant Association: The Congress brought all the goondas
out of jail to break the strike like Babu Reshim, Rama Naik and Arun Gawli. They started to threaten the
workers. We had no alternative but to beat up strikebreakers. It was a matter of life and death for us.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Change and Development in Industrial Society
Bhai Bhonsle, General Secretary of the RMMS during 1982 strike: We started getting people to work in
the mills after three months of the strike…Our point was, if people want to go to work let them, in fact
they should be helped. …About the mafia gangs being involved, I was responsible for that…These
Datta Samant people would wait at convenient locations and lie in wait for those going to work. We set
up counter groups in Parel and other places. Naturally there were some clashes, some bloodshed…When
Rama Naik died, Bhujbal who was Mayor then, had come in his official car to pay his respects. These
forces were used at one time or other by many people in politics.
Kisan Salunke, ex-millworker: Those were very difficult times. We had to sell all our vessels. We
were ashamed to go to the market with our vessels so we would wrap them in gunny bags and take
them to the shop to sell ..There were days when I had nothing to eat, only water. We bought sawdust and
burnt it for fuel. I have three sons. Sometimes when the children had no milk to drink, I could not bear
to see them hungry. I would take my umbrella and go out of the house.
Sindu Marhane, ex-millworker: The RMMS and goondas came for me too, to force me back to
work. But I refused to go….There were rumours going round as to what happened to women who went
to stay and work in the mills. There were incidents of rape.
EXERCISE FOR BOX 5.8
Choose any occupation you see around you – and describe it along the
following lines: a) social composition of the work force – caste, gender, age,
region; b)  labour process – how the work takes place, c) wages and other
benefits, d) working conditions – safety, rest times, working hours etc.
In the account of brickmaking, bidi rolling, software engineers or mines
that are described in the boxes, describe the social composition of the
workers. What are the working conditions and facilities available? How
do girls like Madhu feel about their work?
How has liberalisation affected employment patterns in India?
After reading these accounts of the 1982 strike answer the questions given below.
Describe the 1982 textile strike from the different perspectives of those involved.
Why did the workers go on strike?
How did Datta Samant take up the leadership of the strike?
What was the role played by strike-breakers?
How did the mafia get a foothold in these areas?
How were women affected and what were their concerns during the strike?
How did workers and their families survive the period of strike?
Questions
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
REFERENCES
Anant, T.C.A. 2005. ‘Labour Market Reforms in India: A Review’. In Bibek Debroy
and P.D. Kaushik Eds. Reforming the Labour Market.  pp. 235-252. Academic
Foundation. New Delhi.
Bhandari, Laveesh. ‘Economic Efficiency of Sub-contracted Home-based Work’. In
Bibek Debroy and P.D. Kaushik Eds. Reforming the Labour Market. pp. 397-417.
Academic Foundation. New Delhi.
Breman, Jan. 2004. The Making and Unmaking of an Industrial Working Class.
Oxford University Press. New Delhi.
Breman, Jan. 1999. ‘The Study of Industrial Labour in post-colonial India – The
Formal Sector: An Introductory review’. Contributions to Indian Sociology.
Vol 33 (1&2), January-August 1999. pp. 1-42.
Breman, Jan. 1999. ‘The Study of Industrial Labour in post-colonial India – The
Informal Sector: A concluding review’. Contributions to Indian Sociology.
Vol 33 (1&2), January-August 1999. pp. 407-431.
Breman, Jan and Arvind, N. Das. 2000. Down and Out: Labouring Under Global
Capitalism. Oxford University Press. Delhi.
Datar, Chhaya. 1990. ‘Bidi Workers in Nipani’. In Illina Sen, A Space within the
Struggle. pp. 1601-81. Kali for Women. New Delhi.
Gandhi, M.K. 1909. Hind Swaraj and other writings. Edited by Anthony J. Parel.
Cambridge University Press. Cambridge.
George, Ajitha Susan. 2003. Laws Related to Mining in Jharkhand. Report for
UNDP.
Holmstrom, Mark. 1984. Industry and Inequality: The Social Anthropology of
Indian Labour. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge.
Joshi, Chitra. 2003. Lost Worlds: Indian Labour and its Forgotten Histories Delhi.
Permanent Black. New Delhi.
Kerr, Clark et al. 1973. Industrialism and Industrial Man. Penguin. Harmondsworth.
Kumar, K. 1973. Prophecy and Progress. Allen Lane. London.
Menon, Meena and Neera, Adarkar. 2004. One Hundred Years, One Hundred
Voices: the Millworkers of Girangaon: An Oral History. Seagull Press. Kolkata.
PUDR. 2001. Hard Drive: Working Conditions and Workers Struggles at Maruti.
PUDR. Delhi.
Roy, Tirthankar. 2001. ‘Outline of a History of Labour in Traditional Small-scale
Iindustry in India’. NLI Research Studies Series. No 015/2001. V.V. Giri National
Labour Institute. Noida.
Upadhya, Carol. forthcoming. Culture Incorporated: Control over Work and
Workers in the Indian Software Outsourcing Industry.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Globalisation and
Social Change
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
o discussion on social change in the twenty-first century can take place
without some reference to globalisation.  It is but natural that in this book on
social change and development, the terms globalisation and liberalisation have
already appeared in your earlier chapters. Recall the section on globalisation,
liberalisation, and rural society in chapter 4. Go back and read the section on
the Indian government’s policy of liberalisation and its impact on Indian
industries in chapter 5. It also came up when we discussed Vision Mumbai and
the new visions for global cities in chapter 3. Other than your school books,
you must have come across the term globalisation in newspapers, television
programmes or even in everyday conversation.
Read any newspaper regularly for two
weeks and note down how the term
‘globalisation’ is used. Compare your notes
with others in the class.
Note down references to the term
‘globalisation’ and ‘global’ in different kinds
of television programmes. You can focus
on news and discussions on political or
economic or cultural matters.
ACTIVITY 6.1
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Globalisation and Social Change
Activity 1 will help you notice the various ways the term is used. But we still
need to be clear about what exactly does the term means. In this chapter we
seek to understand the meaning of globalisation, its different dimensions and
their social consequences.
However, this does not mean that there can be only one definition of
globalisation and only one way of understanding it. Indeed you will find that
different subjects or academic disciplines may focus on different aspects of
globalisation. Economics may be dealing more with the economic dimensions
such as capital flows. Political science may focus on the changing role of
governments. However, the very process of globalisation is so far-reaching that
disciplines have to increasingly borrow from each other  to understand both the
causes and consequences of globalisation. Let us see how sociology seeks to
understand globalisation.
You will recall our early discussions on the scope of sociology and the
distinctive character of the sociological perspective. We go back a bit in order to
focus on the significance of the sociological perspective to understand
globalisation.
The scope of sociological study is extremely wide. It can focus its analysis of interactions
between individuals such as that of a shopkeeper with a customer, between teachers and
students, between two friends or family members.  It can likewise focus on national issues
such as unemployment or caste conflict or the effect of state policies on forest rights of the
tribal population or rural indebtedness. Or examine global social processes such as: the
impact of new flexible labour regulations on the working class; or that of the electronic media
on the young; or the entry of foreign universities on the education system of the country. What
defines the discipline of sociology is therefore not just what it studies (i.e. family or trade
unions or villages) but how it studies a chosen field. (NCERT BOOK 1, Class XI  2005)
You read the above paragraph carefully. You will realise that since sociology
is not defined by what it studies but how it studies, it would be not quite right
to state that sociology only studies the social or cultural consequences of
globalisation. What it does is use the sociological imagination to make sense of
the connections between the individual and society, the micro and the macro,
the local and the global. How is the peasant affected in a remote village? How is
s/he connected to global changes? How has it affected the chances of
employment for the middle class? How has it affected the possibilities of big
Indian corporations becoming transnational corporations? What does it mean
to the neighbourhood grocer if the retail sector is opened up to big transnational
companies? Why are there so many shopping malls in our cities and towns
today? How has it changed the way young people spend their leisure time?
These are just few examples of the wide ranging and different kinds of changes
that globalisation is bringing about. You will find many more instances whereby
global developments are affecting the lives of people. And thereby affecting the
way sociology has to study society.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
With the opening up of the market and removal of restrictions to the import
of many products we have many more products from different corners of the
world in our neighbourhood shops. Since April 1, 2001, all types of quantitative
restrictions (QR) on imports were withdrawn. It is no surprise now to find a
Chinese pear, an Australian apple vying for attention in the local fruit stall. The
neighbourhood store also has Australian orange juice and ready to fry chips in
frozen packets. What we eat and drink at home with our family and friends
slowly changes. The same set of policy changes affects consumers and producers
differently. What may mean greater choices for the urban, affluent consumer
may mean a crisis of livelihood for a farmer. These changes are personal because
they affect individuals’ lives and lifestyles. They are obviously also linked to
public policies adopted by the government and its agreement with the World
Trade Organisation (WTO). Likewise macro policy changes have meant that instead
of one television channel we have literally scores today. The dramatic changes in
the media are perhaps the most visible effect of globalisation. We will be discussing
this in greater detail in the next chapter. These are just few random examples
but they may help you to appreciate the close interconnection that exists between
your personal lives and the apparently remote policies of globalisation. As
mentioned earlier the sociological imagination enables to make this connection
between the micro and the macro, between the personal and public.
Sociology has been often defined as the discipline that studies ‘society’. You
would remember from your discussions in Book 1, Class XI that the boundaries
of ‘society’ are not easy to draw. A study of a village not only meant study of
different social groups and their ‘societies’ but would also have to take into
account, the ways the village society was linked to the outside world. This
linkage is more valid today than ever before. The sociologist or social
anthropologist cannot study society as though it was an isolated entity. The
compression of space and time has changed this. Sociologists have to study
villages, families, movements, child rearing practices, work and leisure,
bureaucratic organisations or castes taking this global interconnection into
account.  Studies will have to take into account the impact of WTO rules on
agriculture and therefore on the farmer.
The effect of globalisation is far reaching. It affects us all but affects us
differently. Thus, while for some it may mean new opportunities, for others the
loss of livelihood. Women silk spinners and twisters of Bihar lost their jobs once
the Chinese and Korean silk yarn entered the market. Weavers and consumers
prefer this yarn as it is somewhat cheaper and has a shine.  Similar displacements
have come with the entry of large fishing vessels into Indian waters. These
vessels take away the fish that used to be earlier collected by Indian fishing
vessels. The livelihood of women fish sorters, dryers, vendors and net makers
thereby get affected. In Gujarat, women gum collectors, who were picking from
the ‘julifera’ (Baval trees), lost their employment due to the import of cheaper
gum from Sudan. In almost all cities of India, the rag pickers lost some of their
employment due to import of waste paper from developed countries. We will see
later in the chapter how traditional entertainers are affected.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Globalisation and Social Change
It is obvious that globalisation is of great social significance. But as you saw
its impact on different sections of society is very different. There are, therefore,
sharply divided views about the impact of globalisation regarding its effect.
Some believe that it is necessary to herald a better world. Others fear that the
impact of globalisation on different sections of people is vastly different. They
argue that while many in the more privileged section may benefit, the condition
of a large section of the already excluded population worsens. There are yet
others who argue that globalisation is not a new development at all. In the next
two sections we look at these issues. We find out a bit more about the kind of
global inter-connections that India had in the past. We also examine whether
indeed globalisation has some distinctive features and if so what is it.
6.1 ARE GLOBAL INTERCONNECTIONS
NEW TO WORLD AND TO INDIA
If globalisation is about global interconnections we can ask whether this is
really a new phenomenon.  Was India or the different parts of the world not
interacting with each other in earlier times?
THE EARLY YEARS
India was not isolated from the world even two thousand years ago.  We have
read in our history textbooks about the famous Silk route, which centuries ago
connected India to the great civilisations, which existed in China, Persia, Egypt
and Rome. We also know that through out India’s long past, people from different
parts came here, sometimes as traders, sometimes as conquerors, sometimes
as migrants in search of new lands and settled down here.  In remote Indian
villages often people ‘recall’ a time when their ancestors lived elsewhere, from
where they came and settled down where they now live.
It is interesting to note that the greatest grammarian in Sanskrit namely Panini,
who systematised and transformed Sanskrit grammar and phonetics around the
fourth century BCE, was of Afghan origin. …The seventh-century Chinese scholar Yi Jing learned
his Sanskrit in Java (in the city of Shri Vijaya) on his way from China to India. The influence of
interactions is well reflected in languages and vocabularies throughout Asia from Thailand to
Malaya to Indo-China, Indonesia, the Philippines, Korea and Japan. …
We can find a warning against isolationism in a parable about a well-frog- the ‘kupamanduka’-
that persistently recurs in several old Sanskrit texts…The kupamanduka is a frog that lives its
whole life within a well, knows nothing else, and is suspicious of everything outside it. It talks to
no one, and argues with no one on anything. It merely harbours the deepest suspicion of the
outside world. The scientific, cultural and economic history of the world would have been very
limited indeed had we lived like well-frogs. (Sen 2005: 84-86)
BOX 6.1
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
Global interactions or even a global outlook are thus not novel developments
unique to the modern period or unique to modern India.
COLONIALISM AND THE GLOBAL CONNECTION
We began our story of social and economic development in modern India from
the colonial period. You will recall from chapter 1 that modern capitalism had a
global dimension from its very inception. Colonialism was part of the system
that required new sources of capital, raw materials, energy, markets and a global
network that sustained it. Often globalisation today identifies large-scale
movement of people or migration as a defining feature. You know, however, that
perhaps the greatest movement of people was the migration of European people
who settled down in the Americas and Australia. You will remember how
indentured labourers were taken away in ships from India to work in distant
parts of Asia, Africa and Americas. And the slave trade that carted thousands
of Africans away to distant shores.
INDEPENDENT INDIA AND THE WORLD
Independent India retained a global outlook. In many senses this was inherited
from the Indian nationalist movement. Commitment to liberation struggles
throughout the world, solidarity with people from different parts of the world
was very much part of this vision. Many Indians travelled overseas for education
and work. Migration was an ongoing process. Export and import of raw material,
goods and technology was very much part of development since independence.
Foreign firms did operate in India. So we need to ask ourselves whether the
current process of change is radically different from anything we have seen in
the past.
6.2 UNDERSTANDING GLOBALISATION
We have seen that India had significant links with the global world from very
early times. We are also aware that western capitalism as it emerged in Europe
was both built upon and maintained by global control over resources of other
countries as in colonialism. The important question is, however, whether
globalisation is just about global interconnections. Or is it about some significant
changes in the capitalist system of production and communication, organisation
of labour and capital, technological innovations and cultural experiences, ways
of governance and social movements? These changes are significant even if
some of the patterns were already evident in the early stages of capitalism.
Some of the changes such as those flowing from the communication revolution
have in a myriad ways transformed the way we work and live.
We seek to spell out some of the distinctive features of globalisation below.
As you go through them you will realise why a simple definition of global
interconnection does not capture the intensity and complexity of globalisation.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Globalisation and Social Change
Globalisation refers to the growing interdependence between different people,
regions and countries in the world as social and economic relationships come to
stretch world-wide. Although economic forces are an integral part of globalisation,
it would be wrong to suggest that they alone produce it. It has been driven forward
above all by the development of information and communication technologies
that have intensified the speed and scope of interaction between people all over
the world. Moreover, as we shall see, there was a political context within which it
grew. Let us look at the different dimensions of globalisation. To facilitate our
discussion we deal with the economic, political and cultural aspects separately.
However, you will soon realise how closely connected and interconnected they
THE DIFFERENT DIMENSIONS OF GLOBALISATION
THE ECONOMIC
In India we often use the terms liberalisation and globalisation. They are indeed
related but are not the same. In India we have seen how the state decided to
bring some changes in its economic policy in 1991. These changes are termed as
liberalisation policies.
a.  The Economic Policy of Liberalisation
Globalisation involves a stretching of social and economic relationships
throughout the world. This stretching is pushed by certain economic policies.
Very broadly this process in India is termed liberalisation. The term
liberalisation refers to a range of policy decisions that the Indian state took
since 1991 to open up the Indian economy to the world market. This marked
a break with an earlier stated policy of the government to have a greater
control over the economy. The state after independence had put in place a
large number of laws that ensured that the Indian market and Indian
indigenous business were protected from competition of the wider world. The
underlying assumption of such a policy was that an erstwhile colonial country
would be at a disadvantage in a free market situation. You have already read
about the economic impact of colonialism in chapter 1. The state also believed
that the market alone would not be able to look after all the welfare of the
people, particularly its disadvantaged sections. It felt that the state had an
important role to play for the welfare of the people. You will recall from chapter
3 how important the issues of social justice were for the makers of the Indian
Constitution.
Liberalisation of the economy meant the steady removal of the rules that
regulated Indian trade and finance regulations. These measures are also
described as economic reforms. What are these reforms? Since July 1991, the
Indian economy has witnessed a series of reforms in all major sectors of the
economy (agriculture, industry, trade, foreign investment and technology,
public sector, financial institutions etc). The basic assumption was that greater
integration into the global market would be beneficial to Indian economy.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
The process of liberalisation also involved the taking of loans from international
institutions such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF). These loans are
given on certain conditions. The government makes commitments to pursue
certain kind of economic measures that involve a policy of structural adjustments.
These adjustments usually mean cuts in state expenditure on the social sector
such as health, education and social security. There is also a greater say by
international institutions such as the World Trade Organisation (WTO).
b. The transnational corporations
Among the many economic factors driving globalisation, the role of transnational
corporations (TNCs) is particularly important. TNCs are companies that produce
goods or market services in more than one country. These may be relatively
small firms with one or two factories outside the country in which they are
based. They could also be gigantic international ones whose operations criss-
cross the globe. Some of the biggest TNCs are companies known all around the
world: Coca Cola, General Motors, Colgate-Palmolive, Kodak, Mitsubishi and
many others. They are oriented to the global markets and global profits even if
they have a clear national base. Some Indian corporations are also becoming
transnational. We are, however, not sure at this point of time, what this trend
may mean to the people of India as a whole.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Globalisation and Social Change
c. The electronic economy
The ‘electronic economy’ is another factor that underpins
economic globalisation. Banks, corporations, fund
managers and individual investors are able to shift funds
internationally with the click of a mouse. This new ability
to move ‘electronic money’ instantaneously carries it with
great risks however. In India often this is discussed with
reference to rising stock markets and also sudden dips
because of foreign investors buying stocks, making a
profit and then selling them off. Such transactions can
happen only because of the communication revolution,
which we discuss later.
Make a list of products that you
either use or have seen in the
market or seen advertised which
are produced by transnational
corporations. You can make a list
of products such as:
Shoes
Cameras
Computers
Televisions
Music Systems
Cosmetics like soaps or
shampoos
Clothes
Processed Food
Coffee
Milk Powder
ACTIVITY 6.2
Weightless
Economy or Knowledge
Economy
In contrast to previous
eras, the global economy is
longer
primarily
agricultural or industrial in
its basis. The weightless
economy is one in which
products have their base in
infor mation, as in the case with computer
software, media and entertainment products and internet-
based services.  A knowledge economy is one in which much of the workforce is
involved not in the physical production or distribution of material goods, but in
their design, development, technology, marketing, sale and servicing. It can
range from the neighbourhood catering service to large organisations involved
in providing a host of services for both professional meets like conferences to
family events like weddings.  We have a host of new occupations that was
unheard of a few decades ago, for instance event managers. Have you heard of
them? What do they do? Find out about other such new service.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
e. Globalisation of finance
It should also be noted that for the first
time, mainly due to the information
technology revolution, there has been
a globalisation of finance. Globally
integrated financial markets undertake
billions of dollars worth transactions
within seconds in the electronic
circuits. There is a 24-hour trading in
capital and security markets. Cities
such as New York, Tokyo and London
are the key centers for financial trading.
Within India, Mumbai is known as the
financial capital of the country.
BOX 6.2
Most of us make our money from thin air: we produce nothing that can be
weighed, touched or easily measured. Our output is not stockpiled at harbours,
stored in warehouses or shipped in railway cars. Most of us earn our livings
providing service, judgement, information and analysis, whether in a telephone call centre, a
lawyer’s office, a government department or a scientific laboratory. We are all in the thin-air
business.
Source: Charles Leadbeater 1999 Living on Thin Air: The New Economy (London: Viking)
Ø Count the number of channels on television that
are business channels and provide updates on
stock markets, flows of foreign direct investments,
financial reports of various companies etc. You
can choose whether you wish to focus on an
Indian language channel or English channels.
Ø Find out the names of some financial
newspapers.
Ø Do you see any focus on global trends? Discuss.
Ø How do you think these trends have affected our
lives.
ACTIVITY 6.3
GLOBAL COMMUNICATIONS
Important advances in technology and the world’s telecommunications
infrastructure has led to revolutionary changes in global communication. Some
homes and many offices now have multiple links to the outside world, including
telephones (land lines and mobiles), fax machines, digital and cable television,
electronic mail and the internet.
Some of you may find many such places. Some of you may not. This is
indicative of what is often termed as the digital divide in our country. Despite
this digital divide these forms of technology do facilitate the ‘compression’ of
time and space. Two individuals located on opposite sides of the planet – in
EXERCISE FOR BOX 6.2
Find out from your immediate neighbourhood the kind of jobs young adults do. List
them. How many do you think is engaged in some form of service providing? Discuss.
Find out from your class the kind of future plans that your classmates have. Discuss
with reference to the idea of a weightless economy.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Globalisation and Social Change
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
Bangalore and New York – not only can talk, but also send documents and
images to one another with the help of satellite technology. You have already
seen how outsourcing operates in your earlier chapters.
Globally use of the Internet increased phenomenally in the 1990s. In 1998 there were 70 million
Internet users world-wide. Of these USA and Canada accounted for 62% while Asia had 12%. By
2000 the number of Internet users had risen to 325 million. India had 3 million Internet subscribers and 15 million
users by 2000, thanks to the proliferation of cyber cafes all over the country. (Singhal and Rogers 2001: 235)
According to a CNN-IBN poll broadcast on August 15, 2006, about 7% of the country’s youth had access to the
Internet while only 3% had computers to home. The figures themselves indicate the digital divide that continues to
prevail in the country inspite of the rapid spread of computers. Cyber connectivity had largely remained an urban
phenomenon but widely accessible through the cybercafes. But the rural areas with their erratic power supply
widespread illiteracy and lack of infrastructure like telephone connections still remain largely unconnected.
BOX 6.3
India’s Telecommunications Expansion
When India gained independence in 1947, the new nation had 84,000 telephone lines for its population
of 350 million. Thirty three years later, by 1980, India’s telephone service was still bad with only 2.5
million telephones and 12,000 public phones for a population of 700 million; only 3 percent of India’s 600,000
villages had telephones. However, in the late 1990s, a sea change occurred in the telecommunication scenario: by
1999, India had installed network of over 25 million telephone lines, spread across 300 cities, 4,869 towns, and
310, 897 villages, making India’s telecommunication network the ninth largest in the world.
…Between 1988 and 1998, the number of villages with some kind of telephone facility increased from
27,316 to 300,000 villages (half of all villages in India). By 2000, some 650,000 public call offices
(PCOs) provided reliable telephone service, where people can simply walk in, make a call, and pay the
BOX 6.4
Is there an internet café in your neighbourhood?
Who are its users? What kind of use do they make of the internet?
Is it on work purpose? Is it a new form of entertainment?
Is there a  STD/ISD telephone booth? Is there any FAX facility in your neighbourhood?
ACTIVITY 6.4
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Globalisation and Social Change
Cellular telephony has also grown enormously and cell phones are part of
the self for most urban-based middle class youth. This has been a tremendous
growth in the usage of cell phones and a marked change in how its use is seen.
The 3 boxes below mark out that shift.
EXERCISE FOR BOX 6.2
Write an essay on personal relationships and telecommunications.
metered charges, had mushroomed all over India, including the remote, rural, hilly, and tribal
areas.
The emergence of PCOs satisfies the strong Indian socio-cultural need of keeping in touch
with family members. Much like train travel in India which is often undertaken to celebrate
marriages, visit relatives, or attend funerals, the telephone is also viewed as a way of maintaining
close family ties. Not surprisingly, most advertisement for telephony service show mothers
talking to their sons and daughters, or grandparents talking to grandchildren. Telephone
expansion in India thus serves a strong socio-cultural function for its users, in addition to a
commercial one. (Singhal and Rogers 2001: 188-89)
India has become one of the fastest growing mobile markets in the world. The
mobile services were commercially launched in August 1995 in India. In the
initial 5-6 years the average monthly subscribers additions were around 0.05 to
0.1 million only and the total mobile subscribers base in December 2002 stood at 10.5 millions.
Although mobile telephones followed the New Telecom Policy 1994, growth was tardy in the
early years because of the high price of hand sets as well as the high tariff structure of mobile
telephones. The New Telecom Policy in 1999, the industry heralded several pro consumer
initiatives. Mobile subscriber additions started picking up. The number of mobile phones added
throughout the country in 2003 was 16 million, followed by 22 millions in 2004 and 32 million in
2005. The only countries with more mobile phones than India with 123.44 million mobile phones
(September 2006) are China – 408 million, USA – 170 million, and Russia – 130 million.
BOX 5
BOX 6.5
In 1988, the Indian Home Ministry banned the open sale of pre-paid cash
cards for mobile telephones, arguing that a number of criminals were using
these pre-paid cash cards so as to leave investigators with no way of tracing
them. While the use of telephone cards by criminals is a miniscule part of overall numbers,
telephone operators have been mandated to verify the name and address of a customer
before retailing a cash card. Private operators believe that they are losing almost 50 percent
of their business because of this needless verification.
…New subscription to mobile telephony services dropped by about 50 percent in 1998 when
the Indian Income tax Department decreed that anyone owning a mobile telephone must
submit their income tax. This decree was premised on the notion that if an individual could
afford a “luxury” item such as a mobile telephone, the individual earned enough to file a tax
return. (Singhal and Rogers: 2001: 203-04)
BOX 6.6
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
BOX 6.7
Students send protest letter to Kalam
A statement by…, the vice chancellor of a University on an NDTV show, has
sparked off huge protests among students….
The vice chancellor had defended his decision to impose a dress code and ban cell phones by
saying students had welcomed it.
But the students have denied supporting the ban. And in the first organised protest, they are
writing to President APJ Abdul Kalam asking him to intervene.
Source: http://www.ndtv.com (Thursday, January 19, 2006 (Chennai))
EXERCISE FOR BOXES 6.5, 6.6 AND 6.7
Carefully read the above 3 boxes.
What ideas do they convey about the phenomenonal growth in cell phones usage?
Can you see any changes in the attitude and acceptability towards cell phones?
Initially in the late1980s, cell phones are being looked
at with distrust (misused by criminal elements). As
late as 1998 they are perceived as luxury items (only
the rich can own it and so owners should be taxed).
By 2006 we have become the country with the fourth
largest usage of cell phones. They have become so
much part of our life that students are ready to go on
a strike and appeal to the President of the country
when denied cell phone usage in colleges.
Try and organise a discussion in the class on the
reasons for the amazing growth in cell phones usage
in India.
Has it happened because of clever marketing and
media campaign? Is it still a status symbol?
Or is there a strong need for remaining
‘connected’, communicating with friends and near
and dear ones?
Are parents encouraging its usage in order to
lessen their anxieties about children’s where
about?
Try and find out the different reasons why the
youth strongly feel the need for cell phones
ACTIVITY 6.5
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Globalisation and Social Change
GLOBALISATION AND LABOUR
GLOBALISATION AND A NEW INTERNATIONAL DIVISION OF LABOUR
A new international division of labour has emerged
in which more and more routine manufacturing
production and employment is done in the Third
World cities. You have already dealt with outsourcing
in chapter 4 and contract farming in chapter 5. Here
we simply draw upon the example of Nike company
to illustrate how this works.
Nike grew enormously from its inception in the
1960s. Nike grew as an importer of shoes. The
founder Phil Knight imported shoes from Japan and
sold them at athletics meetings. The company grew
to a multinational enterprise, a transnational
corporation.  Its headquarters are in Beverton, just
outside Portland, Oregon. Only two US factories ever
made shoes for Nike. In the 1960s they were made in Japan. As costs increased
production shifted to South Korea in mid-1970s. Labour costs grew in South
Korea, so in the 1980s production widened to Thailand and Indonesia.  In the
1990s we in India produce Nike. However, if labour is cheaper elsewhere
production centres will move somewhere else. This entire process makes the
labouring population very vulnerable and insecure. This flexibility of labour often
works in favour of the producers. Instead of mass production of goods at a
centralised location (Fordism), we have moved to a system of flexible production
at dispersed locations (post-Fordism).
General Motors produces an ostensibly American car such as Pontiac Le Mans.
Of the showroom price of $20,000, only $7,600 goes to Americans (workers
and management in Detroit, lawyers and bankers in New York, lobbyists in
Washington, and General Motors shareholders all over the country).
Of the rest:
48 per cent goes to South Korea for labour and assembly.
28 per cent to Japan for advanced components such as engines and
electronics.
12 per cent to Germany for styling and design engineering.
7 per cent to Taiwan and Singapore for small components.
4 per cent to the United Kingdom for marketing, and about
1 per cent to Barbados or Ireland for data processing
(Reich 1991)
BOX 6.8
A Call Centre
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
GLOBALISATION AND EMPLOYMENT
Another key issue regarding globalisation
and labour is the relationship between
employment and globalisation. Here too we
seen the uneven  impact of globalisation. For
the middle class youth from urban centers,
globalisation and the IT revolution has
opened up new career opportunities. Instead
of routinely picking up BSc/BA/BCom degree
from colleges, they are learning computer
languages at computer institutes or taking
up jobs at call centers or Business Process
Outsourcing (BPO) companies. They are
working as sales persons in shopping malls
or picking up jobs at the various restaurants
that have opened up. Yet as the box 6.9 shows
broader trends of employment are
disappointing.
GLOBALISATION AND POLITICAL CHANGES
In many ways it was a major political change, namely, the collapse of the erstwhile
socialist world that hastened globalisation. And also gave a specific economic
and political approach to the economic policies that underpin globalisation.
These changes are often termed as neo-liberal economic measures. We have
already seen what concrete steps the liberalisation policy took in India. Broadly
these policies reflect a political vision of free enterprise which believes that a
free reign to market forces will be both efficient and fair. It is, therefore, critical
of both state regulation and state subsidies. The existing process of globalisation
in this sense does have a political vision as much as an economic vision. However,
the possibilities that there can be a globalisation which is different do exist. We,
thus have the concept of an inclusive globalisation, that is one, which includes
all sections of society.
Another significant political development which is accompanying
globalisation is the growth of international and regional mechanisms for political
collaboration. The European Union (EU), the Association of South East Asian
Nations (ASEAN), South Asian Regional Conference  (SARC) and more recently
South Asian Federation of Trade Association (SAFTA) are just some of the
examples that indicate the greater role of regional associations.
The other political dimension has been the rise of International Governmental
Organisations. (IGOs) and International Non-Governmental Organisations (INGOs).
An intergovernmental organisation is a body that is established by participating
governments and given responsibility for regulating, or overseeing a particular domain
of activity that is transnational in scope. The World Trade Organisation (WTO) for
instance increasingly has a major say in the rules that govern trade practices.
“The largest number of poor people
lives in South Asia. The poverty rate is
particularly high in India, Nepal and
Bangladesh,” states an ILO report “Labour and
Social Trends in Asia and the Pacific 2005”… The
study provides a stark analysis of a growing
‘employment gap’ in the Asia region. It states that
the creation of new jobs has failed to keep pace
with the region’s impressive economic growth.
Between 2003 and 2004, employment in Asia and
the Pacific increased by a ‘disappointing’ 1.6 per
cent, or by 25 million jobs, to a total of 1.588 billion
jobs, compared to the strong economic growth rate
of over 7 per cent.
“Job Growth Remains Disappointing- ILO” Labour
File September - October 2005 p.54.
BOX 6.9
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Globalisation and Social Change
As the name suggests, INGOs differ from intergovernmental organisations
in that they are not affiliated with government institutions. Rather they are
independent organisations, which make policy decisions and address
international issues. Some of the best known INGOs are Greenpeace (see chapter
8, The Red Cross and Amnesty International, Medecins Sans Frontieres (Doctors
Without Borders). Find out more about them.
GLOBALISATION AND CULTURE
There are many ways that globalisation affects culture. We saw earlier that over
the ages India has had an open approach to cultural influences and have been
enriched because of this. The last decade has seen major cultural changes
leading to fears that our local cultures would be overtaken. We saw earlier that
our cultural tradition has been wary of the kupamanduka, the frog that lives its
whole life within a well, knows nothing else, and is suspicious of everything
outside it. It talks to no one, and argues with no one on anything. It merely
harbours the deepest suspicion of the outside world. Fortunately for us we
retain our ‘traditional’ open-ended attitude to this day. Thus there are heated
debates in our society not just about political and economic issues but also
about changes in clothes, styles, music, films, languages, body language. You
will recall from chapter 1 and 2 how the 19th century reformers and early
nationalists also debated on culture and tradition. The issues today are in
some ways the same, in some ways different. What is perhaps different is the
scale and intensity of change.
HOMOGENISATION VERSUS GLOCALISATION OF CULTURE
A central contention is that all cultures will become similar, that is
homogeneous. Others argue that there is an increasing tendency towards
glocalisation of  culture. Glocalisation refers
to the mixing of the global with the local. It is
not entirely spontaneous. Nor is it entirely
delinked from the commercial interests of
globalisation.
It is a strategy often adopted by foreign
firms while dealing with local traditions in order
to enhance their marketability. In India, we find
that all the foreign television channels like Star,
MTV, Channel V and Cartoon Network use
Indian languages. Even McDonald sells only
vegetarian and chicken products in India and
not its beef products, which are popular
abroad. McDonald’s goes vegetarian during the
Navaratri festival. In the field of music, one
can see the growth of popularity of ‘Bhangra
pop’, ‘Indi pop’, fusion music and even remixes.
Identify other instances of
glocalisation. Discuss.
Have you noticed any changes in
films produced by Bollywood. While
at one time there were scenes shot
in foreign countries, the stories
remained local. Then there were
stories where characters returned to
India even if part of the story was
set abroad. Now there are stories
set entirely outside India. Discuss.
ACTIVITY 6.6
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
We have already seen how the strength of Indian culture has been its open
ended approach. We also saw how through the modern period our reformers
and nationalists actively debated tradition and culture.  Culture cannot be seen
as an unchanging fixed entity that can either collapse or remain the same when
faced with social change. What is more likely even today is that globalisation
will lead to the creation of not just new local traditions but global ones too.
GENDER AND CULTURE
Very often defenders of a fixed traditional idea of cultural identity defend
undemocratic and discriminating practices against women in the name of
cultural identity. These could range from a defence of sati to defence of women’s
exclusion from education and participation in public matters. Globalisation
can then be taken as a bogey to defend unjust practices against women.
Fortunately for us in India we have been able to retain and develop a democratic
tradition and culture that allows us to define culture in a more inclusive and
democratic fashion.
CULTURE OF CONSUMPTION
Often when we speak of culture we refer to dresses, music, dances, food.
However, culture as we know refers to a whole way of life. There are two uses
of culture that any chapter on globalisation should mention. They are the
culture of consumption and corporate culture. Look at the crucial role that
cultural consumption is playing in the process of globalisation especially in
shaping the growth of cities. Till the 1970s the manufacturing industries used
to play a major role in the growth of cities. Presently, cultural consumption (of
art, food, fashion, music, tourism) shapes to a large extent the growth of
cities. This is evident in the spurt in the growth of shopping malls, multiplex
cinema halls, amusement parks and ‘water world’ in every major city in India.
Most significantly advertisements and the media in general promote a culture
where spending is important. To be careful with money is no longer a virtue.
Shopping is a past time actively encouraged.
ACTIVITY 6.7
Compare the traditional shop and the new
departmental stores that have come up.
Compare the mall with the traditional market.
Discuss how it is not just goods that change but
how the meaning of shopping changes.
Discuss the new kinds of food that is now served
in eating places.
Find out about the new fast food restaurants that
are global in their operation.
Successive successes in
fashion pageants like Miss
Universe and Miss World have
lead to a tremendous growth in
industries in the fields of
fashion, cosmetics and health.
Young girls dream of being an
Aishwarya Rai or Sushmita
Sen. Popular game shows like
Banega
Crorepati
actually made it seem possible
that your fortunes could turn
over a few games.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Globalisation and Social Change
CORPORATE CULTURE
Corporate culture is a branch of management theory that seeks to increase
productivity and competitiveness though the creation of a unique organisational
culture involving all members of a firm. A dynamic corporate culture - involving
company events, rituals and traditions - is thought to enhance employee loyalty
and promote group solidarity.  It also refers to way of doing things, of promotion
and packaging products.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
The spread of multinational companies and the
opportunities opened up by the information technology
revolution has created in the metropolitan cities in India
class of upwardly mobile professionals working in
software fir ms, multinational banks, chartered
accountancy firms, stock markets, travel, fashion
designing, entertainment, media and other allied fields.
These high-flying professionals have highly stressful
work schedules, get exorbitant salaries and are the main
clientele of the booming consumer industry.
THREAT TO MANY INDIGENOUS CRAFT AND LITERARY TRADITIONS AND
KNOWLEDGE SYSTEMS
Yet another link between cultural forms and globalisation is evident from the
condition of many indigenous craft and literary traditions and knowledge
systems. It is, however, important to remember that modern development even
prior to the stage of globalisation did make inroads into traditional cultural
forms and occupations based on them. But the sheer scale and intensity of
change is enormous.  For instance about 30 theatre groups, which were active
around the textile mills area of Parel and Girgaum of Mumbai city, have become
defunct, as most of the mill workers are out of jobs in these areas.  Some years
back, there were reports of large number of suicides by the traditional weavers
in Sircilla village of Karimnagar district and in Dubakka village in Medak district,
both in Andhra Pradesh. These weavers with no means to invest in technology
were unable to adapt to the changing consumer tastes and competition from
power looms.
Similarly, various forms of traditional knowledge systems especially in the
fields of medicine and agriculture have been preserved and passed on from one
generation to the other. Recent attempts by some  multi-national companies to
patent the use of Tulsi, Haldi (turmeric), Rudraksha and Basmati rice has
highlighted the need for protecting the base of its indigenous knowledge systems.
In the last couple of years political
parties have often sought assistance
from corporations for their political
campaign. Advertisement firms were
also consulted. Find out more about
this trend and discuss.
ACTIVITY 6.8
The condition of our dombari community is very bad. Television and radio have
snatched away our means of livelihood. We perform acrobatics but because of
the circus and the television, which have reached even in remote corners and villages, nobody
is interested in our performances. We do not get even a pittance, however hard we perform.
People watch our shows but just for entertainment, they never pay us anything. They never
bother about the fact that we are hungry. Our profession is dying.
(More 1970)
BOX 6.10
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Globalisation and Social Change
It is no easy task to sum up the diverse and complex ways that globalisation
is affecting our lives. One will not even attempt it. One leaves this task to you.
We have not discussed the impact of globalisation on industry and agriculture
in any detail here in this chapter. You have to draw from chapter 4 and 5 to
build up the story of globalisation and social change in India. In the recounting
of this story, use your sociological imagination.
Choose any topic that is of interest to you and discuss how you think
globalisation has affected it. You could choose cinema, work, marriage
or any other topic.
What are the distinctive features of a globalised economy? Discuss.
Briefly discuss the impact of globalisation on culture?
What is glocalisation? Is it simply a market strategy adopted by multinational
companies or is genuine cultural synthesis taking place? Discuss.
REFERENCES
Leadbeater, Charles. 1999. Living on Thin Air: The New Economy. Viking. London.
More, Vimal Dadasaheb. 1970. ‘Teen Dagdachi Chul’  in Sharmila Rege Writing caste/
writing gender: narrating dalit women’s testimonios. Zubaan/Kali. Delhi, 2006.
Reich, R. 1991. ‘Brainpower, bridges and the nomadic corporation’. New
Perspective Quarterly. 8:67-71.
Sen, Amartya. 2004. The Argumentative Indian: Writings on Indian History,
Culture and Identity. Allen Lane, Penguin Group. London.
Sassen, Saskia .1991. The Global City: New York, London, Tokyo. Princeton
University Press. Princeton.
Singhal, Arvind and E.M. Rogers. 2001. India’s Communication Revolution. Sage.
New Delhi.
Questions
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
Notes
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Mass Media and
Communications
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
T he mass media include a wide variety of forms, including television,
newspapers, films, magazines, radio, advertisements, video games and CDs. They
are referred to as ‘mass’ media because they reach mass audiences – audiences
comprised of very large numbers of people. They are also sometimes referred to
as mass communications. For many in your generation it is probably difficult to
imagine a world without some form of mass media and communications.
ACTIVITY 7.1
Imagine a world where there is no
television, no cinema, no newspapers, no
magazines, no internet, no telephones,
no mobile phones.
Write down your daily activities in a day.
Identify the occasions when you used the
media in some way or the other.
Find out from an older generation what
life was like without any of these forms
of communication. Compare it with your
life.
Discuss the ways work and leisure has
changed with developments in
communication technologies.
Mass media is part of our
everyday life. In many middle class
households across the country
people wake up only to put on the
radio, switch on the television, look
for the morning newspaper. The
younger children of the same
households may first glance at their mobile
phones to check their missed calls. Plumbers, electricians,
carpenters, painters and sundry other service providers in many urban centres
have a mobile telephone where they can be easily contacted. Many shops in
cities increasingly have a small television set. Customers who come in may
exchange bits of conversation about the cricket match being telecasted or the
film being shown. Indians abroad keep regular touch with friends and families
back home over the internet and telephone. Migrants from working class
population in the cities are regularly in touch with their families in the villages
over the phone. Have you seen the range of advertisements of mobile phones?
@R. K. Laxman
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Mass Media and Communications
Have you noticed the diverse social groups that they are catering to? Are you
surprised that the CBSE Board results are available to you on both the internet
and over the mobile phone. Indeed this very book is available on the internet.
It is obvious that
there
phenomenal expansion
of mass communication
of all kinds in recent
years. As students of
sociology, there are
many aspects to this
growth which is of great
interest to us. First,
while we recognise
specificity
the current comm-
unication revolution, it
is important to go back
a little and sketch out
the growth of modern
mass media in the
world and in India.
This helps us realise
that like any other
social institution the
structure and content
of mass media is shaped by changes in
the economic, political and socio-cultural contexts. For instance, we see how
central the state and its vision of development influenced the media in the first
decades after independence. And how in the post 1990 period of globalisation
the market has a key role to play. Second, this help us better appreciate how
the relationship between mass media and communication with society is
dialectical. Both influence each other. The nature and role of mass media is
influenced by the society in which it is located. At the same time the far reaching
influence of mass media on society cannot be over-emphasised. We shall see
this dialectical relationship when we discuss in this chapter (a) the role of media
in colonial India, (b) in the first decades after independence and (c) and finally
in the context of globalisation. Third, mass communication is different from
other means of communication as it requires a formal structural organisation
to meet large-scale capital, production and management demands. You will
find, therefore, that the state and/or the market have a major role in the structure
and functioning of mass media. Mass media functions through very large
organisations with major investments and large body of employees. Fourth,
there are sharp differences between how easily different sections of people can
use mass media. You will recall the concept of digital divide from the last chapter.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
7.1 THE BEGINNINGS OF MODERN MASS MEDIA
The first modern mass media institution began with the development of the
printing press. Although the history of print in certain societies dates back to
many centuries, the first attempts at printing books using modern technologies
began in Europe. This technique was first developed by Johann Gutenberg in
1440. Initial attempts at printing were restricted to religious books.
With the Industrial Revolution, the
print industry also grew. The first products
of the press were restricted to an audience
of literate elites. It was only in the mid 19th
century, with further development in
technologies, transportation and literacy
that newspapers began to reach out to a
mass audience. People living in different
corners of the country found themselves
reading or hearing the same news. It has
been suggested that this was in many ways
responsible for people across a country to
feel connected and develop
a sense of belonging or ‘we
feeling’. The well known
scholar Benedict Anderson
has thus argued that this
helped the growth of
nationalism, the feeling that
people who did not even
know of each other’s existence feel like members of a family. It gave people who
would never meet each other a sense of togetherness. Anderson thus suggested
that we could think of the nation as an ‘imagined community’.
You will recall how 19th century social reformers often wrote and debated in
newspapers and journals. The growth of Indian nationalism was closely linked
to its struggle against colonialism. It emerged in the wake of the institutional
changes brought about by British rule in India. Anti colonial public opinion
was nurtured and channelised by the nationalist press, which was vocal in its
opposition to the oppressive measures of the colonial state. This led the colonial
government to clamp down on the nationalist press and impose censorship, for
instance during the Ilbert Bill agitation in 1883. Association with the national
Visuals of a Printing Press and a TV Newsroom in
21st Century, India
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Mass Media and Communications
movement led some of the nationalist newspapers like Kesari (Marathi),
Mathrubhumi (Malayalam), Amrita Bazar Patrika (English) to suffer the
displeasure of the colonial state. But that did not prevent them from advocating
the nationalist cause and demand an end to colonial rule.
Under British rule newspapers
and magazines, films and radio
comprised the range of mass
media. Radio was wholly owned by
the state. National views could
not be, therefore, expressed.
Newspapers and films though
autonomous from the state were
strictly monitored by the Raj.
Newspapers and magazines either
in English or vernacular were not
very widely circulated as the
literate public was limited. Yet their
influence far out stripped their
circulation
information was read and spread
by word of mouth from commercial
and administrative hubs like
markets and trading centers as
well as courts and towns. The print
media carried a range of opinion,
which expressed their ideas of a
‘free India’. These variations were
carried over to independent India.
Though a few newspapers had been started by people before Raja
Rammohun Roy, his Sambad-Kaumudi in Bengali published in 1821, and
Mirat-Ul-Akbar in Persian published in 1822, were the first publications in
India with a distinct nationalist and democratic approach.
Fardoonji Murzban was the pioneer of the Gujarati Press in Bombay. It was as early as
1822 that he started the Bombay Samachar as a daily.
Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar started the Shome Prakash in Bengali in 1858.
The Times of India was founded in Bombay in 1861.
The Pioneer in Allahabad in 1865.
The Madras Mail in 1868.
The Statesman in Calcutta in 1875.
The Civil and Military Gazette in Lahore in 1876.
(Desai 1948)
BOX 7.1
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
7.2 MASS MEDIA IN INDEPENDENT INDIA
THE APPROACH
In independent India, Jawaharlal Nehru, the first prime minister, called upon
the media to function as the watchdog of democracy. The media was expected to
spread the spirit of self-reliance and national development among the people.
You will recall the general thrust of development in the early
years of independence in India from your earlier chapters.
The media was seen as a means to inform the people of the
various developmental efforts. The media was also
encouraged to fight against oppressive social practices like
untouchability, child marriages, and ostracism of widows,
as well as beliefs of witchcraft and faith healing. A rational,
scientific ethos was to be promoted for the building of a
modern industrial society. The Films Division of the
government produced newsreels and documentaries. These
were shown before the screening of films in every movie
theatre, documenting the development process as directed
by the state.
RADIO
Radio broadcasting which commenced in India through amateur ‘ham’
broadcasting clubs in Kolkata and Chennai in the 1920s matured into a public
broadcasting system in the 1940s during the World War II when it became a
major instrument of propaganda for Allied forces in South-east Asia. At the
time of independence there were only 6 radio stations located in the major
cities catering primarily to an urban audience. By 1950 there were 546,200
radio licences all over India.
ACTIVITY 7.2
Ask anyone you know from a
generation that grew up in the first
two decades after independence
about the documentaries that were
routinely shown before the
screening of films. Write down their
recollections.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Mass Media and Communications
Since the media was seen
as an active partner in the
development of the newly free
nation the AIR’s programmes
consisted mainly of news,
current affairs, discussions on
development. The box below
captures the spirit of those
times.
Apart from All India Radio
(AIR) broadcasts news there
was Vividh Bharati, a channel
for entertainment that was
primarily broadcasting Hindi
film songs on listeners
request. In 1957 AIR acquired
the hugely popular channel
Vividh Bharati, which soon began to carry sponsored programmes and
advertisements and grew to become a money-spinning channel for AIR.
AIR’s broadcasts did make a difference
In the 1960s, when the high yielding varieties of food crops,
as a part of the Green Revolution, were introduced for the
first time in the country. It was All India Radio which undertook a
major countryside campaign on these crops on a sustained day-
to-day basis for over 10 years from 1967.
For this purpose, special programmes on the high yielding
varieties were formed in many stations of AIR all over the country.
These programme units, manned by subject specialists,
undertook field visits and recorded and broadcast first hand
accounts of the farmers, who started growing the new varieties
of paddy and wheat.
Source: B. R. Kumar “AIR’s broadcasts did make a difference”.
The Hindu December 31st 2006.
BOX 7.2
When India gained independence in 1947, All India Radio had an
infrastructure of six radio stations, located in metropolitan cities. The country
had 280,000 radio receiver sets for a population of 350 million people. After
independence the government gave priority to the expansion of the radio
broadcasting infrastructure, especially in state capitals and in border areas.
Over the years, AIR has developed a formidable infrastructure for radio
broadcasting in India. It operates a three-tiered – national, regional, and local –
service to cater to India’s geographic, linguistic and cultural diversity.
The major constraint for the popularisation of radio initially was the cost of
the radio set. The transistor revolution in the 1960s made the radio more
accessible by making it mobile as battery operated sets and reducing the unit
BOX 7.3
Indian film songs and commercials were considered low-culture and not
promoted. So Indian listeners tuned their shortwave radio sets to Radio Ceylon
(broadcasting from neighbouring Sri Lanka) and to Radio Goa (broadcasting
from Goa then under Portuguese rule) in order to enjoy Indian film music, commercials, and
other entertainment fare. The popularity of these broadcasts in India spurred radio listening
and the sale of radio sets. When purchasing a radio set, the buyer would invariably confirm
with the vendor that the set could be tuned to radio Ceylon or Radio Goa. (Bhatt : 1994)
EXERCISE FOR BOX 7.3
Ask your elders about Vividh Bharati programmes. Which is the generation that remembers it.
Which part of the country was it more popular? Discuss their experiences. Compare them with
your own experiences with listener’s request
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
price substantially. In 2000 around 110 million households (two-thirds of all
Indian households) were listening to radio broadcasts in 24 languages and 146
dialects. More than a third of them were rural households.
TELEVISION
Television programming was introduced experimentally in India to promote
rural development as early as 1959. Later the Satellite Instructional Television
Experiment (SITE) broadcasted directly to community viewers in the rural areas
of six states between August 1975 and July 1976. These instructional broadcasts
were broadcast to 2,400 TV sets directly for 4 hours daily. Meanwhile, television
stations were set up under Doordarshan in 4 cities (Delhi, Mumbai, Srinagar
and Amritsar) by 1975. Three more stations in Kolkata, Chennai and Jalandhar
were added within a year. Every broadcasting centre had its own mix of
programmes comprising news, children’s and women’s programmes, farmer’s
programmes as well as entertainment programmes.
As programmes become commercialised and were allowed to carry
advertisements of its sponsors, a shift in target audience was evident.
Entertainment programmes grew and were directed to the urban consuming
class. The advent of colour broadcasting during the 1982 Asian Games in Delhi
and the rapid expansion of the national network led to rapid  commercialisation
of television broadcasting. During 1984-85
the number of television transmitters
increased all over India covering a large
proportion of the population. It was also
the time when indigenous soap operas like
Hum Log (1984-85) and Buniyaad (1986-
87) were aired. They were hugely popular
acclaim and attracted substantial
advertising revenue for Doordarshan as did
the broadcasting of the epics Ramayana
(1987-88) and Mahabharat (1988-90).
Wars, tragedies and expansion of AIR
Interestingly wars and tragedies have spurred AIR to expand its activities. The
1962 war with China prompted the launching of a ‘talks’ unit to put out a daily programme. In
August 1971, with the Bangladesh crises looming, the News Service Division introduced
news on the hour, from 6 O’ clock in the morning to midnight. It took another crises, the tragic
assassination of Rajeev Gandhi in 1991, for AIR to take one more step of having bulletins
round the clock.
BOX 7.4
ACTIVITY 7.3
Identify a cross section of people
from an older generation. Find out
from them what television
programmes consisted of in the
1970s and 1980s? Did many of
them have access to television?
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Mass Media and Communications
Hum Log: A Turning Point
Hum Log was India’s first long-running soap opera…. This pioneering program
utilised the entertainment-education strategy by intentionally placing
educational content in this entertainment message.
Some 156 episodes of Hum Log were broadcast in Hindi for 17 months in 1984-85. The
television program promoted such social themes as gender equality, small family size, and
national integration. At the end of each 22 minute episode, a famous Indian actor, Ashok
Kumar, summarised the educational lessons from the episode in an epilogue of 30 to 40
seconds. Kumar connected the drama to viewers’ everyday lives. For instance, he might
comment on a negative character who is drunk and beats his wife by asking; “why do you
think that people like Basesar Ram drink too much, and then behave badly? Do you know
anyone like this? What can be done to reduce incidents of alcoholism? What can you do?
(Singhal and Rogers, 1989). A study of Hum Log’s audience showed that a high degree of
parasocial interaction occurred between the audience members and their favorite Hum Log
characters. For example, many Hum Log viewers reported that they routinely adjusted their
daily schedules to ‘meet’ their favourite character ‘in the privacy of their living rooms’. Many
other individuals reported talking to their favorite characters through the television sets; for
instance, “Don’t worry, Badki. Do not give up your dream of making a career.”
Hum Log achieved audience ratings of 65 to 90 percent in North India and between 20 and
45 percent in South India. About 50 million individuals watched the average broadcast of
Hum Log. One unusual aspect of this soap opera was the huge number of letters, over
400,000, that it attracted from viewers; so many that most of them could not be opened by
Doordarshan officials. (Singhal and Rogers 2001)
BOX 7.5
BOX 7.6
The advertising carried by Hum Log promoted a new consumer product in
India, Maggi 2-Minute noodles. The public rapidly accepted this new consumer
product, suggesting the power of television commercials. Advertisers began
to line up to purchase airtime for television advertising, and the commercialisation of
Doordarshan began.
PRINT MEDIA
The beginnings of the print media and its role in both the spread of the social
reform movement and the nationalist movement have been noted. After
independence, the print media continued to share the general approach of being
a partner in the task of nation building by taking up developmental issues as
well as giving voice to the widest section of people.  The brief extract in the box
below will give you a sense of the commitment.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
The gravest challenge that the media faced was with the declaration of
Emergency in 1975 and censorship of the media. Fortunately, the period ended
and democracy was restored in 1977. India with its many problems can be
justifiably proud of a free media.
At the start of the chapter we had mentioned how mass media is different
from other means of communication as it requires a formal structural
organisation to meet large scale capital, production and management demands.
And also like any other social institution the mass media also varies in structure
and content according to different economic, political and socio-cultural context.
You will now notice how at different points in time both the content and style of
media changes.  At some points the state has a greater role to play. At other
times the market does. In India this shift is very visible in recent times. This
change has also led to debates about what role the media ought to play in a
modern democracy. We look at these new developments in the next section.
7.3 GLOBALISATION AND THE MEDIA
We have already read about the far reaching impact of globalisation as well as its
close link with the communication revolution in the last chapter. The media have
always had international dimensions – such as the gathering of new stories and
the distribution of primarily western films overseas. However, until the 1970s
most media companies operated within specific domestic markets in accordance
with regulations from national governments. The media industry was also
differentiated into distinct sectors – for the most part, cinema, print media, radio
and television broadcasting all operated independently of one another.
Journalism in India used to be regarded as a ‘calling’.
Fired by the spirit of patriotic and social reforming
idealism, it was able to draw in outstanding talent as
the freedom struggle and movements for social change intensified
and as new educational and career opportunities arose in a
modernising society. As is often the case with such pursuits, the
calling was conspicuously underpaid. The transformation of the
calling into a profession took place over a long period, mirroring the
change in character of a newspaper like the Hindu from a purely
societal and public service mission into a business enterprise framed
by a societal and public service mission.
Source: Editorial ‘Yesterday, Today, Tomorrow’, The Hindu, 13
September 2003, quoted in B.P. Sanjay 2006)
BOX 7.7
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Mass Media and Communications
In the past three decades, however, profound transformations have taken
place within the media industry. National markets have given way to a fluid
global market, while new technologies have led to the fusion of forms of media
that were once distinct.
BOX 7.8
Globalisation and the case of music
It has been argued that the musical form is one that lends itself to globalisation
more efficiently than any other. This is because music is able to reach people
who may not know the written and spoken language. The growth of technology- from personal
stereo systems to music television (such as the MTV) to the compact disc (CD) – have provided
newer, more sophisticated ways for music to be distributed globally.
The fusion of forms of media
Although the music industry is becoming ever more concentrated in the hands of a few
international conglomerates, some feel that it is under a great threat. This is because the
Internet allows music to be downloaded digitally, rather than purchased in the form of CDs or
cassettes from local music stores. The global music industry is currently comprised of a complex
network of factories, distribution chains, music shops and sales staff. If the internet removes
the need for all these elements by allowing music to be marketed and downloaded directly,
what will be left of the music industry?
EXERCISE FOR BOX 7.8
Read the texts in the box carefully. Discuss.
Find out the names of a few music conglomerates or corporations.
Have you thought of the ring tones that people now download for their mobile phones? Is
this the fusion of forms of media?
Have you watched any of the musical contests on television where the audience is
expected to SMS their choice? Is this again an instance of the fusion of forms of media?
What forms are involved?
Do you enjoy songs whose words you may not understand? What do you feel about the
new forms of music where there is a mix not just of musical forms but also of language?
Have you heard any fusion music of Rap and Bhangra. Where did the two forms originate?
There are probably many other issues that you can think of? Discuss and write a short
essay on your discussions.
We began with the case of the music industry and the far reaching
consequences that globalisation has had on it. The changes that have taken
place in mass media is so immense that this chapter will probably be only able
to give you a fragmentary understanding. As a young generation you can build
up on the information provided. Let us have a look at the changes that
globalisation has brought about on the print media (primarily newspapers and
magazines), the electronic media (primarily television), and on the radio.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
PRINT MEDIA
We have seen how important newspapers and magazines were for the spread of
the freedom movement. It is often believed that with the growth of the television
and the internet the print media would be sidelined. However, in India we have
seen the circulation of newspapers grow. As the box 7.9 suggests new
technologies have helped boost the production and circulation of newspapers.
A large number of glossy magazines have also made their entry into the market.
The Indian language newspaper revolution
The most significant happening in the last few decades has been the Indian
language newspaper revolution. The beginnings of this growth predated
liberalisation. The top two dailies in India are Dainik Jagran and Dainik Bhaskar with a readership
of 21 million and 17 million, respectively. The fastest growing dailies are the Assamese dailies
in urban areas (51.8 per cent increase) and the Bengali dailies in rural areas (129 per cent)
Source: National Readership Survey 2002.
The Eenadu story also exemplifies the success of the Indian language press. Ramoji Rao the
founder of Eenadu, had successfully organised a chit-fund, before launching the paper in 1974.
By associating with appropriate causes in the rural areas like the Anti-arrack movement in the
mid-1980s, the Telugu newspaper was able to reach into the countryside. This prompted it to
launch ‘district dailies’ in 1989. These were tabloid inserts or sensational features carrying
news from particular districts as well as classified advertisements from villages and small towns
of the same. By 1998 Eenadu was being published from ten towns in Andhra Pradesh and its
circulation accounted for 70 per cent of the audited Telugu daily circulation.
BOX 7.9
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Mass Media and Communications
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
As is evident, the reasons for this amazing growth in Indian language
newspapers are many. First, there is a rise in the number of literate people who
are migrating to cities. The Hindi daily Hindustan in 2003 printed 64,000 copies
of their Delhi edition, which jumped to 425,000 by 2005. The reason was that,
of Delhi’s population of one crore and forty-seven lakhs, 52 per cent had come
from the Hindi belt of the two states of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. Out of this, 47
per cent have come from a rural background and 60 per cent of them are less
than 40 years of age.
Second, the needs of the readers in the small towns and villages are different
from that of the cities and the Indian language newspapers cater to those needs.
Dominant Indian language newspapers such as Malayala Manorama and the
Eenadu launched the concept of local news in a significant manner by
introducing district and whenever necessary, block editions. Dina Thanthi,
another leading Tamil newspaper, has always used simplified and colloquial
language. The Indian language newspapers have adopted advanced printing
technologies and also attempted supplements, pullouts, and literary and niche
booklets. Marketing strategies have also marked the Dainik Bhaskar group’s
growth as they carry out consumer contact programmes, door-to-door surveys,
and research. This also brings back the point that modern mass media has to
have a formal structural organisation.
While English newspapers, often called ‘national dailies’, circulate across
regions, vernacular newspapers have vastly increased their circulation in the
states and the rural hinterland. In order to compete with the electronic media,
newspapers, especially English language newspapers have on the one hand
reduced prices and on the other hand brought out editions from multiple centres.
Shift in circulation of Newspapers in India
According to recently published data of National Readership Study (NRS 2006) the largest growth
in readership has been in Hindi belt. Indian language dailies as a whole have grown substantially in
the last year from 191 million readers to 203.6 million readers. The readership of English dailies on the other hand,
has stagnated at around 21 million. Hindi dailies Dainik Jagran (with 21.2 million) and Dainik Bhaskar (with 21.0
million) are heading the list, while The Times of  India is the only English daily with a readership of over five million
( 7.4 million ). Of the 18 dailies which are in ‘five million club’, six are in Hindi,  three in Tamil, two each in Gujarati,
Malayalam and Marathi and one each in Bengali, Telugu and English (The Hindu, Delhi, August 30,2006).
BOX 7.10
ACTIVITY 7.4
Find out how many places do the newspaper you are most familiar with brought out from?
Have you noticed how there are supplements that cater to city specific or town specific interests
and events?
Have you noticed the many commercial supplements that accompany many newspapers these days?
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Mass Media and Communications
Many feared that the rise in electronic media would lead to a decline in the
circulation of print media. This has not happened. Indeed it has expanded.
This process has, however, often involved cuts in prices and increasing
dependence on the sponsors of advertisements who in turn have a larger say in
the content of newspapers. The box below captures the logic of this practice.
Changes in Newspaper Production: The Role of Technology
From the late 1980s and early
1990s, newspapers have become
fully automatic – from reporter’s
desk to final page proof. The use of
paper has been completely
eliminated with this automated
chain. This has become possible
because of two technological
changes – networking of personal
computers (PCs) through LANs
(local area networks) and use of
newsmaking
software
Newsmaker and other customised
software.
Changing technology has also
changed the role and function of a
reporter. The basic tools of a news
reporter — a shorthand notebook,
pen, typewriter, and plain old
telephone has been replaced by
new tools — a mini tape recorder, a
laptop or a PC, mobile or satellite phone, and other accessories like modem. All these
technological changes in news gathering have increased the speed of news and helped
newspaper managements to push their deadlines to dawn. They are also able to plan a
greater number of editions and provide the latest news to the readers. A number of
language newspapers are using the new technologies to bring out separate editions for
each of the districts. While print centers are limited, the number of editions has grown
manifold.
Newspaper chains like Meerut-based Amar Ujala are using new technology for news
gathering as well as for improving pictorial coverage. The newspaper has a network of
nearly a hundred reporters and staffers and an equal number of photographers, feeding
news to all its thirteen editions spread across Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal. All the
hundred correspondents are equipped with PCs and modems for news transmission,
and the photographers carry digital cameras with them. Digital images are sent to the
central news desk via modems.
BOX 7.11
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
A media managers explains the reasons for this:
The trouble with the print media is the high gestation period for returns and
the high cost of production. The newspaper’s or magazine’s cover price alone
doesn’t cover these costs. …If the cost of producing the paper is Rs. 5 and if you are selling it
at Rs. 2 then you are selling it at a higher subsidy. Naturally, you have to depend on advertising
cost to cover your cost.
The advertiser, thus becomes the primary customer of the print media…So, I, the print media,
am not trying to get readers for my product, but I get customers, who happen to be my readers,
for my advertisers….Advertisers like to reach readers who are successful, who celebrate life,
who consume, who are early adopters, who believe in experimentation, who are hedonists.
The then Director of the Press Institute of India elaborates on the implications of
newspapers that cater to potential customers of advertisers.
For several weeks I have been going through mainline English-language newspapers looking
specifically for field reports and feature articles on happenings in the rural parts of our country,
small towns and growing slum colonies. Some 70 per cent of our people live in these areas
which, to my mind, comprise the ‘real India’…the national press, presumed to provide the
information that moulds the opinions of senior policy makers, politicians, academics and
journalists themselves. They are expected to serve as watchdog over the system of governance,
a role traditionally described as that of the ‘Fourth Estate’.
(Chaudhuri 2005:199-226)
BOX 7.12
EXERCISE FOR BOX 7.13
Read the text carefully.
Do you think readers have changed or newspapers have changed? Discuss.
Discuss the term infotainment. Can you think of examples. What do you think the effect
of infotainment will be?
BOX 7.13
The effort of the newspapers has been to widen their audience and reach out to
different groups. It has been argued that newspaper reading habits have
changed. While the older people read the newspaper in its entirety, younger
readers often have specific interests like sports, entertainment or society gossip and directly
move to the pages earmarked for these items. Segmented interest of readers imply that a
newspaper must have a plurality of ‘stories’ to appeal to a wide range of readers with varied
interests. This has often led to newspapers advocating infotainment, a combination of information
and entertainment to sustain the interest of readers. Production of newspaper is no longer
related to a commitment to certain values that embody a tradition. Newspapers have become
a consumer product and as long as numbers are big, everything is up for sale.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Mass Media and Communications
TELEVISION
In 1991 there was one state
controlled TV channel Doordarshan
in India. By 1998 there were almost
70 channels.  Privately run satellite
channels have multiplied rapidly
since the mid-1990s. While
Doordarshan broadcasts over 20
channels there were some 40 private
television networks broadcasting in
2000. The staggering growth of
private satellite television has been
one of the defining developments of
contemporary India. In 2002, 134
million individuals watched satellite
TV on an average every week. This
number went up to 190 million in
2005. The number of homes with access to satellite TV has jumped from 40
million in 2002 to 61 million in 2005. Satellite subscription has now penetrated
56 percent of all TV homes.
The Gulf War of 1991 (which popularised CNN), and the launching of
Star-TV in the same year by the Whampoa Hutchinson Group of Hong Kong,
signalled the arrival of private satellite Channels in India. In 1992, Zee TV, a
Hindi-based satellite entertainment channel, also began beaming programs to
cable television viewers in India. By 2000, 40 private cable and satellite channels
were available including several that focused exclusively on regional-language
broadcasting like Sun-TV, Eenadu-TV, Udaya-TV, Raj-TV, and Asianet.
Meanwhile, Zee TV has also launched several regional networks, broadcasting
in Marathi, Bengali and other languages.
While Doordarshan was expanding rapidly in the 1980s, the cable television
industry was mushrooming in major Indian cities. The VCR greatly multiplied
entertainment options for Indian audiences, providing alternatives to
Doordarshan’s single channel programming. Video viewing at home and in
community-based parlours increased rapidly. The video fare consisted mostly
of film-based entertainment, both domestic and imported. By 1984,
entrepreneurs in cities such as Mumbai and Ahmedabad had begun wiring
apartment buildings to transmit several films a day. The number of cable
operators exploded from 100 in 1984, to 1200 in 1988, to 15,000 in 1992, and
to about 60,000 in 1999.
The coming in of transnational television companies like Star TV, MTV,
Channel [V], Sony and others, worried some people on the likely impact on
Indian youth and on the Indian cultural identity. But most of the transnational
television channels have through research realised that the use of the familiar is
A television showroom
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
more effective in procuring the diverse groups that constitute Indian audience.
The early strategy of Sony International was to broadcast 10 Hindi films a week,
gradually decreasing the number as the station produced its own Hindi language
content. The majority of the foreign networks have now introduced either a
segment of Hindi language programming (MTV India), or an entire new Hindi
language channel (STAR Plus). STAR Sports and ESPN have dual commentary
or an audio sound track in Hindi. The larger players have launched specific
regional channels in languages such as Bengali, Punjabi, Marathi and Gujarati.
Perhaps the most dramatic adoption of localisation was carried out by
STAR TV. In October 1996, STAR Plus, initially an all English general
entertainment channel originating from Hong Kong, began producing a Hindi
language belt of programming between 7 and 9 PM. By February 1999, the
channel was converted to a solely Hindi Channel and all English serials shifted
to STAR World, the network’s English language international channel.
Advertising to promote the change included the Hinglish slogan: ‘Aapki Boli.
Aapka Plus Point’ (Your language/speech. Your Plus Point) (Butcher, 2003).
Both STAR and Sony continued to dub US programming for younger audience
as children appeared to be able to adjust to the peculiarities that arise when
the language is one and the setting another. Have you watched a dubbed
programme? What do you feel about it?
EXERCISE FOR BOX 7.14
You may have watched on television the whole rescue operation. If not you can choose from any other event.
Organise a debate in class around the following points:
What is the likely impact of this competition among television channels to outdo one another in
running exclusive live coverage of events for gaining higher viewership.
Can we look at this issue as a kind of voyeurism (peep into some other people’s private/intimate
moments) indulged in by television cameras?
Is it an example of the positive role played by television media in highlighting the plight of rural poor?
BOX 7.14
The Rescue of Prince
Prince, a 5 yrs old boy had fallen into a 55 ft borewell shaft in Aldeharhi village in Kurukshetra,
Haryana and was rescued by the army after a 50 hours ordeal in which a parallel shaft was dug
through a well. Along with food, a closed circuit television camera (CCTV) had been lowered into the shaft in
which the little boy was trapped. Two news channel … suspended all other programmes and reporting of all other
events and for two days continuous footage of the child bravely fighting off insects, sleeping or crying out to his
mother was splashed on the TV screen. They even interviewed many people outside the temples asking them
“what do you feel about Prince?” They asked people to send SMS for Prince. (Prince ke liye aapka sandesh
hamein bheje xxx pe). Thousands of people had descended at the site and several free community kitchens
were run for 2 days. It soon created a national hysteria and concern and people were shown praying in temples,
mosques, churches and gurudwaras. There are other such instances when the TV is shown to intrude into
personal lives of people.
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Mass Media and Communications
Most television channels are on throughout the day, 24X7. The format for
news is lively and informal. News has been made far more immediate,
democratic and intimate. Television has fostered public debate and is
expanding its reach every passing year. This brings us to the question whether
serious political and economic issues are neglected.
There are a growing number of news channels in Hindi and English, a
large number of regional channels and an equally large number of reality
shows, talk shows, Bollywood shows, family soaps, interactive shows, game
shows and comedy shows. Entertainment television has produced a new cadre
of superstars who have become familiar household names, and their private
life, rivalry on sets feed the gossip columns of popular magazines and
newspapers. Reality shows like Kaun Banega Crorepati or Indian Idol or Big
Boss have become increasingly popular. Most of these are modelled along the
lines of western programmes. Which of these programmes can be identified
as interactive shows, as family soaps, talk shows, reality shows. Discuss.
Soap opera
Soap operas are stories that are serialised. They are continuous. Individual stories may come to an
end, and different characters appear and disappear, but the soap itself has no ending  until it is taken
off the air completely.  Soap operas presume a history, which the regular viewer knows – he or she
becomes familiar with the characters, with their personalities and their life experiences.
RADIO
In 2000, AIR’s programmes
could be heard in two-third of
all Indian households in 24
languages and 146 dialects, over
some 120 million radio sets. The
advent of privately owned FM
radio stations in 2002 provided
a boost to entertainment
programmes over radio. In order
to attract audiences these
privately run radio stations
sought to provide entertainment
to its listeners. As privately run
FM channels are not permitted
to broadcast any political news
bulletins, many of these channel
specialise in ‘particular kinds’ of
popular music to retain their
audiences. One such FM
BOX 7.15
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
channel claims that it broadcasts ‘All hits all day’! Most of the FM channels
which are popular among young urban professionals and students, often belong
to media conglomerates.  Like ‘Radio Mirchi’ belongs to the Times of India group,
Red FM is owned by Living Media and Radio City by the Star Network. But
independent radio stations engaged in public broadcastings like National Public
Radio (USA) or BBC (UK) are missing from our broadcasting landscape.
In the two films: ‘Rang de Basanti’ and ‘Lage Raho Munnai Bhai’ the radio is
used as an active  medium of communication although both the movies are set
in the contemporary period. In ‘Rang de Basanti’, the conscientious, angry college
youth, inspired by the legend of Bhagat Singh assassinates a minister and then
captures All India Radio to reach out to the people and disseminate their
message. While in ‘Lage Raho Munna Bhai’, the heroine is a radio jockey who
wakes up the country with her hearty and full-throated “Good Morning Mumbai!”
the hero too takes recourse to the radio station to save a girl’s life.
The potential for using FM channels is enormous. Further privatisation of
radio stations and the emergence of community owned radio stations would lead
to the growth of radio stations. The demand for local news is growing. The number
of homes listening to FM in India has also reinforced the world wide trend of
networks getting replaced by local radio. The box below reveals not only the
ingenuity of a village youth but also the need for catering to local cultures.
It may well be the only village FM radio station on the Asian sub-continent.
The transmission equipment, costing little…, may be the cheapest in the world. But
the local people definitely love it. On a balmy morning in India’s northern state of Bihar, young Raghav
Mahato gets ready to fire up his home-grown FM radio station. Thousands of villagers, living in a 20
km (12 miles) radius of Raghav’s small repair shop and radio station …tune their … radio sets to catch
their favourite station. After the crackle of static, a young, confident voice floats up the radio waves.
“Good morning! Welcome to Raghav FM Mansoorpur 1! Now listen to your favourite songs,” announces
anchor and friend Sambhu into a cellotape-plastered microphone surrounded by racks of local music
tapes. For the next 12 hours, Raghav Mahato’s outback FM radio station plays films songs and
broadcasts public interest messages on HIV and polio, and even snappy local news, including alerts
on missing children and the opening of local shops. Raghav and his friend run the indigenous radio
station out of Raghav’s thatched-roof Priya Electronics Shop.
The place is a cramped …rented shack stacked with music tapes and rusty electrical appliances
which doubles up as Raghav’s radio station and repair shop.
He may not be literate, but Raghav’s ingenuous FM station has made him more popular than local
politicians. Raghav’s love affair with the radio began in 1997 when he started out as a mechanic in
a local repair shop. When the shop owner left the area, Raghav, son of a cancer-ridden farm worker,
took over the shack with his friend. Sometime in 2003, Raghav, who by now had learned much
about radio ...In impoverished Bihar state, where many areas lack power supplies, the cheap battery-
powered transistor remains the most popular source of entertainment. “It took a long time to come
up with the idea and make the kit which could transmit my programmes at a fixed radio frequency.
BOX 7.16
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Mass Media and Communications
CONCLUSION
That mass media is an essential part of our personal and public life today
cannot be emphasised enough. This chapter in no way can capture your life
experience with the media. What it does do is attempt to understand it as an
important part of contemporary society. It also seeks to focus on its many
dimensions – its link with the state and the market, its social organisation and
management, its relationship with readers and audience. In other words it
looks at both the constraints within which media operates and the many ways
that it affects our lives.
The kit cost me 50 rupees, “says Raghav. The transmission kit is fitted on to an antenna attached to a
bamboo pole on a neighbouring three-storey hospital. A long wire connects the contraption to a creaky,
old homemade stereo cassette player in Raghav’s radio shack. Three other rusty, locally made battery-
powered tape recorders are connected to it with colourful wires and a cordless microphone.
The shack has some 200 tapes of local Bhojpuri, Bollywood and devotional songs, which Raghav
plays for his listeners. Raghav’s station is truly a labour of love - he does not earn anything from it. His
electronic repair shop work brings him some two thousand rupees a month. The young man, who
continues to live in a shack with his family, doesn’t know that running a FM station requires a government
license. “I don’t know about this. I just began this out of curiosity and expanded its area of transmission
every year,” he says.
So when some people told him sometime ago that his station was illegal, he actually shut it down. But
local villagers thronged his shack and persuaded him to resume services again. It hardly matters for
the locals that Raghav FM Mansoorpur 1 does not have a government license – they just love it.
“Women listen to my station more than men,” he says. “Though Bollywood and local Bhojpuri songs
are staple diet, I air devotional songs at dawn and dusk for women and old people.” Since there’s no
phone-in facility, people send their requests for songs through couriers carrying handwritten messages
and phone calls to a neighbouring public telephone office. Raghav’s fame as the ‘promoter’ of a radio
station has spread far and wide in Bihar. People have written to him, wanting work at his station, and
evinced interest in buying his ‘technology’.
Source: BBC NEWS: (By Amarnath Tewary) http://news.bbc.co.uk/go/pr/fr/-/2/hi/south_asia/
4735642.stm Published: 2006/02/24 11:34:36 GMT © BBC MMV
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social Change and Development in India
Trace out the changes that have been occurring in the newspaper
industry? What is your opinion on these changes?
Is radio as a medium of mass communication dying out? Discuss the
potential that FM stations have in post-liberalisation India?
Trace the changes that have been happening in the medium of television.
Discuss.
REFERENCES
Bhatt, S.C. 1994. Satellite invasion in India. Sage. New Delhi.
Butcher, Melissa. 2003. Transnational television, Cultural Identity and change:
When STAR Came to India. Sage. New Delhi.
Chaudhuri, Maitrayee. 2005. ‘A Question of Choice: Advertisements, Media and
Democracy’ Ed. Bernard Bel et. al. Media and Mediation Communication Processes
pp.199-226. Sage. New Delhi.
Chatterji, P.C. 1987. Broadcasting in India. Sage. New Delhi.
Desai, A.R. 1948. The Social Background of Indian Nationalism. Popular
Prakashan. Bombay.
Ghose, Sagarika 2006, ‘Indian Media: A flawed yet robust public service’ in B.G.
Verghese (Ed.) Tomorrow’s India: Another tryst with destiny. Viking. New Delhi.
Joshi, P.C. 1986. Communication and Nation-Building. Publications Divison GOI.
Delhi.
Jeffrey, Roger. 2000. India’s Newspaper Revolution. OUP. Delhi.
More, Dadasaheb Vimal. 1970. ‘Teen Dagdachachi Chul” in Sharmila Rege Writing
Caste/Writing Gender: Narrating Dalit Women’s Testimonies. Zubaan/Kali.
Delhi, 2006
Page, David and Willam Gawley. 2001. Satellites Over South Asia. Sage. New Delhi.
Singhal, Arvind and E.M. Rogers. 2001. India’s Communication Revolution. Sage.
New Delhi.
Questions
2015-16(21/01/2015)
Social
Movements
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
great many students and office-workers around the world go to work only
for five or six days. And rest on the weekends. Yet, very few people who relax on
their day off realise that this holiday is the outcome of a long struggle by workers.
That the work-day should not exceed eight hours, that men and women should
be paid equally for doing the same work, that workers are entitled to social
security and pension – these and many other rights were gained through social
movements.  Social movements have shaped the world we live in and continue
to do so.
ACTIVITY 8.1
Compare your life with your
grandmother. How is it different from
yours? What are the rights you take for
granted in your life and which she did
not have? Discuss.
The Right to Vote
Universal adult franchise, or the right of every
adult to vote, is one of the foremost rights
guaranteed by the Indian Constitution. It means that we cannot
be governed by anyone other than the people we have
ourselves elected to represent us. This right is a radical
departure from the days of colonial rule when ordinary people
were forced to submit to the authority of colonial officers who
represented the interests of the British Crown. However, even
in Britain, not everyone was allowed to vote. Voting rights were
limited to property-owning men. Chartism was a social
movement for parliamentary representation in England. In
1839, more than 1.25 million people signed the People’s
Charter asking for universal male suffrage, voting by ballot,
and the right to stand for elections without owning property. In
1842, the movement managed to collect 3.25 million signatures,
a huge number for a tiny country. Yet, it was only after World
War I, in 1918 that all men over 21, married women, women
owning houses, and women university graduates over the age
of 30, got the right to vote.  When the suffragettes (women
activists) took up the cause of all adult women’s right to vote,
they were bitterly opposed and their movement violently crushed.
We often assume that the rights we enjoy just happened to exist. It is
important to recall the struggles of the past, which made these rights possible.
You have read about the 19th century social reform movements, of the struggles
against caste and gender discrimination and of the nationalist movement in
India that brought us independence from colonial rule in 1947.  You are familiar
also with the many nationalist movements around the world in Asia and Africa
and Americas that put an end to colonial rule. The socialist movements world
over, the civil rights movement in the United States in the 1950s and 1960s
that fought for equal rights for Blacks, the anti apartheid struggle in South
Africa have all changed the world in fundamental ways. Social movements not
BOX 8.1
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Movements
only change societies. They also
inspire other social movements.
You saw in chapter 3 how the
Indian national movement
shaped the making of the Indian
Constitution. And how in turn the
Indian Constitution played a
major role in bringing about
social change.
8.1 FEATURES OF A SOCIAL MOVEMENT
People may damage a bus and attack its driver when the bus has run over a
child. This is an isolated incident of protest. Since it flares up and dies down it
is not a social movement. A social movement requires sustained collective action
over time.  Such action is often directed against the state and takes the form of
demanding changes in state policy or practice. Spontaneous, disorganised protest
cannot be called a social movement either. Collective action must be marked by
some degree of organisation. This organisation may include a leadership and a
structure that defines how members relate to each other, make decisions and
carry them out. Those participating in a social movement also have shared
objectives and ideologies. A social movement has a general orientation or way of
approaching to bring about (or to prevent) change. These defining features are
not constant. They may change over the course of a social movement’s life.
Social movements often arise with the aim of bringing about changes on a
public issue, such as ensuring the right of the tribal population to use the
forests or the right of displaced people to settlement and compensation. Think
of other issues that social movements have taken up in the past and present.
While social movements seek to bring in social change, counter movements
sometimes arise in defence of status quo. There are many instances of such
counter movements. When Raja Rammohun Roy campaigned against sati and
formed the Brahmo Samaj, defenders of sati formed Dharma Sabha and
petitioned the British not to legislate against sati. When reformers demanded
education for girls, many protested that this would be disastrous for society.
When reformers campaigned for widow remarriage, they were socially
boycotted. When the so called ‘lower caste’ children enrolled in schools, some
so called ‘upper caste’ children were withdrawn from the schools by their
families.  Peasant movements have often been brutally suppressed. More
recently the social movements of erstwhile excluded groups like the Dalits
have often invoked retaliatory action. Likewise proposals for extending
reservation in educational institutions have led to counter movements opposing
them. Social movements cannot change society easily. Since it goes against
both entrenched interests and values, there is bound to be opposition and
resistance. But over a period of time changes do take place.
ACTIVITY 8.2
Try and think of any example that will show
you how society is changed by social
movements and also how a social movement
can lead to other social movements.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
While protest is the most visible form of collective
action, a social movement also acts in other, equally
important, ways. Social movement activists hold
meetings to mobilise people around the issues that
concern them. Such activities help shared
understanding, and also prepare for a feeling of
agreement or consensus about how to pursue the
collective agenda.  Social movements also chart out
campaigns that include lobbying with the
government, media and other important makers of
public opinion.  You will recall this discussion from chapter 3. Social movements
also develop distinct modes of protest. This could be candle and torch light
processions, use of black cloth, street theatres, songs, poetry. Gandhi adopted
novel ways such as ahimsa, satyagraha and his use of the charkha in the freedom
movement. Recall the innovative modes of protest such as picketing and the
defying of the colonial ban on producing salt.
ACTIVITY 8.3
Make a list of different social
movements that you have heard or read
of. What changes do they want to bring
about?  What changes do they want to
prevent?
The repertoire of satyagraha
The fusion of foreign power and capital was the focus of social protest during
India’s nationalist struggle.  Mahatma Gandhi wore khadi, hand-spun, hand-woven cloth, to
support Indian cotton-growers, spinners and weavers whose livelihoods had been destroyed
by the government policy of favouring mill-made cloth.  The legendary Dandi March to make
salt was a protest against British taxation policies that placed a huge burden on consumers of
basic commodities in order to benefit the empire.  Gandhi took items of everyday mass
consumption like cloth and salt, and transformed them into symbols of resistance.
BOX 8.2
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Movements
DISTINGUISHING SOCIAL CHANGE AND SOCIAL MOVEMENTS
It is important to distinguish between social change in general and social
movements.  Social change is continuous and ongoing. The broad historical
processes of social change are the sum total of countless individual and collective
actions gathered across time and space. Social movements are directed towards
some specific goals. It involves long and continuous  social effort and action by
people. To draw from our discussion in chapter 2 we can view sanskritisation
and westernisation as social change and see the 19th century social reformers’
efforts to change society as social movements.
8.2 SOCIOLOGY AND SOCIAL MOVEMENTS
WHY THE STUDY OF SOCIAL MOVEMENTS IS IMPORTANT FOR
SOCIOLOGY
From the very beginning, the discipline of sociology has been interested in
social movements.  The French Revolution was the violent culmination of several
movements aimed at overthrowing the monarchy and establishing ‘liberty,
equality and fraternity’. In Britain, the industrial revolution was marked by
great social upheaval. Recall our discussion on the emergence of sociology in
the west in Book 1 NCERT class XI. Poor labourers and artisans who had left
the countryside to find work in the cities protested against the inhuman living
conditions into which they were forced. Food riots in England were often
suppressed by the government. These protests were perceived by elites as a
BOX 8.3
Vimal Dadasaheb More (1970)
Speech by Ankush Kale who was born in a pardhi community at a public meeting
The pardhis are very skilful hunters. Yet society recognises us only as
criminals….Our community has to undergo police torture under the charge of theft. Whenever
there is a theft in the village, it is we who get arrested. The police exploit our womenfolk and we
have to witness their humiliation. Society tries to keep us at a distance because we are called
thieves. But have people ever tried to give us a thought? Why do our people steal? It is this
society that is responsible for turning us into thieves. They never employ us because we are
pardhis.
Source: Sharmila Rege Writing caste/writing gender: narrating dalit women’s testimonies
(Zubaan/Kali , New Delhi, 2006)
EXERCISE FOR BOX 8.3
Read the narrative above. How is a new shared understanding developed? How is the dominant
society’s perception being questioned?
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
major threat to the established order of society.  Their anxiety about maintaining
social order was reflected in the work of sociologist Emile Durkheim. Durkheim’s
writings about the division of labour in society, forms of religious life, and even
suicide, mirror his concern about how social structures enable social integration.
Social movements were seen as forces that led to disorder.
Scholars influenced by the ideas of Karl Marx offered a different view of
violent collective action.  Historians like E. P. Thompson showed that the ‘crowd’
and the ‘mob’ were not made up of anarchic hooligans out to destroy society.
Instead, they too had a ‘moral economy’. In other words they have their own
shared understanding of right and wrong that informed their actions. Their
research showed that poor people in urban areas had good reasons for protesting.
They often resorted to public protest because they had no other way of expressing
their anger and resentment against deprivation.
THEORIES OF SOCIAL MOVEMENTS
According to the theory of relative deprivation, social conflict arises when a social
group feels that it is worse off than others around it. Such conflict is likely to
result in successful collective protest. This theory emphasises the role of
psychological factors such as resentment and rage in inciting social movements.
The limitations of this theory are that while perceptions of deprivation may be a
necessary condition for collective action, they are not a sufficient reason in
themselves. All instances where people feel relatively deprived do not result in
social movements. Can you think of any example where people do feel deprived
but do not start or join a social movement to redress their grievance?
To mobilise collectively in a sustained and organised manner, grievances
have to be discussed and analysed in order to arrive at a shared ideology and
strategy. That is, there is no automatic causal relationship between relative
deprivation and collective action. There are other factors such as leadership
and organisation that are equally important.
Mancur Olson’s book The Logic
of Collective Action argues that a
social movement is an aggregation of
rational individual actors pursuing
their self-interest.  A person will join
a social movement only if s/he will
gain something from it. S/he will
participate only if the risks are less
than the gains. Olson’s theory is
based on the notion of the rational,
utility-maximising individual. Do you
think people always calculate
individual costs and benefits before
undertaking any action?
ACTIVITY 8.4
Think of the any social movement. You
can take the case of  the Indian freedom
movement, any tribal movement, any
anti racist movement and discuss
whether people joined them by thinking
of the pros and cons of joining it, of
calculating rationally what they would
gain individually.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Movements
McCarthy and Zald’s proposed resource mobilisation theory rejected Olson’s
assumption that social movements are made up of individuals pursuing their
self-interest.  Instead, they argued that a social movement’s success depends
on its ability to mobilise resources or means of different sorts. If a movement
can muster resources such as leadership, organisational capacity, and
communication facilities, and can use them within the available political
opportunity structure, it is more likely to be effective. Critics argue that a social
movement is not limited by existing resources. It can create resources such as
new symbols and identities. As numerous poor people’s movements show,
scarcity of resources need not be a constraint. Even with an initial limited
material resources and organisational base, a movement can generate resources
through the process of struggle. Think of examples from both the past and the
contemporary period.
Social conflict does not automatically lead to collective action.  For such action to take place, a
group must consciously think or identify themselves as oppressed beings.  There has to be an
organisation, leadership, and a clear ideology. Often, however, social protest does not follow
on these lines. People may have a clear idea of how they are exploited, but they are often
unable to challenge this through overt political mobilisation and protest. In his book Weapons
of the Weak, James Scott analysed the lives of peasants and labourers in Malaysia. Protest
against injustice took the form of small acts such as being deliberately slow. These kinds of
acts have been defined as everyday acts of resistance.
BOX 8.4
Studies on poor women in South Asia has shown that often they are forced to
give their small savings to their husbands who demand it for their drinks. They
then devised a way out by hiding their money in two places. When they were
forced to give up their hard earned saving, they gave the money from of one of the hiding
places. And thereby ensured the safety of the other saving.
EXERCISE FOR BOX 8.4
Is this an act of resistance or a survival strategy, a coping mechanism? Discuss.
8.3 TYPES OF SOCIAL MOVEMENTS
ONE WAY OF CLASSIFYING: REFORMIST, REDEMPTIVE, REVOLUTIONARY
There are different kinds of social movements. They can be classified as:
(i) redemptive or transformatory; (ii) reformist; and (iii) revolutionary. A
redemptive social movement aims to bring about a change in the personal
consciousness and actions of its individual members. For instance, people in
the Ezhava community in Kerala were led by Narayana Guru to change their
social practices.  Reformist social movements strive to change the existing social
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
and political arrangements through gradual,
incremental steps. The 1960s movement for the
reorganisation of Indian states on the basis of
language and the recent Right to Information campaign
are examples of reformist movements.  Revolutionary
social movements attempt to radically transform social
relations, often by capturing state power.  The
Bolshevik revolution in Russia that deposed the Tsar
to create a communist state and the Naxalite
movement in India that seeks to remove oppressive
landlords and state officials can be described as
revolutionary movements.
As you might discover when you try to classify a
social movement in terms of this typology, most
movements have a mix of redemptive, reformist and
revolutionary elements.  Or the orientation of a social
movement may shift over time such that it starts off
with, say, revolutionary objectives and becomes
reformist.  A movement may start from a phase of
mass mobilisation and collective protest to become
more institutionalised. Social scientists who study the
life cycles of social movements call this a move towards
‘social movement organisations’.
How a social movement is perceived and classified
is always a matter of interpretation. It differs from
one section to another. For instance, what was a
‘mutiny’ or ‘rebellion’ for British colonial rulers in 1857 was ‘the first war of
Independence’ for Indian nationalists.  A mutiny is an act of defiance against
legitimate authority, i.e., the British rule. A struggle for independence is a
challenge to the very legitimacy of British rule.  This shows how people attach
different meanings to social movements.
ANOTHER WAY OF CLASSIFYING: OLD AND NEW
For much of the twentieth century social movements were class based such as
working class movements and peasant movements or anti-colonial movements.
While anti-colonial movements united entire people into national liberation
struggles, class-based movements united classes to fight for their rights.
The most far-reaching social movements of the last century thus have been
class-based or based on national liberation struggles. You have read in your
history books about the workers’ movements in Europe that gave rise to the
international communist movement. Besides bringing about the formation of
communist and socialist states across the world, most notably in the Soviet
Union, China, and Cuba, these movements also led to the reform of capitalism.
ACTIVITY 8.5
Find out about social movements such
as the:
Telangana struggle
the Tebhaga movement
the Swadhyaya Parivar movement
the Santhal Hool
the Ulgulan led by Birsa Munda
the campaign against dowry deaths
the movement to allow Dalits to
enter temples
the movement for separate
statehood for Uttaranchal and
Jharkhand
the movement for widow remarriage
in Bengal and Maharashtra and
others
any other social movement you have
read about.
Can you classify these social movements
in terms of the categories given above?
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Movements
The creation of welfare states that protected workers’ rights and offered universal
education, health care and social security in the capitalist nations of Western
Europe was partly due to political pressure created by the communist and
socialist movements.  The movement against colonialism has been as influential
as the movement against capitalism.  Since capitalism and colonialism have
usually been inter-linked through forms of imperialism, social movements have
simultaneously targeted both these forms of exploitation.  That is, nationalist
movements have mobilised against rule by a foreign power as well as against
the dominance of foreign capital.
The decades after the Second World War witnessed the end of empire and the
formation of new nation-states as a result of nationalist movements in India,
Egypt, Indonesia, and many other countries.  Since then, another wave of social
movements occurred in the 1960s and early 1970s.  This was the time of the war
in Vietnam where forces led by the United States of America were involved in a
bloody conflict in the former French colony against Communist guerrillas.  In
Europe, Paris was the nucleus of a vibrant students’ movement that joined
workers’ parties in a series of strikes protesting against the war.  Across the
Atlantic, the United States of America was experiencing a surge of social protest.
The civil rights movement led by Martin Luther King had been followed by the
Black Power movement led by Malcolm X. The anti-war movement was joined by
tens of thousands of students who were being compulsorily drafted by the
government to go and fight in Vietnam.  The women’s movement and the
environmental movement also gained strength during this time of social ferment.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
It was difficult to classify the members of these so-called ‘new social
movements’ as belonging to the same class or even nation.  Rather than a
shared class identity, participants felt that they shared identities as students,
women, blacks, or environmentalists. How are the old social movements, often
based on class related issues like the trade union or peasant movements different
from the new social movements like the environmental or women or tribal
movements?
You are already familiar with the many instances of trade union movements
and workers’ struggles in chapter 5.
DISTINGUISHING THE NEW SOCIAL MOVEMENT FROM THE OLD SOCIAL
MOVEMENTS
We have already seen that the historical contexts were different. That was a
period when nationalist movements were overthrowing colonial powers. And
working class movements in the capitalist west were wresting better wages,
better living conditions, social security, free schooling and health security from
the state. That was also a period when socialist movements were establishing
new kinds of states and societies. The old social movements clearly saw
reorganisation of power relations as a central goal.
The old social movements functioned within the frame of political parties.
The Indian National Congress led the Indian National Movement. The Communist
Party of China led the Chinese Revolution. Today some believe that ‘old’ class-
based political action led by trade unions and workers’ parties is on the decline.
Others argued that in the affluent West with its welfare state, issues of class-
based exploitation and inequality were no longer central concerns. So the ‘new’
social movements were not about changing the distribution of power in society
but about quality-of-life issues such as having a clean environment.
In the old social movements, the role of political parties was central. Political
scientist Rajni Kothari attributes the surge of social movements in India in the
1970s to people’s growing dissatisfaction with parliamentary democracy.  Kothari
argues that the institutions of the state have been captured by elites.  Due to
this, electoral representation by political parties is no longer an effective way
for the poor to get their voices heard. People left out by the formal political
system join social movements or non-party political formations in order to put
pressure on the state from outside. Today, the broader term of civil society is
used to refer to both old social movements represented by political parties and
trade unions. And to new nongovernmental organisations, women’s groups,
environmental groups and tribal activists.
As you read about the various dimensions of social change in India you
would have been struck by the fact that globalisation has been re-shaping
peoples’ lives in industry and agriculture, culture and media. Often firms are
trans-national. Often legal arrangements that are binding are international such
as the regulations of the World Trade Organisation (WTO). Environmental and
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Movements
health risks, fears of nuclear warfare are global in nature. Not surprisingly
therefore many of the new social movements are international in scope. What is
significant, however, is that the old and new movements are working together
in new alliances such as the World Social Forum that have been raising
awareness about the hazards of globalisation.
CAN WE APPLY THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN OLD AND NEW SOCIAL MOVEMENTS
IN THE INDIAN CONTEXT?
India has experienced a whole array of social movements involving women,
peasants, dalits, adivasis, and others.  Can these movements be understood as
‘new social movements’?  Gail Omvedt in her book Reinventing Revolution points
out that concerns about social inequality and the unequal distribution of
resources continue to be important elements in these movements. Peasant
movements have mobilised for better prices for their produce and protested
against the removal of agricultural subsidies. Dalit labourers have acted
collectively to ensure that they are not exploited by upper-caste landowners
and money-lenders.  The women’s movement has worked on issues of gender
discrimination in diverse spheres like the workplace and within the family.
At the same time, these new social movements are not  just about ‘old’ issues
of economic inequality. Nor are they organised along class lines alone.  Identity
politics, cultural anxieties and aspirations are essential elements in creating
social movements and occur in ways that are difficult to trace to class-based
inequality. Often, these social movements unite participants across class
boundaries. For instance, the women’s movement includes urban, middle-class
feminists as well as poor peasant women. The regional movements for separate
statehood bring together different groups of people who do not share
homogeneous class identities. In a social movement, questions of social inequality
can occur alongside other, equally important, issues.
This will be clear when we discuss the Chipko movement later.
8.4 ECOLOGICAL MOVEMENTS
For much of the modern period the greatest emphasis has been laid on
development. Over the decades there has been a great deal of concern about
the unchecked use of natural resources and a model of development that creates
new needs that further demands greater exploitation of the already depleted
natural resources. This model of development has also been critiqued for
assuming that all sections of people will be beneficiaries of development. Thus
big dams displace people from their homes and sources of livelihood. Industries
displace agriculturalists from their homes and livelihood. The impact of industrial
pollution is yet another story. Here we take just one example of an ecological
movement to examine the many issues that are interlinked in an ecological
movement.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
Chipko
movement, an example
ecological
movement, in the
Himalayan foothills is
a good example of such
intermingled interests
and ideologies. According to Ramachandra Guha in his book Unquiet Woods,
villagers rallied together to save the oak and rhododendron forests near their
villages. When government forest contractors came to cut down the trees,
villagers, including large numbers of women, stepped forward to hug the trees
to prevent their being felled.  At stake was the question of villagers’ subsistence.
All of them relied on the forest to get firewood, fodder and other daily necessities.
This conflict placed the livelihood needs of poor villagers against the government’s
desire to generate revenues from selling timber.  The economy of subsistence
was pitted against the economy of profit.
Along with this issue of social inequality
(villagers versus a government that
represented commercial, capitalist
interests), the Chipko movement also
raised the issue of ecological
sustainability.  Cutting down natural
forests was a form of environmental
destruction that had resulted in
devastating floods and landslides in the
region. For the villagers, these ‘red’ and
‘green’ issues were inter-linked. While
their survival depended on the survival
of the forest, they also valued the forest
for its own sake as a form of ecological
wealth that benefits all. In addition, the
Chipko movement also expressed the
resentment of hill villagers against a
distant government headquartered in the plains that seemed indifferent and
hostile to their concerns.  So concerns about economy, ecology and political
representation underlay the Chipko movement.
ACTIVITY 8.6
Find out some instances of
environmental pollution from your
region. Discuss. You can also have a
poster exhibition of all your findings.
Chipko activists gather together on World Enviornment Day at
Saklana in 1986
Discussing deforestation, Junagadh, Himachal Pradesh
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Movements
Chipko Movement
The unusually heavy monsoon of 1970 precipitated the most devastating flood
in living memory. In the Alaknanda valley, water inundated 100 square kilometres
of land, washed away 6 metal bridges and 10 kilometres of motor roads, 24 buses and several
other vehicles; 366 houses collapsed and 500 acres of standing paddy crops were destroyed.
The loss of human and bovine life was considerable.
…The 1970 floods mark a turning-point in the ecological history of the region. Villagers, who
bore the brunt of the damage, were beginning to perceive the hitherto tenuous links between
deforestation, landslides and floods. It was observed that some of the villages most affected by
landslides lay directly below forests where felling operations had taken place….
…The villagers’ cause was taken up by the Dashauli Gram Swaraja Sangh (DGSS), a cooperative
organisation based in Chamoli district.
…Despite these early protests, the  government went ahead with the yearly auction of forests
in November. One of the plots scheduled to be assigned was the Reni forest….
…The contractors’ men who were travelling to Reni from Joshimath stopped the bus shortly
before Reni. Skirting the village, they made for the forest. A small girl who spied the workers
with their implements rushed to Gaura Devi, the head of the village Mahila Mandal (Women’s
Club). Gaura Devi quickly mobilised the other housewives and went to the forest. Pleading with
the labourers not to start felling operations, the women initially met with abuse and threats.
When the women refused to budge, the men were eventually forced to retire.
EXERCISE FOR BOX 8.5
Is this social movement raising ‘old’ issues of class-based inequality and resource
distribution?
Or is it raising other concerns such as ecological sustainability and the cultural rights of
people?
BOX 8.6
EXERCISE FOR BOX 8.6
Read the text given above and discuss how even social movements get globalised.  How does
technology help? How does it change the role social movements can play?
In our current information age, social movements around the globe are able to
join together in huge regional and international networks comprising non-
governmental organisations, religious and humanitarian groups, human rights
association, consumer protection advocates, environmental activists and others who campaign
in the public interest. …The enormous protests against the World Trade Organisation that took
place in Seattle, for example, were organised in part through internet-based network.
BOX 8.5
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
ACTIVITY 8.7
Find out more about the Naxal
Movement:
The early years
The current phase
The issues
The mode of protest
Discuss. Go back to chapter 4 and
identify what could be the social causes
responsible for the movement.
8.5 CLASS BASED MOVEMENTS
PEASANT MOVEMENTS
Peasant movements or agrarian struggles have taken place from pre-colonial
days. The movements in the period between 1858 and 1914 tended to remain
localised, disjointed and confined to particular grievances. Well-known are the
Bengal revolt of 1859-62 against the indigo plantation system and the ‘Deccan
riots’ of 1857 against moneylenders. Some of these issues continued into the
following period, and under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi became partially
linked to the Independence movement. For instance, the Bardoli Satyagraha
(1928, Surat District) a ‘non-tax’ campaign as part of the nationwide non-
cooperative movement, a campaign of refusal to pay land revenue and the
Champaran Satyagraha (1917-18) directed against indigo plantations. In the
1920s, protest movements against the forest policies of the British government
and local rulers arose in certain regions. Recall our discussion on structural
changes in Chapter 1.
Between 1920 and 1940 peasant organisations arose. The first organisation
to be founded was the Bihar Provincial Kisan Sabha (1929) and in 1936 the All
India Kisan Sabha. The peasants organised by the Sabhas demanded freedom
from economic exploitation for peasants, workers and all other exploited classes.
At the time of Independence we had the two most classical cases of peasant
movements, namely the Tebhaga movement (1946-7) and the Telangana
movement (1946-51). The first was a struggle of sharecroppers in Bengal in
North Bihar for two thirds share of their produce instead of the customary half.
It had the support of the Kisan Sabha and the
Communist Party of India (CPI). The second, directed
against the feudal conditions in the princely state of
Hyderabad and was led by the CPI.
Certain issues which had dominated colonial
times changed after independence. For land reforms,
zamindari abolition, declining importance of land
revenue and public credit system began to alter rural
areas. The period after 1947 was characterised by
two major social movements. The Naxalite struggle
and the ‘new farmer’s movements.’ The Naxalite
movement started from the region of Naxalbari (1967)
in Bengal.
The central problem for peasants was land. You
have a clear understanding of the sharp divisions
within the agrarian structure in rural India from chapter 4. Boxes 1 and 2
provide two brief accounts of the movement.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Movements
BOX 8.7
EXERCISE FOR BOX 8.7 AND 8.8
Read box 8.7 and 8.8 carefully. Identify the issues and the tactics.
BOX 8.8
The guerrilla movement was heralded by the forcible cutting of crops from the land of
a rich landlord at Garudabhadra, near Boddapadu in the plains area on 24 November
1968. More significant was the action in the hill tracts the next day, when in Pedagottili
village of the Parvatipuram Agency area, about 250 Girijans from several villages armed with bows,
arrows and spears... raided the house of a …landlord cum moneylender.. .and took possession of his
hoarded paddy, rice, other food grains and property worth about Rs. 20,000. They also seized
documents.
Many of the agrarian problems persist in contemporary India. Chapter 4 has
discussed these in detail. The Naxal movement is a growing force even today.
The so called ‘new farmer’s movements began in the 1970s in Punjab and
Tamil Nadu. These movements were regionally oganised, were non-party, and
involved farmers rather than peasants. (farmers are said to be market-involved
as both commodity producers and purchasers) The basic ideology of the
movement was strongly anti-state and anti-urban. The focus of demand were
‘price and related issues’ (for example price procurement, remunerative prices,
prices for agricultural inputs, taxation, non-repayment of loans). Novel methods
of agitation were used: blocking of roads and railways, refusing politicians and
bureaucrats entry to villages, and so on. It has been argued that the farmers’
movements have broadened their agenda and ideology and include environment
and women’s issues. Therefore, they can be seen as a part of the worldwide
‘new social movements’.
…the Siliguri subdivision peasants’ conference proved to be a great success. The
peasants, quickened and strengthened by their earlier militant struggles, looked forward
expectantly. Faces deadened and dulled with the grinding routine of labour on the
jotedars’ fields in sun and rain glowed with hope and understanding. According to Kanu Sanyal’s
later claims, from March 1967 to April 1967, all the villagers were organised. From 15,000 to 20,000
peasants were enrolled as wholetime activists. Peasants’ committees were formed in every village
and they were transformed into armed guards. They soon occupied land in the name of peasants’
committees, burnt all land records ‘which had been used to cheat them of their dues’, cancelled all
hypothecary debts, passed death sentences on oppressive landlords, formed armed bands by
looting guns from landlords, armed themselves with conventional weapons like bows, arrows and
spears, and set up parallel administration to look after the villages…
Source: Sumanata Banerjee “Naxalbari and the Left Movement”  in ed. Ghanshyam Shah Social
Movements and the State (Sage, Delhi 2002) pp.125-192
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
WORKERS’ MOVEMENTS
Factory production began in India in the early part of the 1860s. You will recall
our discussion on the specific character of industrialisation in the colonial period.
The general pattern of trade set up by the colonial regime was one under which
raw materials were procured from India and goods manufactured in the United
Kingdom were marketed in the colony. These factories were, thus established
in the port towns of Calcutta (Kolkata) and Bombay (Mumbai). Later factories
were also set up in Madras (Chennai). Tea plantations in Assam were established
as early as 1839.
In the early stages of colonialism, labour was very cheap as the colonial
government did not regulate either wages or working conditions. You will
remember the manner in which the colonial government ensured supply of
labour in the tea plantations (Chapter 1)
Though trade unions emerged later, workers did protest. Their actions then
were, however, more spontaneous than sustained. Some of the nationalist leaders
also drew in the workers into the anti colonial movement. The war led to the
expansion of industries in the country but it also brought a great deal of misery
to the poor. There were food shortage and sharp increase in prices. There were
waves of strikes in the textile mills in Bombay. In September and October 1917
there were around 30 recorded strikes. Jute workers in Calcutta struck work.
In Madras, the workers of Buchingham and Carnatic Mills (Binny’s) struck
work for increased wages. Textile workers in Ahmedabad struck work for increase
in wages by 50 per cent. (Bhowmick 2004)
The first trade union was established in April 1918 in Madras by B.P. Wadia,
a social worker and member of the Theosophical Society. During the same year,
Mahatma Gandhi founded the Textile Labour Association (TLA). In 1920 the All
India Trade Union Congress (AITUC) was formed in Bombay. The AITUC  was a
broad-based organisation involving diverse ideologies. The main ideological
groups were the communists led by S.A. Dange  and M.N. Roy, the moderates
led by M. Joshi and V.V. Giri and the nationalists which involved people like
Lala Lajpat Rai and Jawaharlal Nehru.
The formation of the AITUC made the colonial government more cautious in
dealing with labour. It attempted to grant workers some concessions in order to
contain unrest. In 1922 the government passed the fourth Factories Act which
reduced the working day to 10 hours. And in 1926, the Trade Unions Act was
passed, which provided for registration of trade unions and proposed some
regulations. By the mid 1920s, the AITUC had nearly 200 unions affiliated to it
and its membership stood at around 250,000.
During the last few years of British rule the communists gained considerable
control over the AITUC. The Indian National Congress chose to form another
union called the Indian National Trade Union Congress (INTUC) in May 1947.
The split in the AITUC in 1947 paved the way for further splits on the line of
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Movements
political parties. Apart from
the working class movement
being divided on the lines of
political parties at the
national level, regional parties
too started to form their own
unions from the late 1960s.
In 1966-67 the economy
suffered a major recession
which led to a decrease in
production and consequently
employment. There was a
general unrest. In 1974 there
was a major railway workers’
strike. The confrontation
between the state and trade
unions became acute. During the Emergency in
1975-77 the government curbed all trade union
activities. This again was short lived. The
workers’ movement was very much part of the
wider struggle for civil liberties.
In the contemporary context of globalisation
you have read about the changes affecting labour. The challenges before the
trade unions are also of a new nature. You need to go back to chapter 5 and 6
to understand these.
ACTIVITY 8.8
Follow the news regularly and collect information
on the issues that trade unions are taking up.
Discuss in the context of globalisation
Top: Bombay textile worker’s strike
1981-82
Right: Women workers at a Union
Demonstration, Arwal, Bihar 1987
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
8.6 CASTE BASED MOVEMENTS
THE DALIT MOVEMENT
The sun of self-respect has burst into flame-
Let it burn up these castes!
Smash, break, destroy
These walls of hatred.
Crush to smithereens this eons-old school of blindness,
Rise, O people!
Social movements of Dalits show a particular character. The movements cannot
be explained satisfactorily by reference to economic exploitations alone or political
oppression, although these dimensions are important. This is a struggle for
recognition as fellow human beings. It is a struggle for self-confidence and a
space for self-determination. It is a struggle for abolishment of stigmatisation,
that untouchability implied.  It has been called a struggle to be touched.
The word Dalit is commonly used in Marathi, Hindi, Gujarati and many
other Indian languages, meaning the poor and oppressed persons. It was first
used in the new context in Marathi by neo-Buddhist activists, the followers of
Babasaheb Ambedkar in the early 1970s. It refers to those who have been
broken, ground down by those above them in a deliberate way. There is, in the
word itself, inherent denial of pollution, karma and justified caste hierarchy.
There has not been a single, unified Dalit
movement in the country now or in the past.
Different movements have highlighted different
issues related to Dalits, around different
ideologies. However, all of them assert a Dalit
identity though the meaning may not be
identical
precise
everyone.
Notwithstanding differences in the nature of
Dalit movements and the meaning of identity,
there has been a common quest for equality,
self-dignity and eradication of untouchability.
(Shah 2001:194) This can be seen in the
Satnami Movement of the Chamars in the
Chattisgarh plains in eastern MP, Adi Dharma
Movement in Punjab, the Mahar Movement in
Maharashtra, the socio-political mobilisation among the Jatavas of Agra and
the Anti Brahman Movement in south India.
In the contemporary period the Dalit movement has unquestionably acquired
a place in the public sphere that cannot be ignored. This has been accompanied
by a growing body of Dalit literature.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Movements
Dalit literature is squarely opposed to the
Chaturvarna system and caste hierarchy
which it considers as responsible for
crushing the creativity and very existence of
lower castes. Dalit writers are insistent on
using their own imageries and expressions
rooted in their own experiences and
perceptions. Many felt that the high-flown social imageries of mainstream society
would hide the truth rather than reveal it. Dalit literature gives a call for social
and cultural revolt. While some emphasise the cultural struggle for dignity and
identity, others also bring in the structural features of society including the
economic dimensions.
BOX 8.9
An unknown poet’s poem (1890s) on his
fellow Mahars.
Their houses are outside the village;
There are lice in their women’s hair;
Naked children play in the rubbish;
They eat carrion;
The faces of the untouchables have a humble look;
There is no learning among them;
They know the names of the village goddesses and the
demon gods;
But not the name of Brahma.
ACTIVITY 8.9
Find out more about Dalit literature. Discuss any
poem or story of your choice from within the
body of Dalit writings.
EXERCISE FOR BOX 8.10
BOX 8.10
¾ Identify the reasons why the Dalit movement can be termed reformist as well as redemptive.
¾ Do you agree with the observation given in the text.  Discuss.
Sociologists, attempts to classify Dalit movements have led them to believe
that they belong to all the types, namely reformative, redemptive, revolutionary.
…the anti-caste movement which began in the 19th century under the inspiration
of Jotiba Phule and was carried out in the 1920s by the non-Brahmin movements in Maharashtra
and Tamil Nadu and then developed under the leadership of Dr. Ambedkar had characteristics
of all types. At its best it was revolutionary in terms of society and redemptive in terms of
individuals. In partial context, the ‘post Ambedkar Dalit movement’ has had revolutionary practice.
It has provided alternative ways of living, at some points limited and at some points radical and
all-encompassing, ranging from changes in behaviour such as giving up eating beef to religious
conversion. It has focussed on changes in the entire society, from radical revolutionary goal of
abolishing caste oppression and economic exploitation to the limited goals of providing scope
for members of Scheduled Caste to achieve social mobility.
But on the whole…this movement has been a reformist movement. It has mobilized along
caste lines, but only made half hearted efforts to destroy caste; it has attempted and achieved
some real though limited societal changes with gains especially for the educated sections
among Dalits, but it has failed to transform society sufficiently to raise the general mass from
what is still among the most excruciating poverty in the world.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
BACKWARD CLASS CASTES MOVEMENTS
The emergence of backward castes/classes as political entities has occurred both
in the colonial and post-colonial contexts. The colonial state often distributed
patronage on the basis of caste. It made sense, therefore, for people to stay within
their caste for social and political identity in institutional life. It also influenced
similarly placed caste groups to unite themselves and to form what has been
termed a ‘horizontal stretch’. Caste, thus began to lose its ritual content and
become more and more secularised for political mobilisation. (recall the discussion
on secularisation in chapter 2)
The term ‘Backward Classes’ has been
in use in different parts of the country since
the late 19th Century. It began to be used
more widely in Madras presidency since
1872, in the princely state of Mysore since
1918, and in Bombay presidency since
1925. From the 1920s, a number of
organisations united around the issue of
caste sprang up in different parts of the
country. These included the United
Provinces Hindu Backward Classes League,
All-India Backward Classes Federation, All
India Backward Classes League. In 1954,
88 organisations were counted working for
the Backward Classes.
THE UPPER CASTE RESPONSE
The increasing visibility of both Dalits and
other backwards classes has led to a feeling among sections of the upper caste
that they are being given short shrift. The government, they feel, does not pay
any heed to them because they are numerically not significant enough. As
sociologists we need to recognise that such a ‘feeling’ does exist and then we
need to scutinise to what extent such an impression is grounded on empirical
facts. We also need to ask why earlier generations from the so called ‘upper
castes” did not think of ‘caste’ as a living reality of modern India? Box 8.12
provides an obvious sociological explanation.
By and large when compared to the situation prevailing before independence,
the condition of all social groups, including the lowest caste and tribes, has
improved today. But by how much has it improved? How have the lowest castes/
tribes fared in comparison to the rest of the population? It is true that in the early
part of the 21st century, the variety of occupations and professions among all
caste groups is much wider than it was today. However, this does not change the
massive social reality that the overwhelming majority of those in the ‘highest’ or
The following observations were made
by G.B. Pant during a speech that
moved the constitution of the Advisory
Committee on fundamental rights, minorities etc.
We have to take particular care of the Depressed
Classes, the Scheduled Castes and the Backward
Classes… We must do all we can to bring them up
to the general level…The strength of the chain is
measured by the weakest link of it and so until every
link is fully revitalised, we will not have a healthy
body politic.
Recent years have seen renewed debate about the
state decision on reservation to this section.
BOX 8.11
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Movements
most preferred occupations are from the upper castes, while the vast majority of
those in the menial and despised occupations belong to the lowest castes. Issues
of discrimination and exclusion have been discussed at some length in Book 1.
8.7  THE TRIBAL MOVEMENTS
Different tribal groups spread across the country
may share common issues. But the distinctions
between them are equally significant. Many of
the tribal movements have been largely located
in the so called ‘tribal belt’ in middle India, such
as the Santhals, Hos, Oraons, Mundas in Chota
Nagpur and the Santhal Parganas. The region
constitutes the main part of what has come to
be called Jharkhand. We will not be able to go
into any detailed account of the different
movements. We take Jharkhand as an example
of a tribal movement with a history that goes
back a hundred years. We also briefly touch on
the specificity of the tribal movements in the North East but fail to deal
comprehensively the many differences that exist between one tribal movement
and another within the region.
JHARKHAND
Jharkhand is one of the newly-formed states of India, carved out of south Bihar
in the year 2000. Behind the formation of this state lies more than a century of
resistance. The social movement for Jharkhand had a charismatic leader in
Birsa Munda, an adivasi who led a major uprising against the British.  After his
death, Birsa became an important icon of the movement.  Stories and songs
about him can be found all over Jharkhand. The memory of Birsa’s struggle
was also kept alive by writing.  Christian missionaries working in south Bihar
To the generations born in Nehruvian India, and specially to those who (like me) were brought up in
traditionally upper-caste but newly urban and newly professional middle-class environment, caste
was an archaic concept. True, it would be brought out figuratively mothballs to preside over traditional rites of
passage, specially marriage, but it seemed  to have no active role in urban everyday life.
It is mainly now- after Mandal so to speak- that we are beginning to understand why caste was almost invisible in
urban middle- class contexts. The most important reason, of course, is that these contexts were overwhelmingly
dominated by the upper castes. This homogeneity made caste drop below the threshold of social visiblilty. If almost
everyone around is upper-caste, caste identity is unlikely to be an issue, just as our identity as “Indians’ may be
relevant abroad but goes unnoticed in India. (Deshpande 2003: 99)
BOX 8.12
Struggles of the Tribals continue
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
were responsible for spreading literacy in the area. Literate adivasis began to
research and write about their history and myths. They documented and
disseminated information about tribal customs and cultural practices.  This
helped create a unified ethnic consciousness and a shared identity as
Jharkhandis.
Literate adivasis were also in a position to get government jobs so that, over
time, a middle-class adivasi intellectual leadership emerged that formulated
the demand for a separate state and lobbied for it in India and abroad.  Within
south Bihar, adivasis shared a common hatred of dikus – migrant traders and
money-lenders who had settled in the area and grabbed its wealth, impoverishing
the original residents. Most of the benefits from the mining and industrial projects
in this mineral-rich region had gone to dikus even as adivasi lands had been
alienated. Adivasi experiences of marginalisation and their sense of injustice
were mobilised to create a shared Jharkhandi identity and inspire collective
action that eventually led to the formation of a separate state.
The issues against which the leaders of the movement in Jharkand
agitated were:
acquisition of land for large irrigation projects and firing ranges;
survey and settlement operations, which were held up, camps closed down,
collection of loans, rent and cooperative dues, which were resisted;
nationalisation of forest produce which they boycotted
THE NORTH EAST
The process of state formation initiated by the Indian government following the
attainment of independence generated disquieting trends in all the major hill
districts in the region. Conscious of their distinct identity and traditional
autonomy the tribes were unsure of being incorporated within the administrative
machinery of Assam.
The rise of ethnicity in the region is thus a response to cope with the new situation which
developed as a consequence of the tribe’s contact with a powerful alien system. Long isolated
from the Indian mainstream the tribes were able to maintain their own worldview and social and
cultural institutions with little external influence. …While the earlier phase showed a tendency
towards secessionism, this trend has been replaced by a search for autonomy within the
framework of the Indian Constitution. (Nongbri 2003: 115)
One of the key issues that bind tribal movements from different parts of the
country is the alienation of tribals from forest lands. In this sense ecological
issues are central to tribal movements. Just as cultural issues of identity and
economic issues such as inequality are. This brings us back to the question
about the blurring of old and new social movements in India.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Movements
8.8 THE WOMEN’S MOVEMENT
THE 19TH CENTURY SOCIAL REFORM MOVEMENTS AND EARLY
WOMEN’S ORGANISATIONS
You are already familiar with the 19th century
social reform movements that raised various issues
concerning women. Chapter 2 had dealt with it as
did the earlier book. The early 20th century saw
the growth of women’s organisations at a national
and local level. The Women’s India Association (WIA)
(1917) All India Women’s Conference (AIWC) (1926),
National Council for Women in India (NCWI) (1925)
are ready names that we can mention.   While many
of them began with a limited focus, their scope
extended over time. For instance, the AIWC began
with the idea that ‘women’s welfare’ and ‘politics’
were mutually exclusive. Few years later the
Presidential address stated, “…Can the Indian man
or woman be free if India be a slave? How can we
remain dumb about national freedom, the very
basis of all great reforms?” (Chaudhuri 1993: 149)
It can be argued that this period of activity did
not constitute a social movement. It can be argued
otherwise too. Let us recall some of the features
that characterise social movements. It did have
organisations, ideology, leadership, a shared
understanding and the aim of bringing about
changes on a public issue. What they succeeded
together was to create an atmosphere where the
women’s question could not be ignored.
AGRARIAN STRUGGLES AND REVOLTS
It is often assumed that only middle class educated women are involved in social
movements. Part of the struggle has been to remember the forgotten history of
women’s participation. Women participated along with men in struggles and revolts
originating in tribal and rural areas in the colonial period. The Tebhaga movement
in Bengal, the Telangana arms struggle from the erstwhile Nizam’s rule, and the
Warli tribal’s revolt against bondage in Maharashtra are some examples.
POST 1947
An issue that is often raised is that if there was an active women’s movement
before 1947, whatever happened afterwards. One explanation has been that
In the North Cedar Hills, a woman named
Gufiallo became famous for her part in the Civil
Disobedience Movement.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
many of the women activists who were also involved in the nationalist movement
got involved in the nation building task. Others cite the trauma of Partition as
responsible for the lull.
In the mid 1970s there was a renewal of the women’s movement in India.
Some call it the second phase of the Indian women’s movement. While many of
the concerns remained the same there were changes both in terms of
organisational strategy as well as ideologies. There was the growth of what is
termed as the autonomous women’s movements. The term ‘autonomy’ referred
to the fact that they were ‘autonomous’ or independent from political parties as
distinct from those women’s organisations that had links with political parties.
It was felt that political parties tended to marginalise issues of women.
Apart from organisational changes, there were new issues that were focussed
upon. For instance, violence against women. Over the years there have been
numerous campaigns that have been taken up. You may have noticed that
application for school forms have both father’s and mother’s names. This was
not always true. Likewise important legal changes have taken place thanks to
the campaign by the women’s movement. Issues of land rights, employment
have been fought alongside rights against sexual harassment and dowry.
There has been a recognition too that while all women are in some way
disadvantaged vis-a-vis men, all women do not suffer the same level or kind of
discrimination. The concerns of the educated middle class woman is different
from the peasant woman just as the concern of the Dalit woman is different
from the ‘upper caste’ woman. Let us take the example of violence.
Struggle against Dowry
Shahjehan Begum ‘Ape’ with a photograph of her
daughter, allegedly mudered for dowry.
There has also been greater recognition that both men and women are
constrained by the dominant gender identities. For instance men in patriarchal
societies feel they must be strong and successful. It is not, manly, to express
oneself emotionally. A gender-just society would allow both men and women to
be free. This ofcourse rests on the idea that for true freedom to grow and develop
injustices of all kind have to end.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Movements
BOX 8.13
In the face of widespread unemployment, ecological degradation, and rampant poverty, ... a new
ferment of political action began in the country. In some cases, the struggles were launched from
party fronts or from joint fronts of coalitions of parties. An example of the latter kind of action is
provided by the Anti Price Rise Movement of Bombay and Gujarat in the late 60s….
During the early 70s, in crisis-ridden Bihar, a massive upsurge of students …supported Jayapraksh Narayan’s
call for a ‘Total Revolution’. …A large number of questions about power structures was raised, which included
many about women- questions about family, work, distribution, and family violence, unequal access to resources
enjoyed by men and women, issues of male-female relationship, and women’s sexuality.
The 70s also witnessed the emergence of the ‘autonomous’ women’s movement. During the mid 70s, many
educated women took to radical, active politics, and simultaneously promoted an analysis of women’s issues.
Groups of women came together in many cities. Among the incidents that played catalytic roles in crystallising
these meetings into organisational efforts were the Mathura rape case (1978) and the Maya Tyagi rape case
(1980). Both were cases of custodial rape by the police, and led to nationwide protest movements…
Source: Ilina Sen “Women’s Politics in India” in ed. Maitrayee Chaudhuri Feminism in India  (Women
Unlimited/Kali, New Delhi, 2004) PP. 187-210.
EXERCISE FOR BOX 8.14
Think what other kinds of difference would exist between one section of women and another.
Would there still be something common for all women as women? Discuss
BOX 8.14
An analysis of the practices of violence against women by caste would reveal that while the incidence
of dowry deaths and violent controls and regulations on the mobility and sexuality by the family are
frequent among the dominant upper castes- dalit women are more likely to face the collective and
public threat of rape, sexual assault and physical violence at the workplace and in public.
Source: Sharmila Rege “Dalit Women Talk Differently: A Critique of ‘Difference’ and Towards a Dalit Feminist
Standpoint Position” in Maitrayee Chaudhuri ed. Feminism in India (p.211-223) (Women Unlimited/Kali Delhi
2004)
CONCLUSION
As we reach the end of the book, it is perhaps relevant to go back to where we
began in our first sociology book in class XI. We had begun by discussing the
dialectical relationship between the individual and society. Social movements
perhaps best shows this relationship. They arise because individuals and social
groups seek to change their conditions. Thereby they change both themselves
and society.
© NCERT
not to be republished
Social Change and Development in India
Imagine a society where there has been no social movement. Discuss.
You can also describe how you imagine such a society to be.
Write short notes on:
 Women’s Movement
 Tribal Movements
In India it is difficult to make a clear distinction between the old and new
social movements. Discuss.
Environmental movements often also contain economic and identity
issues. Discuss.
Distinguish between peasent and New Farmenr’s  movements.
REFERENCES
Banerjee, Sumanta. 2002. ‘Naxalbari and the Left Movement’ in ed.
Ghanshyam Shah, Social Movements and the State 2002. pp. 125-192. Sage.
New Delhi.
Bhowmick, Sharit K.  2004. ‘The Working Class Movement in India : Trade
Unions and the State’ in Manoranjan Mohanti Class, Caste and Gender. Sage.
New Delhi.
Chaudhuri, Maitrayee. 1993. The Indian Women’s Movement: Reform and
Revival. Radiant. New Delhi.
Fuchs, Martin and Antje, Linkenbach. 2003. ‘Social Movements’ in ed. Veena
Das, The Oxford India Companion to Sociology and Social Anthropology. pp. 1524-
1563. Oxford University Press. New Delhi.
Deshpande, Satish. 2003. Contemporary India: A Sociological View. Viking.
New Delhi.
Giddens, Anthony. 2001. Sociology (Fourth edition). Polity. Cambridge.
Guha, Ramchandra. 2002. “Chipko: Social History of an Environmental Movement”
in Shah Ghansyam  Social Movements and the State. Sage. New Delhi.
Nongbri, Tiplut. 2003. Development. Ethnicity and Gende: Select Essays on Tribes.
Rawat. Jaipur/New Delhi.
Oommen, T.K. 2004. Nation, Civil Society and Social Movements: Essays in Political
Sociology. Sage. New Delhi.
Rege, Sharmila.  2004. ‘Dalit Women Talk Differently: A Critique of ‘Difference’
and Towards a Dalit Feminist Standpoint Position’ in Maitrayee Chaudhuri Ed.
Feminism in India. pp.211-223. Women Unlimited/Kali. Delhi.
– 2006. Writing caste/writing gender: narrating dalit women’s
testimonies.  Zubaan/Kali. Delhi.
Sen, Ilina. 2004. ‘Women’s Politics in India’ in ed. Maitrayee Chaudhuri Feminism
in India Women. Unlimited/Kali. Delhi.
Shah, Ghansyam Ed. 2001. Dalit Identity and Politics . Sage. New Delhi.
– 2002. Social Movements and the State. Sage. New Delhi.
Questions
© NCERT
not to be republished
