CONTENTS
FOREWORD
UNIT I : INTRODUCTION
India — Location
UNIT II : PHYSIOGRAPHY
Structure and Physiography
Drainage System
UNIT III : CLIMATE, VEGETATION AND SOIL
32-75
Climate
Natural Vegetation
Soils
UNIT IV : NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS: CAUSES,
76-93
CONSEQUENCES AND MANAGEMENT
Natural Hazards and Disasters
APPENDICES
94-98
STATES, THEIR CAPITALS, NUMBER OF DISTRICTS, AREA AND POPULATION
UNION TERRITORIES, THEIR CAPITALS, AREA AND POPULATION
IMPORTANT RIVER BASINS
STATE/UNION TERRITORY WISE FOREST COVER
NATIONAL PARKS OF INDIA
GLOSSARY
99-100
INTRODUCTION
This unit deals with
• Location — space relations and India’s place in the world
ou have already seen the map of India
in the previous classes. Now you closely
examine the  map of India (Figure 1.1).
Mark the southernmost and northernmost
latitudes and the easternmost and
westernmost longitudes.
The mainland of India, extends from
Kashmir in the north to Kanniyakumari in the
south and  Arunachal Pradesh in the east to
Gujarat in the west. India’s territorial limit
further extends towards the sea upto 12
nautical miles (about 21.9 km) from the coast.
(See the box for conversion).
Statute mile
63,360 inches
Nautical mile
72,960 inches
1 Statute mile
about 1.6 km (1.584 km)
1 Nautical mile
about 1.8 km (1.852 km)
Our southern boundary extends upto
6°45' N latitude in the Bay of Bengal.  Let us
try to analyse the implications of having such
a vast longitudinal and latitudinal extent.
If you work out the latitudinal and
longitudinal extent of India, they are roughly
about 30 degrees, whereas the actual distance
measured from north to south extremity is
3,214 km, and that from east to west is only
2,933 km. What is the reason for this
difference? Consult Chapter 3 on the topic
Latitude, Longitude and Time in the book
Practical Work in Geography – Part I (NCERT,
2006) to find out.
This difference is based on the fact that the
distance between two longitudes decreases
towards the poles whereas the distance
between two latitudes remains the same
everywhere. Find out the distance between two
latitudes?
From the values of latitude, it is understood
that the southern part of the country lies
within the tropics and the northern part lies in
the sub-tropical zone or the warm temperate
zone. This location is responsible for large
variations in land forms, climate, soil types and
natural vegetation in the country.
Now, let us observe the longitudinal extent
and its implications on the Indian people. From
the values of longitude, it is quite discernible
that there is a variation of nearly 30 degrees,
which causes a time difference of nearly two
hours between the easternmost and the
westernmost parts of our country. You are
familiar with the concept of Indian Standard
Time (IST).  What is the use of the standard
meridian? While the sun rises in the
northeastern states about two hours earlier as
compared to Jaisalmer, the watches in
Dibrugarh, Imphal in the east and Jaisalmer,
Bhopal or Chennai in the other parts of India
show the same time.  Why does this happen?
INDIA – LOCATION
C H A P T E R
There is a general understanding among the countries of the world to select the standard
meridian in multiples of 7°30' of longitude. That is why 82°30' E  has been selected as the
‘standard meridian’ of India. Indian Standard Time is ahead of Greenwich Mean Time by
5 hours and 30 minutes.
There are some countries where there are more than one standard meridian due to
their vast east-to-west extent. For example, the USA has seven time zones.
INDIA – LOCATION
Figure 1.1 : India : Administrative Divisions
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 1.2 : Location of India in the Eastern World
INDIA – LOCATION
Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
Which one of the following latitudinal extent is relevant for the extent of
India’s area?
8°41'N - 35°7'N
8°4'N - 35°6'N
8°4'N - 37°6'N
6°45'N - 37°6'N
Which one of the following countries shares the longest land frontier with
India?
(a) Bangladesh
Pakistan
(b) China
(d) Myanmar
EXERCISES
Name a few place in India through which the
standard meridian passes?
India with its area of 3.28 million sq. km
accounts for 2.4 per cent of the world’s land
surface area and stands as the seventh
largest country in the world.  Find out the
names of the countries which are larger than
India.
The size of India has endowed her with great
physical diversity.  Thus, you may appreciate
the presence of lofty mountains in the north;
large rivers such as Ganga, Brahmaputra,
Mahanadi, Krishna, Godavari and Kaveri;
green forested hills in northeast and south
India; and the vast sandy expanse of
Marusthali.  You may further appreciate that
bounded by the Himalayas in the north,
Hindukush and Sulaiman ranges in the north-
west, Purvachal hills in the north-east and by
the large expanse of the Indian ocean in the
south, it forms a great geographic entity known
as the Indian subcontinent. It includes the
countries — Pakistan, Nepal, Bhutan,
Bangladesh and India. The Himalayas,
together with other ranges, have acted as a
formidable physical barrier in the past.  Except
for a few mountain passes such as the Khyber,
the Bolan, the Shipkila, the Nathula, the
Bomdila, etc. it was difficult to cross it.  It has
contributed towards the evolving of a unique
regional identity of the Indian subcontinent.
By referring to the physical map of India
you can now describe the physical variations
which you would come across while travelling
from Kashmir to Kanniyakumari and from
Jaisalmer in Rajasthan to Imphal in Manipur.
Peninsular part of India extends towards
the Indian Ocean.  This has provided the
country with a coastline of 6,100 km in the
mainland and 7,517 km in the entire
geographical coast of the mainland plus the
island groups Andaman and Nicobar located
in the Bay of Bengal and the Lakshadweep in
the Arabian Sea.  Thus India, as a country, is
a physically diverse land providing occurrence
of varied resources.
INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS
Examine the location map of India (Figure 1.2).
You will notice that India is located in the
south-central part of the continent of Asia,
bordering the Indian ocean and its two arms
extending in the form of Bay of Bengal and the
Arabian Sea. This maritime location of
Peninsular India has provided links to its
neighbouring regions through the sea and air
routes.
Prepare a list of India’s neighbouring
countries by consulting the map.
Sri Lanka and Maldives are the two island
countries located in the Indian Ocean, which
are our neighbours.  Sri Lanka is separated from
India by the Gulf of Mannar and Palk Strait.
Differentiate between a Gulf and a Strait
Do you think that physical barrier is a
hindrance in interaction with our neighbouring
countries in modern times?  Give some
examples how we have overcome these
difficulties in the present day.
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
(iii)
Which one of the following countries is larger in area than India?
(a) China
(c) France
(b) Egypt
(d) Iran
Which one of the following longitudes is the standard meridian for India?
(a) 69°30'E
(c) 75°30'E
(b) 82°30'E
(d) 90°30'E
Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
Does India need to have more than one standard time?  If yes, why do you
think so?
What are the implications of India having a long coastline?
(iii)
How is the latitudinal spread of India advantageous to her?
While the sun rises earlier in the east, say Nagaland and also sets earlier,
how do the watches at Kohima and New Delhi show the same time?
Project/Activity
Activity based on Appendix I  (Teachers may help in the exercises by explaining
and getting it done by the students).
(i) On a graph paper, plot the number of districts in Madhya Pradesh,
Karnataka, Meghalaya, Goa, Kerala, Haryana.  Do the number of districts
have some relationship with the area of the state?
(ii) Which state amongst Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Gujarat, Arunachal
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Rajasthan and Jammu and Kashmir is
the most thickly populated and which one is the least densely populated?
(iii) Find out the relationship between the area of the state and the number of
districts.
(iv) Identify the states with coastal boundaries.
(v) Arrange the states from west to east which have only land boundary.
Activity based on Appendix II
(i) List the Union Territories which have coastal location.
(ii) How do you explain the variation in the area and population of NCT Delhi
and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands?
(iii) On a graph paper, draw a bar diagram to show the area and population of
all the Union Territories.
PHYSIOGRAPHY
This unit deals with
• Structure and Relief; physiographic divisions
• Drainage systems: concept of water sheds — the Himalayan
and the Peninsular
o you know that our earth also has a
history.  The earth and its landforms
that we see today have evolved over a
very long time. Current estimation shows that
the earth is approximately 460 million years old.
Over these long years, it has undergone many
changes brought about primarily by the
endogenic and exogenic forces. These forces have
played a significant role in giving shape to various
surface and subsurface features of the earth.  You
have already studied  about the Plate Tectonics
and the movement of the Earth’s plates in the
book Fundamentals of Physical Geography
(NCERT, 2006).  Do you know that the Indian
plate was to the south of the equator millions of
years ago? Do you also know that it was much
larger in size and the Australian plate was a part
of it?  Over millions of years, this plate broke into
many parts and the Australian plate moved
towards the southeastern direction and the
Indian plate to the north. Can you map different
phases in the movement of the Indian plate?  This
northward movement of the Indian plate is still
continuing and it has significant consequences
on the physical environment of the Indian
subcontinent.  Can you name some important
consequences of the northward movement  of the
Indian plate?
It is primarily through the interplay of these
endogenic and exogenic forces and lateral
movements of the plates that the present geological
structure and geomorphologic processes active
in the Indian subcontinent came into existence.
Based on the variations in its geological structure
and formations, India can  be divided into three
geological divisions. These geological regions
broadly follow the physical features:
(i) The Penisular Block
(ii) The Himalayas and other Peninuslar
Mountains
(iii) Indo-Ganga-Brahmaputra Plain.
THE PENINSULAR BLOCK
The northern boundary of the Peninsular
Block may be taken as an irregular line
running from Kachchh along the western flank
of the Aravali Range near Delhi and then
roughly parallel to the Yamuna and the Ganga
as far as the Rajmahal Hills and the Ganga
delta. Apart from these, the Karbi Anglong and
the Meghalaya Plateau in the northeast and
Rajasthan in the west are also extensions of
this block. The northeastern parts are
separated by the Malda fault in West Bengal
from the Chotanagpur plateau.  In Rajasthan,
the desert and other desert–like features
overlay  this block.
The Peninsula is formed essentially by a
great complex of very ancient gneisses and
granites, which constitutes a major part of it.
Since the Cambrian period, the Peninsula has
been standing like a rigid block with the
exception of some of its western coast  which
is submerged beneath the sea and some other
parts changed due to tectonic activity without
affecting the original basement. As a part of
the Indo-Australian Plate, it has been subjected
to various vertical movements and block
faulting.  The rift valleys of the Narmada, the
Tapi and the Mahanadi and the Satpura block
mountains are some examples of it.  The
Peninsula mostly consists of relict and residual
mountains like the Aravali hills, the Nallamala
hills, the Javadi hills, the Veliconda hills, the
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY
C H A P T E R
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY
Palkonda range and the Mahendragiri hills, etc.
The river valleys here are shallow with low
gradients.
You are aware of the method of calculating
the gradient as a part of your study of the book
Practical Work in Geography– Part I  (NCERT,
2006).  Can you calculate the gradient of the
Himalayan and the Peninsular rivers and draw
the comparisons?
Most of the east flowing rivers form deltas
before entering  into the Bay of Bengal.  The
deltas formed by the Mahanadi, the Krishna,
the Kaveri and the Godavari  are important
examples.
THE HIMALAYAS AND OTHER
PENINSULAR MOUNTAINS
The Himalayas along with other Peninsular
mountains are young, weak and flexible in their
geological structure unlike the rigid and stable
Peninsular Block. Consequently, they are still
subjected to the interplay of exogenic and
endogenic forces, resulting in the development of
faults, folds and thrust plains. These mountains
are tectonic in origin, dissected by fast-flowing
rivers which are in their youthful stage. Various
landforms like gorges, V-shaped valleys, rapids,
waterfalls, etc. are indicative of this stage.
INDO-GANGA-BRAHMAPUTRA PLAIN
The third geological division of India
comprises the plains formed by the river
Indus, the Ganga and the Brahmaputra.
Originally, it was a geo-synclinal depression
which attained its maximum development
during the third phase of the Himalayan
mountain formation approximately about 64
million years ago. Since then, it has been
gradually filled by the sediments brought by
the Himalayan and Peninsular rivers. Average
depth of alluvial deposits in these plains
ranges from 1,000-2,000 m.
It is evident from the above discussion that
there are significant variations among the
different regions of India in terms of their
geological structure, which has far-reaching
impact upon other related aspects.  Variations
in the physiography and relief are important
among these. The relief and physiography of
India has been greatly influenced by the
geological and geomorphological processes
active in the Indian subcontinent.
PHYSIOGRAPHY
‘Physiography’ of an area is the outcome of
structure, process and the stage of
development. The land of India is characterised
by great diversity in its physical features. The
north has a vast expanse of rugged topography
consisting of a series of mountain ranges with
varied peaks, beautiful valleys and deep gorges.
The south consists of stable table land with
highly dissected plateaus, denuded rocks and
developed series of scarps. In between these
two lies the vast north Indian plain.
Based on these macro variations, India can
be divided into the following physiographic
divisions:
(i) The Northern and Northeastern Mountains
(ii) The Northern Plain
(iii) The Peninsular Plateau
(iv) The Indian Desert
(v) The Coastal Plains
(vi) The Islands.
The North and Northeastern Mountains
The North and Northeastern Mountains consist
of the Himalayas and the Northeastern hills.
The Himalayas consist of a series of parallel
mountain ranges. Some of the important ranges
are the Greater Himalayan range, which
includes the Great Himalayas and the Trans-
Himalayan range, the Middle Himalayas and
Figure 2.1 : A Gorge
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 2.2 : India : Physical
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY
the Shiwalik. The general orientation of these
ranges is from northwest to the southeast
direction in the northwestern part of India.
Himalayas in the Darjiling and Sikkim regions
lie in an eastwest direction, while in Arunachal
Pradesh they are from southwest to the
northwest direction. In Nagaland, Manipur and
Mizoram, they are in the northsouth direction.
The approximate length of the Great Himalayan
range, also known as the central axial range, is
2,500 km from east to west, and their width
varies between 160-400 km from north to
south. It  is also evident from the map that the
Himalayas stand almost like a strong and long
wall between the Indian subcontinent and the
Central and East Asian countries.
Himalayas are not only the physical barrier,
they are also a climatic, drainage and cultural
divide.  Can you identify the impact of Himalayas
on the geoenvironment of the countries of South
Asia?  Can you find some other examples of
similar geoenvironmental divide in the world?
There are large-scale regional variations
within the Himalayas. On the basis of relief,
alignment of ranges and other geomorphological
features, the Himalayas can be divided into the
following sub-divisions:
(i) Kashmir or Northwestern Himalayas
(ii) Himachal and Uttaranchal Himalayas
(iii) Darjiling and Sikkim Himalayas
(iv) Arunachal Himalayas
(v) Eastern Hills and Mountains.
Kashmir or Northwestern Himalayas
It comprise a series of ranges such as the
Karakoram, Ladakh, Zaskar and Pir Panjal. The
northeastern part of the Kashmir Himalayas is a
cold desert, which lies between the Greater
Himalayas and the Karakoram ranges. Between
the Great Himalayas and the Pir Panjal range,
lies the world famous valley of Kashmir and the
famous Dal Lake. Important glaciers of South
Asia such as the Baltoro and Siachen are also
found in this region. The Kashmir Himalayas are
also famous for Karewa
formations, which are useful
for the cultivation of Zafran,
a local variety of saffron.
Some of the important
passes of the region are Zoji
La on the Great Himalayas,
Banihal on the Pir Panjal,
Photu La on the Zaskar and Khardung La on
the Ladakh range. Some of the important fresh
lakes such as Dal and Wular and salt water lakes
such as Pangong Tso and Tso Moriri are also in
this region. This region is drained by the river
Indus, and its tributaries such as the Jhelum
and the Chenab. The Kashmir and northwestern
Himalayas are  well-known for their scenic
beauty and picturesque landscape. The
landscape of Himalayas is a major source of
attraction for adventure tourists. Do you know
that some famous places of pilgrimage such as
Vaishno Devi, Amarnath Cave, Charar -e-Sharif,
etc. are also located here and large number of
pilgrims visit these places every year?
Srinagar, capital city of the state of Jammu
and Kashmir is located on the banks of Jhelum
river.  Dal Lake in Srinagar presents an
interesting physical feature.  Jhelum in the valley
of Kashmir is still in its youth stage and yet forms
meanders – a typical feature associated with the
mature stage in the evolution of fluvial land form
(Figure 2.4). Can you name some other fluvial
landforms in the mature stage of a river?
Figure 2.3 : The Himalayas
Karewas
Karewas are the
thick deposits of
glacial clay and
other materials
embedded with
moraines.
Figure 2.4 : Meandering Jhelum
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
The southernmost part of this region consists
of longitudinal valleys known as ‘duns’. Jammu
dun and Pathankot dun are important examples.
The Himachal and Uttaranchal Himalayas
This part lies approximately between the Ravi
in the west and the Kali (a tributary of
Ghaghara) in the east. It is drained by two major
river systems of India, i.e. the Indus and the
Ganga. Tributaries of the Indus include the river
Ravi, the Beas and the Satluj, and the
tributaries of Ganga flowing through this
region include the Yamuna  and the Ghaghara.
The northernmost part of the Himachal
Himalayas is an extension of the Ladakh cold
desert, which lies in the Spiti subdivision of
district Lahul and Spiti. All the three ranges of
Himalayas are prominent in this section also.
These are the Great Himalayan range, the Lesser
Himalayas (which is locally known as
Dhaoladhar in Himachal Pradesh and Nagtibha
in Uttaranchal) and the Shiwalik range from the
North to the South. In this section of Lesser
Himalayas, the altitude between 1,000-2,000
m specially attracted to the British colonial
administration, and subsequently, some of the
important hill stations such as Dharamshala,
Mussoorie, Shimla, Kaosani and the
cantonment towns and health resorts such as
Shimla, Mussoorie, Kasauli, Almora,
Lansdowne and Ranikhet, etc. were developed
in this region.
The two distinguishing features of this
region from the point of view of physiography
are the ‘Shiwalik’ and ‘Dun formations’.  Some
important duns located in this region are the
An Interesting Fact
In Kashmir  Valley, the meanders in Jhelum
river are caused by the local base level
provided by the erstwhile larger lake of which
the present Dal Lake is a small part.
Figure 2.5 : Western Himalayas
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY
Chandigarh-Kalka dun, Nalagarh dun, Dehra
Dun, Harike dun and the Kota dun, etc. Dehra
Dun is the largest of all the duns with an
approximate length of 35-45 km and a width
of 22-25 km. In the Great Himalayan range,
the valleys are mostly inhabited by the
Bhotia’s. These are nomadic groups who
migrate to ‘Bugyals’ (the summer glasslands
in the higher reaches) during summer months
and return to the valleys during winters.  The
famous ‘Valley of flowers’ is also situated in this
region.  The places of pilgrimage such as the
Gangotri, Yamunotri, Kedarnath, Badrinath
and Hemkund Sahib are also situated in this
part.  The region is also known to have five
famous Prayags (river confluences) as
mentiond in Chapter 3 of this book.  Can you
name some other famous prayags in other
parts of the country?
The Darjiling and Sikkim Himalayas
They are flanked by Nepal Himalayas in the
west and Bhutan Himalayas in the east. It is
relatively small but is a most significant part
of the Himalayas. Known for its fast-flowing
rivers such as Tista, it is a region of high
mountain peaks like Kanchenjunga
(Kanchengiri), and deep valleys. The higher
reaches of this region are inhabited by Lepcha
tribes while the southern part, particularly the
Darjiling Himalayas, has a mixed population
of Nepalis, Bengalis and tribals from Central
India. The British, taking advantage of the
physical conditions such as moderate slope,
thick soil cover with high organic content, well
distributed rainfall throughout the year and
mild winters, introduced tea plantations in this
region.  As compared to the other sections of
the Himalayas, these along with the Arunachal
Himalayas are conspicuous by the absence of
the Shiwalik formations. In place of the
Shiwaliks here, the ‘duar formations’ are
important, which have also been used for the
development of tea gardens. Sikkim and
Darjiling Himalayas are also known for their
scenic beauty and rich flora and fauna,
particularly various types of orchids.
The Arunachal Himalayas
These extend from the east of the Bhutan
Himalayas up to the Diphu pass in the east.
The general direction of the mountain range is
from southwest to northeast. Some of the
important mountain peaks of the region are
Kangtu and Namcha Barwa. These ranges are
dissected by fast-flowing rivers from the north
to the south, forming deep gorges.
Bhramaputra flows through a deep gorge after
crossing Namcha Barwa. Some of the
important rivers are the Kameng, the
The Shiwalik
The word shiwalik has its origin in the
geological formation found in and around
a place called Sivawala near Dehra Dun
which was once a headquarter of the
Imperial Survey and which subsequently
established its permanent headquarters
at Dehra Dun.
Figure 2.6 : Himalayan Mountain Complex : Cross Sectional View from South to North
South
North
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Subansiri, the Dihang, the Dibang and the
Lohit. These are perennial with the high rate of
fall, thus, having the highest  hydro-electric
power potential in the country. An important
aspect of the Arunachal Himalayas is the
numerous ethnic tribal community inhabiting
in these areas. Some of the prominent ones
from west to east are the Monpa, Daffla, Abor,
Mishmi, Nishi and the Nagas.  Most of these
communities practise Jhumming. It is also
known as shifting or slash and burn
cultivation. This region is rich in biodiversity
which has been preserved by the indigenous
Figure 2.7 : Eastern Himalayas
communities. Due to rugged topography, the
inter-valley transportation linkages are
nominal.  Hence, most of the interactions are
carried through the duar region along the
Arunachal-Assam border.
The Eastern Hills and Mountains
These are part of the Himalayan mountain
system having their general alignment from the
north to the south direction. They are known
by different local names. In the north, they are
known as Patkai Bum, Naga hills, the Manipur
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY
Figure 2.8 : Mizo Hills
Figure 2.9 : Loktak Lake
hills and in the south as Mizo or Lushai hills.
These are low hills, inhabited by numerous
tribal groups practising Jhum cultivation.
Most of these ranges are separated from each
other by numerous small rivers. The Barak is
an important river in Manipur and Mizoram.
The physiography of Manipur is unique by
the presence of a large lake known as ‘Loktak’
lake at the centre, surrounded by mountains
from all sides. Mizoram which is also known
as the ‘Molassis basin’ which is made up of
soft unconsolidated deposits. Most of the rivers
in Nagaland form the tributary of the
Brahmaputra. While two rivers of Mizoram and
Manipur are the tributaries of the Barak river,
which in turn is the tributary of Meghna; the
rivers in the eastern part of Manipur are the
tributaries of Chindwin, which in turn is a
tributary of the Irrawady of Myanmar.
The Northern Plains
The northern plains are formed by the
alluvial deposits brought by the rivers – the
Indus, the Ganga and the Brahmaputra.
These plains extend approximately 3,200 km
from the east to the west. The average width
of these plains varies between 150-300 km.
The maximum depth of alluvium deposits
varies between 1,000-2,000 m. From the
north to the south, these can be divided into
three major zones: the Bhabar, the Tarai and
the alluvial plains. The alluvial plains can be
further divided into the Khadar and the
Bhangar.
Bhabar is a narrow belt ranging between
8-10 km parallel to the Shiwalik foothills at
the break-up of the slope. As a result of this,
the streams and rivers coming from the
mountains deposit heavy materials of rocks
and boulders, and at times, disappear in this
zone. South of the Bhabar is the Tarai belt,
with an approximate width of 10-20 km where
most of the streams and rivers re-emerge
without having any properly demarcated
channel, thereby, creating  marshy and
swampy conditions known as the Tarai. This
has a luxurious growth of natural vegetation
and houses a varied wild life.
The south of Tarai is a belt consisting of
old and new alluvial deposits known as the
Bhangar and Khadar respectively. These
plains have characteristic features of mature
stage of fluvial erosional and depositional
landforms such as sand bars, meanders, ox-
bow lakes and braided channels. The
Brahmaputra plains are known for their
riverine  islands and sand bars. Most of these
areas are subjected to periodic floods and
shifting river courses forming braided streams.
The mouths of these mighty rivers also form
some of the largest deltas of the world, for
example, the famous Sunderbans delta.
Otherwise, this is a featureless plain with a
general elevation of 50-150 m above the mean
sea level. The states of Haryana and Delhi form
a water divide between the Indus and the
Ganga river systems.  As opposed to this, the
Brahmaputra river flows from the northeast to
the southwest direction before it takes an
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
almost 90° southward turn at Dhubri before
it enters into Bangladesh. These river valley
plains have a fertile alluvial soil cover which
supports a variety of crops like wheat, rice,
sugarcane and jute, and hence, supports a
large population.
The Peninsular Plateau
Rising from the height of 150 m above the river
plains up to an elevation of 600-900 m is the
irregular triangle known as the Peninsular
plateau. Delhi ridge in the northwest, (extension
of Aravalis), the Rajmahal hills in the east, Gir
range in the west and the Cardamom hills in
the south constitute the outer extent of the
Peninsular plateau. However, an extension of
this is also seen in the northeast, in the form of
Shillong and Karbi-Anglong plateau. The
Peninsular India is made up of a series of
patland plateaus such as the Hazaribagh
plateau, the Palamu plateau, the Ranchi
plateau, the Malwa plateau, the Coimbatore
Figure 2.10 : Northern Plain
Figure 2.11 : A Part of Peninsular Plateau
plateau and the Karnataka plateau, etc. This
is one of the oldest and the most stable
landmass of  India. The general elevation of the
plateau is from the west to the east,  which is
also proved by the pattern of the flow of rivers.
Name some rivers of the Peninsular plateau
which have their confluence in the Bay of
Bengal and the Arabian sea and mention some
landforms which are typical to the  east flowing
rivers but are absent in the west flowing rivers.
Some of the important physiographic features
of this region are tors, block mountains, rift
valleys, spurs, bare rocky structures, series of
hummocky hills and wall-like quartzite dykes
offering natural sites for water storage. The
western and northwestern part of the plateau
has an emphatic presence of black soil.
This Peninsular plateau has undergone
recurrent phases of upliftment and
submergence accompanied by crustal faulting
and fractures. (The Bhima fault  needs special
mention, because of its recurrent seismic
activities).  These spatial variations have
brought in elements of diversity in the relief of
the Peninsular plateau. The northwestern part
of the plateau has a complex relief of ravines
and gorges. The ravines of Chambal, Bhind and
Morena are some of the well-known examples.
On the basis of the prominent relief
features, the Peninsular plateau can be divided
into three broad groups:
(i) The Deccan Plateau
(ii) The Central Highlands
(iii) The Northeastern Plateau.
The Deccan Plateau
This is bordered by the Western Ghats in the
west, Eastern Ghats in the east and the
Satpura, Maikal range and Mahadeo hills in
the north.  Western Ghats are locally known
by different names such as Sahyadri in
Maharashtra, Nilgiri hills in Karnataka and
Tamil Nadu and Anaimalai hills and
Cardamom hills in Kerala.  Western Ghats are
comparatively higher in elevation and more
continuous than the Eastern Ghats. Their
average elevation is about 1,500 m with the
height increasing from north to south.
‘Anaimudi’ (2,695 m), the highest peak of
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY
Peninsular plateau is located on the Anaimalai
hills of the Western Ghats followed by Dodabetta
(2,637 m) on the Nilgiri hills. Most of the
Peninsular rivers have their origin in the
Western Ghats. Eastern Ghats comprising the
discontinuous and low hills are highly eroded
by the rivers such as the Mahanadi, the
Godavari, the Krishna, the Kaveri, etc. Some of
the important ranges include the Javadi hills,
the Palconda range, the Nallamala hills, the
Mahendragiri hills, etc. The Eastern and the
Western Ghats meet each other at the Nilgiri hills.
The Central Highlands
They are bounded to the west by the Aravali
range. The Satpura range is formed by a series
of scarped plateaus on the south, generally at
an elevation varying between 600-900 m above
the mean sea level.  This forms the
northernmost boundary of the Deccan plateau.
It is a classic example of the relict mountains
which are highly denuded and form
discontinuous ranges. The extension of the
Peninsular plateau can be seen as far as
Jaisalmer in the West, where it has been
covered by the longitudinal sand ridges and
crescent-shaped sand dunes called barchans.
This region has undergone metamorphic
processes in its geological history, which can
be corroborated by the presence of
metamorphic rocks such as marble, slate,
gneiss, etc.
The general elevation of the Central
Highlands ranges between 700-1,000 m above
the mean sea level and it slopes towards the
north and northeastern directions. Most of the
tributaries of the river Yamuna have their origin
in the Vindhyan and Kaimur ranges. Banas is
the only significant tributary of the river
Chambal that originates from the Aravalli in
the west.  An eastern extension of the Central
Highland is formed by the Rajmahal hills, to
the south of which lies a large reserve of
mineral resources in the Chotanagpur
plateau.
The Northeastern Plateau
In fact it is an extension of the main Peninsular
plateau. It is believed that due to the force
exerted by the northeastward movement of the
Indian plate at the time of the Himalayan
origin, a huge fault was created between the
Rajmahal hills and the Meghalaya plateau.
Later, this depression got filled up by the
deposition activity of the numerous rivers.
Today, the Meghalaya and Karbi Anglong
plateau stand detached from the main
Peninsular Block.  The Meghalaya plateau is
further sub-divided into three: (i) The Garo
Hills; (ii) The Khasi Hills; (iii) The Jaintia Hills,
named after the tribal groups inhabiting this
region.  An extension of this is also seen in the
Karbi Anglong hills of Assam.  Similar to the
Chotanagpur plateau, the Meghalaya plateau
is also rich in mineral resources like coal, iron
ore, sillimanite, limestone and uranium.  This
area receives maximum rainfall from the south
west monsoon. As a result, the Meghalaya
plateau has a highly eroded surface.
Cherrapunji displays a bare rocky surface
devoid of any permanent vegetation cover.
The Indian Desert
To the northwest of the Aravali hills lies the
Great Indian desert. It is a land of undulating
topography dotted with longitudinal dunes
and barchans. This region receives low rainfall
below 150 mm per year; hence, it has arid
climate with low vegetation cover. It is because
of these characteristic features that this is also
known as Marusthali. It is believed that
Figure 2.12 : The Indian Desert
Can you identify the type of sand dunes
shown in this picture?
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Kathiawar coast in Gujarat, Konkan coast in
Maharashtra, Goan coast and Malabar coast
in Karnataka and Kerala respectively.  The
western coastal plains are narrow in the
middle and get broader towards north and
south. The rivers flowing through this coastal
plain do not form any delta. The Malabar
coast  has got certain distinguishing features
in the form of ‘Kayals’ (backwaters), which
are used for fishing, inland navigation and also
due to its special attraction for tourists. Every
year the famous Nehru Trophy Vallamkali
(boat race) is held in Punnamada Kayal in
Kerala.
As compared to the western coastal plain,
the eastern coastal plain is broader and is an
example of an emergent coast.  There are well-
developed deltas here, formed by the rivers
flowing eastward in to the Bay of Bengal. These
include the deltas of the Mahanadi, the
Godavari, the Krishna and the Kaveri. Because
of its emergent nature, it has less number of
ports and harbours. The continental shelf
extends up to 500 km into the sea, which
makes it difficult for the development of good
ports and harbours. Name some ports on the
eastern coast.
The Islands
There are two major island groups in India –
one in the Bay of Bengal and the other in the
Arabian Sea. The Bay of Bengal island groups
consist of about 572 islands/islets. These are
situated roughly between 6°N-14°N and
92°E -94°E. The two principal groups of islets
include the Ritchie’s archipelago and the
Labrynth island. The entire group of island is
Figure 2.13 : Coastal Plains
during the Mesozoic era, this region was under
the sea. This can be corroborated by the
evidence available at wood fossils park at Aakal
and marine deposits around Brahmsar, near
Jaisalmer (The approximate age of the wood-
fossils is estimated to be 180 million years).
Though the underlying rock structure of the
desert is an extension of the Peninsular
plateau, yet, due to extreme arid conditions,
its surface features have been carved by
physical weathering and wind actions. Some
of the well pronounced desert land features
present here are mushroom rocks, shifting
dunes and oasis (mostly in its southern part).
On the basis of the orientation, the desert can
be divided into two parts: the northern part is
sloping towards Sindh and the southern
towards the Rann of Kachchh. Most of the rivers
in this region are ephemeral.  The Luni river
flowing in the southern part of the desert is of
some significance.  Low precipitation and high
evaporation makes it a water deficit region.
There are some streams which disappear after
flowing for some distance and present a typical
case of inland drainage by joining a lake or
playa.  The lakes and the playas have brackish
water which is the main source of obtaining salt.
The Coastal Plains
You have already read that India has a long
coastline . On the basis of the location and
active geomorphological processes, it can be
broadly divided into two: (i) the western coastal
plains;  (ii) the eastern coastal plains.
The western coastal plains are an example
of submerged coastal plain. It is believed that
the city of Dwaraka which was once a part of
the Indian mainland situated along the west
coast is submerged under water. Because of
this submergence it is a narrow belt and
provides natural conditions for the
development of ports and harbours. Kandla,
Mazagaon, JLN port Navha Sheva, Marmagao,
Mangalore, Cochin, etc. are some of the
important natural ports located along the
west coast. Extending from the Gujarat coast
in the north to the Kerala coast in the south,
the western coast may be divided into
following divisions – the Kachchh and
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY
Figure 2.14 : An Island
divided into two broad categories – the
Andaman in the north and the Nicobar in the
south. They are separated by a water body
which is called the Ten degree channel. It is
believed that these islands are an elevated
portion of submarine mountains. However,
some smaller islands are volcanic in origin.
Barren island, the only active volcano in India
is also situated in the Nicobar islands.
Some important mountain peaks in
Andaman and Nicobar islands are Saddle
peak (North Andaman – 738 m), Mount
Diavolo (Middle Andaman – 515 m), Mount
Koyob (South Andaman – 460 m) and
Mount Thuiller (Great Nicobar – 642 m).
The coastal line has some coral deposits,
and beautiful beaches. These islands receive
convectional rainfall and have an equatorial
type of vegetation.
The islands of the Arabian sea include
Lakshadweep and Minicoy.  These are scattered
between 8°N-12°N  and 71°E -74°E longitude.
These islands are located at a distance of
280 km-480 km off the Kerala coast. The
entire island group is built of coral deposits.
There are approximately 36 islands of which
11 are inhabited. Minicoy is the largest island
with an area of 453 sq. km. The entire group
of islands is broadly divided by the Eleventh
degree channel, north of  which is the  Amini
Island and to the south of the Canannore
Island. The Islands of this archipelago have
storm beaches consisting of unconsolidated
pebbles, shingles, cobbles and boulders on the
eastern seaboard.
On  26 December 2004, the Andaman and Nicobar islands experienced one of the most
devasting natural calamity. Can you name the calamity and identify some other areas
which were adversely affected by the same calamity?  What was its major consequence?
Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i) In which part of Himalayas do we find the Karewa formation?
(a) North-eastern Himalayas
(c) Eastern Himalayas
(b) Himachal-Uttaranchal Himalayas
(d) Kashmir Himalayas
(ii) In which of the following states is Loktak lake situated?
(a) Kerala
(c) Manipur
(b) Uttaranchal
(d) Rajasthan
(iii) Which one of the water bodies separates the Andaman from the Nicobar?
(a) 11° Channel
(c) 10° Channel
(b) Gulf of Mannar
(d) Andaman Sea
(iv) On which of the following hill range is the ‘Dodabeta’ peak situated?
(a) Nilgiri hills
(c) Cardamom hills
(b) Anaimalai hills
(d) Nallamala hills
Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) If a person is to travel to Lakshadweep, from which coastal plain does he
prefer and why?
EXERCISES
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
(ii) Where in India will you find a cold desert?  Name some important ranges of
this region.
(iii) Why is the western coastal plain is devoid of any delta?
Answer the following questions in not more than 125 words.
(i) Make a comparison of the island groups of the Arabian Sea and the Bay of
Bengal.
(ii) What are the important geomorphological features found in the river valley
plains?
(iii) If you move from Badrinath to Sunderbans delta along the course of the
river Ganga, what major geomorphological features will you come across?
Project/Activity
Make a list of major Himalayan peaks from the west to the east with the help
of an atlas.
Identify the major landforms of your state and analyse the major economic
activity practised by the people in each landform.
ou have observed water flowing through
the rivers, nalas and even channels
during rainy season which drain the
excess water. Had these channels not been
there, large-scale flooding would have
occurred. Wherever channels are ill-defined or
choked, flooding is a common phenomenon.
The flow of water through well-defined
channels is known as ‘drainage’ and the
network of such channels is called a
‘drainage system’. The drainage pattern
of an area is the outcome of the geological
time period, nature and structure of
rocks, topography, slope, amount of
water flowing and the periodicity of
the flow.
Do you have a river near your village or city?
Have you ever been there for boating or bathing?
Is it perennial (always with water) or ephemeral
(water during rainy season, and dry, otherwise)?
Do you know that rivers flow in the same
direction? You have studied about slopes in the
other two textbooks of geography (NCERT,
2006) in this class . Can you, then, explain the
reason for water flowing from one direction to
the other? Why do the rivers originating from the
Himalayas in the northern India and the Western
Ghat in the southern India flow towards the east
and discharge their waters in the Bay of Bengal?
A river drains the water collected from a
specific area, which is called its ‘catchment area’.
An area drained by a river and its tributaries
is called a drainage basin. The boundary line
DRAINAGE SYSTEM
C H A P T E R
Important Drainage Patterns
The drainage pattern resembling the branches of a tree is known as “dendritic” the examples
of which are the rivers of northern plain.
When the rivers originate from a hill and flow in all directions, the drainage pattern is known
as ‘radial’. The rivers originating from the Amarkantak range present a good example of it.
(iii)
When the primary tributaries of rivers flow parallel to each other and secondary tributaries
join them at right angles, the pattern is known as ‘trellis’.
When the rivers discharge their waters from all directions in a lake or depression, the
pattern is know as ‘centripetal’.
Find out some of the patterns in the topo sheet given in Chapter 5 of Practical Work in
Geography– Part I (NCERT, 2006).
Figure 3.1 : A River in the Mountainous Region
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 3.2 : Major Rivers of India
DRAINAGE SYSTEM
separating one drainage basin from the other
is known as the watershed. The catchments of
large rivers are called river basins while those
of small rivulets and rills are often referred to
as watersheds. There is, however, a slight
difference between a river basin and a
watershed. Watersheds are small in area while
the basins cover larger areas.
River basins and watersheds are marked
by unity. What happens in one part of the
basin or watershed directly affects the other
parts and the unit as a whole. That is why, they
are accepted as the most appropriate micro,
meso or macro planning regions.
Indian drainage system may be divided on
various bases. On the basis of discharge of water
(orientations to the sea), it may be grouped into:
(i) the Arabian Sea drainage; and (ii) the Bay of
Bengal drainage. They are separated from each
other through the Delhi ridge, the Aravalis and
the Sahyadris  (water divide is shown by a line
in Figure 3.1). Nearly 77 per cent of the drainage
area consisting of the Ganga, the Brahmaputra,
the Mahanadi, the Krishna, etc. is oriented
towards the Bay of Bengal while 23 per cent
comprising the Indus, the Narmada, the Tapi,
the Mahi and the Periyar systems discharge
their waters in the Arabian Sea.
On the basis of the size of the watershed,
the drainage basins of India are grouped into
three categories: (i) Major river basins with
more than 20,000 sq. km of catchment area.
It includes 14 drainage basins such as the
Ganga, the Brahmaputra, the Krishna, the
Tapi, the Narmada, the Mahi, the Pennar, the
Sabarmati, the Barak, etc. (Appendix III). (ii)
Medium river basins with catchment area
between 2,000-20,000 sq. km incorporating
44 river basins such as the Kalindi, the Periyar,
the Meghna, etc. (iii) Minor river basins with
catchment area of less than 2,000 sq. km
include fairly good number of rivers flowing in
the area of low rainfall.
If you look at the Figure 3.1 you can see
that many rivers have their sources in the
Himalayas and discharge their waters either in
the Bay of Bengal or  in the Arabian Sea. Identify
these rivers of North India. Large rivers flowing
on the Peninsular plateau have their origin in
the Western Ghats and discharge their waters
in the Bay of Bengal. Identify these rivers of the
South India.
The Narmada and Tapi are two large rivers
which are exceptions. They along with many
small rivers discharge their waters in the
Arabian Sea.
Name these rivers of the western coastal
region from the Konkan to the Malabar coast.
On the basis of the mode of origin, nature
and characteristics, the Indian drainage may
also be classified into the Himalayan drainage
and the Peninsular drainage. Although it has
the problem of including the Chambal, the
Betwa, the Son, etc. which are much older in
age and origin than other rivers that have their
origin in the Himalayas, it is the most accepted
basis of classification. Hence, this scheme has
been followed in this book.
DRAINAGE SYSTEMS OF INDIA
Indian drainage system consists of a large
number of small and big rivers. It is the outcome
of the evolutionary process of the three major
physiographic units and the nature and
characteristics of precipitation.
THE HIMALAYAN DRAINAGE
The Himalayan drainage system has evolved
through a long geological history. It mainly
includes the Ganga, the Indus and the
Brahmaputra river basins. Since these are fed
both by melting of snow and precipitation,
rivers of this system are perennial. These rivers
pass through the giant gorges carved out by
the erosional activity carried on simultaneously
with the uplift of the Himalayas. Besides deep
gorges, these rivers also form V-shaped valleys,
rapids and waterfalls in their mountainous
Figure 3.3 : Rapids
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
course. While entering the plains, they form
depositional features like flat valleys, ox-bow
lakes, flood plains, braided channels, and
deltas near the river mouth. In the Himalayan
reaches, the course of these rivers is highly
tortous, but over the plains they display a
strong meandering tendency and shift their
courses frequently. River Kosi, also know as
the ‘sorrow of Bihar’, has been notorious for
frequently changing its course. The Kosi brings
huge quantity of sediments from its upper
reaches and deposits it in the plains. The
course gets blocked, and consequently, the
river changes its course. Why does the Kosi
river bring such huge quantity of sediments
from the upper reaches? Do you think that
the discharge of the water in the rivers in
general and the Kosi in particular, remains the
same, or does it fluctuate? When does the river
course receive the maximum quantity of water?
What are the positive and negative effects of
flooding?
EVOLUTION OF THE HIMALAYAN DRAINAGE
There are difference of opinion about the
evolution of the Himalayan rivers. However,
geologists believe that a mighty river called
Shiwalik or Indo-Brahma traversed the entire
longitudinal extent of the Himalaya from Assam
to Punjab and onwards to Sind, and finally
discharged into the Gulf of Sind near lower
Punjab during the Miocene period some 5-24
million years ago (See the table of geological
times scale in Chapter 2 of Fundamentals of
Physical Geography, NCERT, 2006). The
remarkable continuity of the Shiwalik and its
lacustrine origin and alluvial deposits
consisting of sands, silt, clay, boulders and
conglomerates support this viewpoint.
It is  opined that in due course of time Indo–
Brahma river was dismembered into three main
drainage systems: (i) the Indus and its five
tributaries in the western part; (ii) the Ganga
and its Himalayan tributaries in the central
part; and (iii) the stretch of the Brahmaputra
in Assam and its Himalayan tributaries in the
eastern part. The dismemberment was
probably due to the Pleistocene upheaval in
the western Himalayas, including the uplift of
the Potwar Plateau (Delhi Ridge), which acted
as the water divide between the Indus and
Ganga drainage systems. Likewise, the down-
thrusting of the Malda gap area between the
Rajmahal hills and the Meghalaya plateau
during the mid-pleistocene period, diverted the
Ganga and the Brahmaputra systems to flow
towards the Bay of Bengal.
THE RIVER SYSTEMS OF THE
HIMALAYAN DRAINAGE
The Himalayan drainage consists of several
river systems but the following are the major
river systems:
The Indus System
It is one of the largest river basins of the  world,
covering an area of 11,65,000 sq. km (in India
it is 321, 289 sq. km and a total length of 2,880
km (in India 1,114 km). The Indus also
known as the Sindhu, is the westernmost of
the Himalayan rivers in India. It originates
from a glacier near Bokhar Chu (31°15' N
latitude and 81°40' E longitude) in the
Tibetan region at an altitude of 4,164 m in
the Kailash Mountain range. In Tibet, it is
known as ‘Singi Khamban; or Lion’s mouth.
After  flowing in the northwest direction
between the Ladakh and Zaskar ranges, it
passes through Ladakh and Baltistan. It cuts
across the Ladakh range, forming a
spectacular gorge near Gilgit in Jammu and
Kashmir. It enters into Pakistan near Chillar
in the Dardistan region. Find out the area
known as Dardistan.
The Indus receives a number of Himalayan
tributaries such as the Shyok, the Gilgit, the
Zaskar, the Hunza, the Nubra, the Shigar, the
Gasting and the Dras. It finally emerges out of
the hills near Attock where it receives the Kabul
river on its right bank. The other important
tributaries joining the right bank of the Indus
are the Khurram, the Tochi, the Gomal, the
Viboa and the Sangar. They all originate in the
Sulaiman ranges. The river flows southward
and receives ‘Panjnad’ a little above Mithankot.
The Panjnad is the name given to the five rivers
of Punjab, namely the Satluj, the Beas, the Ravi,
the Chenab and the Jhelum. It finally discharges
DRAINAGE SYSTEM
into the Arabian Sea, east of Karachi. The Indus
flows in India only through the Leh district in
Jammu and Kashmir.
The Jhelum, an important tributary of the
Indus, rises from a spring at Verinag situated
at the foot of the Pir Panjal in the south-eastern
part of the valley of Kashmir. It flows through
Srinagar and the Wular lake before entering
Pakistan through a deep narrow gorge. It joins
the Chenab near Jhang in Pakistan.
The Chenab is the largest tributary of the
Indus. It is formed by two streams, the
Chandra and  the Bhaga, which join at
Tandi near Keylong in Himachal Pradesh.
Hence, it is also known as Chandrabhaga.
The river flows for 1,180 km before entering
into Pakistan.
The Ravi is another important tributary of
the Indus. It rises west of the Rohtang pass in
the Kullu hills of Himachal Pradesh and flows
through the Chamba valley of the state. Before
entering Pakistan and joining the Chenab near
Sarai Sidhu, it drains the area lying between
the southeastern part of the Pir Panjal and the
Dhauladhar ranges.
The Beas is another important tributary of
the Indus, originating from the Beas Kund near
the Rohtang Pass at an elevation of 4,000 m
above the mean sea level. The river flows
through the Kullu valley and forms gorges at
Kati and Largi in the Dhaoladhar range. It
enters the Punjab plains where it meets the
Satluj near Harike.
The Satluj originates in the Rakas lake near
Mansarovar at an altitude of 4,555 m in Tibet
where it is known as Langchen Khambab. It
flows almost parallel to the Indus for about 400
km before entering India, and comes out of a
gorge at Rupar. It passes through the Shipki
La on the Himalayan ranges and enters the
Punjab plains. It is an antecedent river. It is a
very important tributary as it feeds the canal
system of the Bhakra Nangal project.
The Ganga System
The Ganga is the most important river of India
both from the point of view of its basin and
cultural significance. It rises in the Gangotri
glacier near Gaumukh (3,900 m) in the
Uttarkashi district of Uttaranchal. Here, it is
known as the Bhagirathi. It cuts through the
Central and the Lesser Himalayas in narrow
gorges. At Devprayag, the Bhagirathi meets
the Alaknanda; hereafter, it is known as the
Ganga. The Alaknanda has its source in the
Satopanth glacier above Badrinath. The
Alaknanda consists of the Dhauli and the
Vishnu Ganga which meet at Joshimath or
Vishnu Prayag. The other tributaries of
Alaknanda such as the Pindar join it at Karna
Prayag while Mandakini or Kali Ganga meets
it at Rudra Prayag. The Ganga enters the
plains at Haridwar. From here, it flows first to
the south, then to the south-east and east
before splitting into two distributaries, namely
the Bhagirathi and the Hugli. The river has a
length of 2,525 km. It is shared by
Uttaranchal (110 km) and Uttar Pradesh
(1,450 km), Bihar (445 km) and West Bengal
(520 km). The Ganga basin covers about 8.6
lakh sq. km area in India alone. The Ganga
river system is the largest in India having a
number of perennial and non-perennial rivers
originating in the Himalayas in the north and
the Peninsula in the south, respectively. The
Son is its major right bank tributary. The
important left bank tributaries are the
Ramganga, the Gomati, the Ghaghara, the
Gandak, the Kosi and the Mahanada. The
river finally discharges itself into the Bay of
Bengal near the Sagar Island.
The Yamuna, the western most and the
longest tributary of the Ganga, has its source
in the Yamunotri glacier on the western slopes
of Banderpunch range (6,316 km). It joins the
Ganga at Prayag (Allahabad). It is joined by
the Chambal, the Sind, the Betwa and the Ken
on its right bank which originates from the
Peninsular plateau while the Hindan, the Rind,
the Sengar, the Varuna, etc. join it on its left
bank. Much of its water feeds the western and
eastern Yamuna and the Agra canals for
irrigation purposes.
Name the states which are drained by
the river Yamuna.
The Chambal rises near Mhow in the
Malwa plateau of Madhya Pradesh and flows
northwards through a gorge up wards of Kota
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
in Rajasthan, where the Gandhisagar dam has
been constructed. From Kota, it traverses down
to Bundi, Sawai Madhopur and Dholpur, and
finally joins the Yamuna. The Chambal is
famous for its badland topography called the
Chambal ravines.
The Gandak comprises two streams,
namely Kaligandak and Trishulganga. It rises
in the Nepal Himalayas between the Dhaulagiri
and Mount Everest and drains the central part
of Nepal. It enters the Ganga plain in
Champaran district of Bihar and joins the
Ganga at Sonpur near Patna.
The Ghaghara originates in the glaciers of
Mapchachungo. After collecting the waters of
its tributaries – Tila, Seti and Beri, it comes
out of the mountain, cutting a deep gorge at
Shishapani. The river Sarda (Kali or Kali
Ganga) joins it in the plain before it finally meets
the Ganga at Chhapra.
The Kosi is an antecedent river with its
source to the north  of Mount Everest in Tibet,
where its main stream Arun rises. After
crossing the Central Himalayas in Nepal, it is
joined by the Son Kosi from the West and the
Tamur Kosi from the east. It forms Sapt Kosi
after uniting with the river Arun.
The Ramganga is comparatively a small
river rising in the Garhwal hills near Gairsain.
It changes its course to the southwest direction
after crossing the Shiwalik and enters into the
plains of Uttar Pradesh near Najibabad. Finally,
it joins the Ganga near Kannauj.
The Damodar occupies the eastern margins
of the Chotanagpur Plateau where it flows
through a rift valley and finally joins the Hugli.
The Barakar is its main tributary. Once known
as the ‘sorrow of Bengal’, the Damodar has
been now tamed by the Damodar Valley
corporation, a multipurpose project.
The Sarda or Saryu river rises in the Milan
glacier in the Nepal Himalayas where it is
known as the Goriganga. Along the Indo-Nepal
border, it is called Kali or Chauk, where it joins
the Ghaghara.
The Mahananda is another important
tributary of  the Ganga rising in the Darjiling
hills. It joins the Ganga as its last left bank
tributary in West Bengal.
The Son is a large south bank tributary of
the Ganga, originating in the Amarkantak
plateau. After forming a series of waterfalls at
the edge of the plateau, it reaches Arrah, west
of Patna, to join the Ganga.
The Brahmaputra System
The Brahmaputra, one of the largest rivers
of the world, has its origin in the
Chemayungdung glacier of the Kailash range
near the Mansarovar lake. From here, it
traverses eastward longitudinally for a
distance of nearly 1,200 km  in a dry and
flat region of southern Tibet, where it is
known as the Tsangpo, which means ‘the
purifier.’ The Rango Tsangpo is the major
right bank tributary of this river in Tibet. It
emerges as a turbulent and dynamic river
after carving out a deep gorge in the Central
Himalayas near Namcha Barwa (7,755 m).
The river emerges from the foothills under
the name of Siang or Dihang. It enters India
west of Sadiya town in Arunachal Pradesh.
Flowing southwest, it receives its main left
bank tributaries, viz., Dibang or Sikang and
Lohit; thereafter, it is known as the
Brahmaputra.
The Brahmaputra receives numerous
tributaries in its 750 km long journey through
the Assam valley. Its major left bank
tributaries are the Burhi Dihing, Dhansari
(South) and Kalang whereas the important  right
bank tributaries are the Subansiri, Kameng,
Manas and Sankosh. The Subansiri which has
its origin in Tibet, is an antecedent river. The
Brahmaputra enters into Bangladesh near
Dhubri and flows southward. In Bangladesh,
the Tista joins it on its right bank from where
the river is known as the Yamuna. It finally
merges with the river Padma, which falls in the
Bay of Bengal. The Brahmaputra is well-known
for floods, channel shifting and bank erosion.
This is due to the fact that most of its tributaries
are large, and bring large quantity of sediments
owing to heavy rainfall in its catchment area.
THE PENINSULAR DRAINAGE SYSTEM
The Peninsular drainage system is older than
the Himalayan one. This is evident from the
broad, largely-graded shallow valleys, and the
DRAINAGE SYSTEM
maturity of the rivers. The Western Ghats
running close to the western coast act as the
water divide between the major Peninsular
rivers, discharging their water in the Bay of
Bengal and as small rivulets joining the
Arabian Sea. Most of the major Peninsular
rivers except Narmada and Tapi flow from west
to east. The Chambal, the Sind, the Betwa, the
Ken, the Son, originating in the northern part
of the Peninsula belong to the Ganga river
system. The other major river systems of the
Peninsular drainage are – the Mahanadi the
Godavari, the Krishna and the Kaveri.
Peninsular rivers are characterised by fixed
course, absence of meanders and non-
perennial flow of water. The Narmada and the
Tapi which flow through the rift valley are,
however, exceptions.
The Evolution of Peninsular Drainage
System
Three major geological events in the distant
past have shaped the present drainage
systems of Peninsular India:  (i) Subsidence
of the western flank of the Peninsula leading
to its submergence below the sea during the
early tertiary period. Generally, it has
disturbed the symmetrical plan of the river
on either side of the original watershed.
(ii) Upheaval of the Himalayas when the
northern flank of the Peninsular block was
subjected to subsidence and the consequent
trough faulting. The Narmada and The Tapi
flow in trough faults and fill the original
cracks with their detritus materials. Hence,
there is a lack of alluvial and deltaic deposits
in these rivers. (iii) Slight tilting of the
Peninsular block from northwest to the
southeastern direction gave orientation to the
entire drainage system towards the Bay of
Bengal during the same period.
River Systems of the Peninsular Drainage
There are a large number of river systems in
the Peninsular drainage. A brief account of the
major Peninsular river systems is given below:
The Mahanadi rises near Sihawa in Raipur
district of Chhattisgarh and runs through
Orissa to discharge its water into the Bay of
Bengal. It is 851 km long and its catchment area
spreads over 1.42 lakh sq. km. Some
navigation is carried on in the lower course of
this river. Fifty three per cent of the drainage
basin of this river lies in Madhya Pradesh and
Chhattisgarh, while 47 per cent lies in Orissa.
The Godavari is the largest Peninsular river
system. It is also called the Dakshin Ganga. It
rises in the Nasik district of Maharashtra and
discharges its water into the Bay of Bengal. Its
tributaries run through the states of
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Orissa and Andhra Pradesh. It is 1,465 km
long with a catchment area spreading over 3.13
lakh sq. km 49 per cent of this, lies in
Maharashtra, 20 per cent in Madhya Pradesh
and Chhattisgarh, and the rest in Andhra
Pradesh. The Penganga, the Indravati, the
Pranhita, and the Manjra are its principal
tributaries. The Godavari is subjected to heavy
floods in its lower reaches to the south of
Polavaram, where it forms a picturesque gorge.
It is navigable only in the deltaic stretch. The
river after Rajamundri splits into several
branches forming a large delta.
The Krishna is the second largest east-
flowing Peninsular river which rises near
Mahabaleshwar in Sahyadri.  Its total length is
1,401 km.  The Koyna, the Tungbhadra and
the Bhima are its major tributaries. Of the total
catchment area of the Krishna, 27 per cent lies
in Maharashtra, 44 per cent in Karnataka and
29 per cent in Andhra Pradesh.
The Kaveri  rises in Brahmagiri hills
(1,341m) of Kogadu district in Karnataka.  Its
length is 800 km and it drains an area of
81,155 sq. km.  Since the upper catchment
area receives rainfall during the southwest
monsoon season (summer) and the lower part
during the northeast monsoon season (winter),
the river carries water throughout the year with
comparatively less fluctuation than the other
Peninsular rivers.   About 3 per cent of the Kaveri
basin falls in Kerala, 41 per cent in Karnataka
and 56 per cent in Tamil Nadu. Its important
tributaries are the Kabini,  the Bhavani and the
Amravati.
The Narmada originates on the western flank
of the Amarkantak plateau at a height of about
1,057 m.  Flowing in a rift valley between the
Satpura in the south and the Vindhyan range
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Find out the name of the river on which
the Gersoppa (Jog) fall is found.
Goa has two important rivers which can be
mentioned here.  One is Mandovi and the other
is Juari.  You can locate them on the map.
Kerala has a narrow coastline. The longest
river of Kerala, Bharathapuzha rises near
Annamalai hills. It is also known as Ponnani.
It drains an area of 5,397 sq. km. Compare its
catchment area with that of the Sharavati river
of Karnataka.
The Periyar is the second largest river of
Kerala.  Its catchment area is 5,243 sq. km.
You can see that there is a marginal difference
in the catchment area of the Bhartapuzha and
the Periyar rivers.
Another river of Kerala worth mentioning is
the Pamba river which falls in the Vemobanad
lake after traversing a course of 177 km.
Teachers may explain the comparative
importance of west flowing small rivers
River
Catchment area
sq. km
Sabarmati
21,674
34,842
Dhandhar
2,770
Kalinadi
5,179
Sharavati
2,029
Bharathapuzha
5,397
Periyar
5,243
Small Rivers Flowing towards the East
There are a large number of rivers flowing
towards the east along with their tributaries.
Can you name some of these rivers?  There are
small rivers which join the Bay of Bengal,
though small, these are important in their own
right. The Subarnrekha, the Baitarni, the
Brahmani, the Vamsadhara, the Penner, the
Palar and the Vaigai are important rivers. Find
out these rivers from the atlas.
Teachers may explain the comparative
importance of east flowing small rivers
River
Catchment area
sq. km
Subarnarekha
19,296
Baitarni
12,789
Brahmani
39,033
Penner
55,213
Palar
17,870
in the north, it forms a picturesque gorge in
marble rocks and Dhuandhar waterfall near
Jabalpur.  After flowing a distance of about
1,312 km, it meets the Arabian sea south of
Bharuch, forming a broad 27 km long estuary.
Its catchment area is about 98,796 sq. km. The
Sardar Sarovar Project has been constructed
on this river.
The Tapi is the other important westward
flowing river. It originates from Multai in the Betul
district of Madhya Pradesh. It is 724 km long
and drains an area of 65,145 sq. km. Nearly 79
per cent of its basin lies in Maharashtra, 15 per
cent in Madhya Pradesh and the remaining
6 per cent in Gujarat.
Luni is the largest river system of
Rajasthan, west of Aravali. It originates near
Pushkar in two branches, i.e. the Saraswati
and the Sabarmati, which join with each other
at Govindgarh. From here, the  river comes out
of Aravali and is known as Luni. It flows
towards the west till Telwara and then takes a
southwest direction to join the Rann of
Kuchchh. The entire river system is ephemeral.
Smaller Rivers Flowing Towards the West
The rivers flowing towards the Arabian sea
have short courses.  Why do they have short
courses?  Find out the smaller rivers of
Gujarat.  The Shetruniji is one such river
which rises near Dalkahwa in Amreli district.
The Bhadra originates near Aniali village in
Rajkot district. The Dhadhar rises near
Ghantar village in Panchmahal district.
Sabarmati and Mahi are the two famous rivers
of Gujarat.
Find out the places of confluence of these
rivers. Find out some important west
flowing rivers of Maharashtra.
The Vaitarna rises from the Trimbak hills
in Nasik district at an elevation of 670 m. The
Kalinadi rises from Belgaum district and falls
in the Karwar Bay.  The source of Bedti river
lies in Hubli Dharwar and traverses a course
of 161 km. The Sharavati is another important
river in Karnataka flowing towards the west.
The Sharavati originates in Shimoga district
of Karnataka and drains a catchment area of
2,209 sq. km.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM
RIVER REGIMES
Do you know that the quantity of water
flowing in a river channel is not the same
throughout the year?  It varies from season
to season.  In which season do you expect the
maximum flow in Ganga and Kaveri?  The
pattern of flow of water in a river channel over
a year is known as its regime. The north Indian
rivers originating from the Himalayas are
perennial as they are fed by glaciers through
snow melt and also receive rainfall water during
rainy season. The rivers of South India do not
originate from glaciers and their flow pattern
witnesses fluctuations. The flow increases
considerably during monsoon rains. Thus, the
regime of the rivers of South India is controlled
by rainfall which also varies from one part of
the Peninsular plateau to the other.
The discharge is the volume of water flowing
in a river measured over time. It is measured
either in cusecs (cubic feet per second) or
cumecs (cubic metres per second).
The Ganga has its minimum flow during
the January-June period. The maximum flow
is attained either in August or in September.
After September, there is a steady fall in the
flow. The river, thus, has a monsoon regime
during the rainy season.
There are striking differences in the river
regimes in the eastern and the western parts
of the Ganga Basin. The Ganga maintains a
sizeable flow in the early part of summer due
to snow melt before the monsoon rains begin.
The mean maximum discharge of the Ganga
at Farakka is about 55,000 cusecs while the
mean minimum is only 1,300 cusecs. What
factors are responsible for such a large
difference?
The two Peninsular rivers display
interesting differences in their regimes
compared to the Himalayan rivers. The
Narmada has a very low volume of discharge
from January to July but it suddenly rises in
August when the maximum flow is attained.
The fall in October is as spectacular as the rise
in August. The flow of water in the Narmada,
as recorded at Garudeshwar, shows that the
maximum flow is of the order of 2,300 cusecs,
while the minimum flow is only 15 cusecs.  The
Godavari has the minimum discharge in May,
and the maximum in July-August. After
August, there is a sharp fall in water flow
although the volume of flow in October and
November is higher than that in any of the
months from January to May. The mean
maximum discharge of the Godavari at
Polavaram is 3,200 cusecs while the mean
minimum flow is only 50 cusecs. These figures
give an idea of the regime of the river.
EXTENT OF USABILITY OF RIVER WATER
The rivers of India carry huge volumes of water
Table 3.1 : Comparison between the Himalayan and the Peninsular River
Sl. No.
Aspects
Himalayan River
Peninsular River
Place of origin
Peninsular plateau and central highland
Nature of flow
Seasonal; dependent on monsoon
rainfall
Type of drainage
Super imposed, rejuvenated resulting
in trellis, radial and rectangular
patterns
Nature of river
Smaller, fixed course with well-adjusted
valleys
Catchment area
Relatively smaller basin
Age of the river
Old rivers with graded profile, and have
almost reached their base levels
Himalayan mountain covered with
glaciers
Perennial; receive water from glacier
and rainfall
Antecedent and consequent leading to
dendritic pattern in plains
Long course, flowing through the
rugged mountains experiencing
headward erosion and  river capturing;
In plains meandering and shifting of
course
Very large basins
Young and youthful, active and
deepening in the valleys
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
per year but it is unevenly distributed both in
time and space. There are perennial rivers
carrying water throughout the year while the
non-perennial rivers have very little water during
the dry season. During the rainy season, much
of the water is wasted in floods and flows down
to the sea. Similarly, when there is a flood in one
part of the country, the other area suffers from
drought. Why does this happen?  Is it the
problem of availability of water resource or that
of its management? Can you suggest some
measures to mitigate the problems of floods and
droughts simultaneously occuring in different
parts of the country? (See  Chapter 7 of the book).
Can these problems be solved or minimised
by trasfering the surplus water from one basin
to the water deficit basins?  Do we have some
schemes  of inter-basin linkage?
Teachers may explain the following
examples
Periyar Diversion Scheme
Indira Gandhi Canal Project
Kurnool-Cuddapah Canal
Beas-Satluj Link Canal
Ganga-Kaveri Link Canal
Have you read in the newspapers about the
linking of rivers? Do you think that digging a
canal is enough to transfer water from the Ganga
basin to the Peninsular river? What is the major
problem? Consult  Chapter 2 of this book and
find out the difficulties posed by the
unevenness of the terrain. How can the water
be lifted from the plain area to the plateau area?
Is there sufficient surplus water in the north
Indian rivers which can be transferred on a
regular basis? Organise a debate on the whole
issue and prepare a write up. How do you rank
the following problems in using river water?
(i) No availability in sufficient quantity
(ii) River water pollution
(iii) Load of silt in the river water
(iv) Uneven seasonal flow of water
(v) River water disputes between states
(vi) Shrinking of channels due to the extension
of settlements towards the thalweg.
Why are the rivers polluted? Have you seen
the dirty waters of cities entering into the
rivers?  Where do the industrial affluents and
wastes get disposed of ? Most of the cremation
grounds are on the banks of rivers and the
dead bodies are sometimes thrown in the
rivers.  On the occasion of some festivals, the
flowers and statues are immersed in the rivers.
Large scale bathing and washing of clothes
also pollute river waters.  How can the rivers
be made pollution free? Have you read about
Ganga Action Plan, or about a campaign for
cleaning the Yamuna at Delhi? Collect
materials on schemes for making rivers
pollution free and organise the materials in a
write up.
Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i) Which one of the following rivers was known as the ‘Sorrow of Bengal’?
(a) The Gandak
(c) The Kosi
(b) The Son
(d) The Damodar
(ii) Which one of the following rivers has the largest river basin in India?
(a) The Indus
(c) The Ganga
(b) The Brahmaputra
(d) The Krishna
(iii) Which one of the following rivers is not included in ‘Panchnad’?
(a) The Ravi
(c) The Indus
(b) The Chenab
(d) The Jhelum
(iv) Which one of the following rivers flows in a rift valley?
(a) The Son
(c) The Yamuna
(b) The Narmada
(d) The Luni
EXERCISES
DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Which one of the following is the place of confluence of the Alkananda and the
Bhagirathi?
(a) Vishnu Prayag
(c) Karan Prayag
(b) Rudra Prayag
(d) Deva Prayag
State the differences between the following.
(i) River Basin and Watershed
(ii) Dendritic and Trellis drainage pattern
(iii) Radial and Centripetal drainage pattern
(iv) Delta and Estuary
Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
What are the socio-economic advantages of inter-linking of rivers in India?
Write three characterstics of the Peninsular river.
Answer the following questions in not more than 125 words.
What are the important characteristic features of north Indian rivers? How are
these different from Peninsular rivers?
Suppose you are travelling from Hardwar to Siliguri along the foothills of the
Himalayas. Name the important rivers you will come across. Describe the
characteristics of any one of them.
Project/Activity
Study the Appendix III and answer the following questions.
Which river has the largest proportion of catchment area in the country?
Make a comparative bar diagram on a graph paper to show the length of the
courses of the rivers.
CLIMATE, VEGETATION AND SOIL
This unit deals with
Weather and climate – spatial and temporal distribution of temperature,
pressure, winds and rainfall; Indian monsoons: mechanism, onset and
variability – spatial and temporal; climatic types
Natural vegetation – forest types and distribution; wild life
conservation; biosphere reserves
Soils – major types and their distribution, soil degradation and
conservation
e drink more water during summers.
Your uniform during the summer is
different from the winters.  Why do
you wear lighter clothes during summers and
heavy woollen clothes during winters in north
India?  In southern India, woollen clothes are
not required. In northeastern states, winters
are mild except in the hills. There are variations
in weather conditions during different seasons.
These changes occur due to the changes in the
elements of weather (temperature, pressure,
wind direction and velocity, humidity and
precipitation, etc.).
Weather is the momentary state of the
atmosphere while climate refers to the
average of the weather conditions over a
longer period of time. Weather changes
quickly, may be within a day or week but
climate changes imperceptively and may
be noted after 50 years or even more.
You have already studied about the
monsoon in your earlier classes.  You are also
aware of the meaning of the word, “monsoon”.
Monsoon connotes the climate associated with
seasonal reversal in the direction of winds.
India has hot monsoonal climate which is the
prevalent climate in south and southeast Asia.
UNITY AND DIVERSITY IN THE MONSOON CLIMATE
The monsoon regime emphasises the unity of
India with the rest of southeast Asian region.
This view of broad unity of the monsoon type
of climate should not, however, lead one to
ignore its regional variations which differentiate
the weather and climate of different regions of
India. For example, the climate of Kerala and
Tamil Nadu in the south are so different from
that of  Uttar Pradesh and Bihar in the north,
and yet all of these have a monsoon type of
climate. The climate of India has many regional
variations expressed in the pattern of winds,
temperature and rainfall, rhythm of seasons
and the degree of wetness or dryness. These
regional diversities may be described as
sub-types of monsoon climate. Let us take a
closer look at these regional variations in
temperature, winds and rainfall.
While in the summer the mercury
occasionally touches 55°C in the western
Rajasthan, it drops down to as low as minus
45°C in winter around Leh. Churu in Rajasthan
may record a temperature of 50°C or more on a
June day while the mercury hardly touches
19°C in Tawang (Arunachal Pradesh) on the
same day. On a December night, temperature
in Drass (Jammu and Kashmir) may drop down
to minus 45°C while Tiruvanantapuram or
Chennai on the same night records 20°C or
22°C. These examples confirm that there are
seasonal variations in temperature from place
to place and from region to region in India. Not
only this, if we take only a single place and
record the temperature for just one day,
variations are no less striking. In Kerala and in
the Andaman Islands, the difference between
day and night temperatures may be hardly
seven or eight degree Celsius. But in the Thar
desert, if the day temperature is around 50°C,
at night, it may drop down considerably upto
15°-20°C.
CLIMATE
C H A P T E R
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Now, let us see the regional variations in
precipitation. While snowfall occurs in the
Himalayas, it only rains over the rest of the
country. Similarly, variations are noticeable not
only in the type of precipitation but also in its
amount. While Cherrapunji and Mawsynram
in the Khasi Hills of Meghalaya receive rainfall
over 1,080 cm in a year, Jaisalmer in Rajasthan
rarely gets more than 9 cm of rainfall during
the same period.
Tura situated in the Garo Hills of
Meghalaya may receive an amount of rainfall
in a single day which is equal to 10 years of
rainfall at Jaisalmer.  While the annual
precipitation is less than 10 cm in the north-
west Himalayas and the western deserts, it
exceeds 400 cm in Meghalaya.
The Ganga delta and the coastal plains of
Orissa are hit by strong rain-bearing storms
almost every third or fifth day in July and
August while the Coromandal coast, a
thousand km to the south, goes generally dry
during these months. Most parts of the country
get rainfall during June-September, but on the
coastal areas of Tamil Nadu, it rains in the
beginning of the winter season.
In spite of these differences and variations,
the climate of India is monsoonal in rhythm
and character.
FACTORS DETERMINING THE CLIMATE OF INDIA
India’s climate is controlled by a number of
factors which can be broadly divided into two
groups — factors related to location and relief,
and factors related to air pressure and winds.
Factors related to Location and Relief
Latitude : You already know the latitudinal and
longitudinal extent of the land of India.  You
also know that the Tropic of  Cancer passes
through the central part of India in east-west
direction. Thus, northern part of the India lies
in sub-tropical and temperate zone and the
part lying south of the Tropic of Cancer falls in
the tropical zone.  The tropical zone being
nearer to the equator, experiences high
temperatures throughout the year with small
daily and annual range.  Area north of the
Tropic of Cancer being away from the equator,
experiences extreme climate with high daily
and annual range of temperature.
The Himalayan Mountains : The lofty Himalayas
in the north along with its extensions act as an
effective climatic divide. The towering mountain
chain provides an invincible shield to protect
the subcontinent from the cold northern winds.
These cold and chilly winds originate near the
Arctic circle and blow across central and eastern
Asia. The Himalayas also trap the monsoon
winds, forcing them to shed their moisture
within the subcontinent.
Distribution of Land and Water : India is
flanked by the Indian Ocean on three sides in
the south and girdled by a high and
continuous mountain-wall in the north. As
compared to the landmass, water heats up or
cools down slowly. This differential heating of
land and sea creates different air pressure
zones in different seasons in and around the
Indian subcontinent. Difference in air pressure
causes reversal in the direction of monsoon
winds.
Distance from the Sea : With a long coastline,
large coastal areas have an equable climate.
Areas in the interior of India are far away from
the moderating influence of  the sea. Such
areas have extremes of climate. That is why,
the people of Mumbai and the Konkan coast
have hardly any idea of extremes of
temperature and the seasonal rhythm of
weather. On the other hand, the seasonal
contrasts in weather at places in the interior of
the country such as Delhi, Kanpur and
Amritsar affect the entire sphere of life.
Altitude : Temperature decreases with height.
Due to thin air, places in the mountains are
cooler than places on the plains. For example,
Agra and Darjiling are located on the same
latitude, but temperature of January in Agra
is 16°C whereas it is only 4°C in Darjiling.
Relief :  The physiography or relief of India also
affects the temperature, air pressure, direction
and speed of wind and the amount and
distribution of rainfall. The windward sides of
Western Ghats and Assam receive high rainfall
CLIMATE
during June-September whereas the southern
plateau remains dry due to its leeward
situation along the Western Ghats.
Factors Related to Air Pressure and Wind
To understand the differences in local climates
of India, we need to understand the
mechanism of the following three factors:
Distribution of air pressure and winds
on the surface of the earth.
Upper air circulation caused by factors
controlling global weather and the inflow
of different air masses and jet streams.
(iii)
Inflow of western cyclones generally
known as disturbances during the winter
season and tropical depressions during
the south-west monsoon period into
India, creating weather conditions
favourable to rainfall.
The mechanism of these three factors can
be understood with reference to winter and
summer seasons of the year separately.
Mechanism of Weather in the Winter Season
Surface Pressure and Winds : In winter
months, the weather conditions over India are
generally influenced by the distribution of
pressure in Central and Western Asia. A high
pressure centre in the region lying to the north
of the Himalayas develops during winter. This
centre of high pressure gives rise to the flow of
air at the low level from the north towards the
Indian subcontinent, south of the mountain
range. The surface winds blowing out of the high
pressure centre over Central Asia reach India
in the form of a dry continental air mass. These
continental winds come in contact with trade
winds over northwestern India. The position of
this contact zone is not, however, stable.
Occasionally, it may shift its position as far east
as the middle  Ganga valley with the result that
the  whole of the northwestern and northern
India up to the middle Ganga valley comes
under the influence of dry northwestern winds.
Jet Stream and Upper Air Circulation : The
pattern of air circulation discussed above is
witnessed only at the lower level of the
atmosphere near the surface of the earth. Higher
up in the lower troposphere, about three km
above the surface of the earth, a different pattern
of air circulation is observed. The variations in
the atmospheric pressure closer to the surface
of the earth have no role to play in the making of
upper air circulation. All of  Western and Central
Asia remains under the influence of westerly
winds along the altitude of 9-13 km from west
to east. These winds blow across the Asian
continent at latitudes north of the Himalayas
roughly parallel  to the Tibetan highlands
(Figure 4.1). These are known as jet streams.
Tibetan highlands act as a barrier in the path of
these jet streams.  As a result, jet streams get
bifurcated. One of its branches blows to the north
of the Tibetan highlands, while the  southern
branch blows in an eastward direction, south of
the Himalayas. It has its mean position at 25°N
in February at 200-300 mb level. It is believed
that this southern branch of the jet stream
exercises an important influence on the winter
weather in India.
Western Cyclonic Disturbance and Tropical
Cyclones : The western cyclonic disturbances
which enter the Indian subcontinent from the west
and the northwest during the winter months,
originate over the Mediterranean Sea and are
Figure 4.1 : Direction of Winds in India  in
Winter at the Height of 9-13 km
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
brought into India by the westerly jet stream. An
increase in the prevailing night temperature
generally indicates an advance in the arrival of these
cyclones disturbances.
Tropical cyclones originate over the Bay of
Bengal and the Indian ocean. These tropical
cyclones have very high wind velocity and heavy
rainfall and hit the Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh
and Orissa coast.  Most of these cyclones are very
destructive due to high wind velocity and torrential
rain that accompanies it.  Have you seen their
movement in the weather report in the television?
Mechanism of Weather in the Summer Season
Surface Pressure and Winds : As the summer
sets in and the sun shifts northwards, the wind
circulation over the subcontinent undergoes
a complete reversal at  both, the lower as well
as the upper levels. By the middle of July, the
low pressure belt nearer the surface [termed
as Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)]
shifts northwards, roughly parallel to the
Himalayas between 20° N and 25° N. By this
time, the westerly jet stream withdraws from
the Indian region. In fact, meteorologists have
found an interrelationship between the
northward shift of the equatorial trough (ITCZ)
and the withdrawal of the westerly jet stream
from over the North Indian Plain. It is generally
believed that there is a cause and effect
relationship between the two. The ITCZ being
a zone of low pressure, attracts inflow of winds
from different directions. The maritime tropical
airmass (mT) from the southern hemisphere,
after crossing the equator, rushes to the low
pressure area in the general southwesterly
direction. It is this moist air current which is
popularly known as the southwest monsoon.
Jet Streams and Upper Air Circulation :  The
pattern of pressure and winds as mentioned
above is formed only at the level of the
troposphere. An easterly jet stream flows over
Figure 4.2 : Summer Monsoon Winds : Surface Circulation
CLIMATE
the southern part of the Peninsula in June, and
has a maximum speed of 90 km per hour
(Figure 4.3). In August, it is confined to 15oN
latitude, and in September up to 22o N latitudes.
The easterlies normally do not extend to the north
of 30o N latitude in the upper atmosphere.
Easterly Jet Stream and Tropical Cyclones : The
easterly jet stream steers the tropical
depressions into India.  These depressions play
a significant role in the distribution of monsoon
rainfall over the Indian subcontinent.  The
tracks of these depressions are the areas of
highest rainfall in India. The frequency at which
these depressions visit India, their direction
and intensity, all go a long way in determining
the rainfall pattern during the southwest
monsoon period.
Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)
The Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) is a low pressure zone located at the equator
where trade winds converge, and so, it is a zone where air tends to ascend.  In July, the
ITCZ is located around 20°N-25°N latitudes (over the Gangetic plain), sometimes called
the monsoon trough.  This monsoon trough encourages the development of thermal low
over north and northwest India.  Due to the shift of ITCZ, the trade winds of the southern
hemisphere cross the equator between 40° and 60°E longitudes and start blowing from
southwest to northeast due to the Coriolis force.  It becomes southwest monsoon. In winter,
the ITCZ moves southward, and so the reversal of winds from northeast to south and
southwest, takes place. They are called northeast monsoons.
THE NATURE OF INDIAN MONSOON
Monsoon is a familiar though a little known
climatic phenomenon. Despite the observations
spread over centuries, the monsoon continues
to puzzle the scientists. Many attempts have
been made to discover the exact nature and
causation of monsoon, but so far, no single
theory has been able to explain the monsoon
fully.  A real breakthrough has come recently
when it was studied at the global rather than
at regional level.
Systematic studies of the causes of rainfall
in the South Asian region help to understand
the causes and salient features of the monsoon,
particularly some of its important aspects,
such as:
(i) The onset of the monsoon.
(ii) Rain-bearing systems (e.g. tropical
cyclones) and the relationship between
their frequency and distribution of
monsoon rainfall.
(iii) Break in the monsoon.
Onset of the Monsoon
Towards the end of the nineteenth century, it
was believed that the differential heating of
land and sea during the summer months is
the mechanism which sets the stage for the
monsoon winds to drift towards the
subcontinent.  During April and May when the
sun shines vertically over the Tropic of Cancer,
the large landmass in the north  of Indian ocean
gets intensely heated. This causes the
formation of an intense low pressure in the
northwestern part of the subcontinent. Since
the pressure in the Indian Ocean in the south
of the landmass is high as water gets heated
Figure 4.3 : The Direction of Winds at 13 km
Altitude in Summer Season
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
The shift in the position of the ITCZ is also
related to the phenomenon of the withdrawal
of the westerly jet stream from its position over
the north Indian plain, south of the Himalayas.
The easterly jet stream sets in along 15°N
latitude only after the western jet stream has
withdrawn itself from the region.  This easterly
jet stream is held responsible for the burst of
the monsoon in India.
Entry of Monsoon into India : The southwest
monsoon sets in over the Kerala coast by 1st
June and moves swiftly to reach Mumbai and
Kolkata between 10th and 13th June.  By mid-
July, southwest monsoon engulfs the entire
subcontinent (Figure 4.5)
Rain-bearing Systems and Rainfall
Distribution
There seem to be two  rain-bearing systems in
India. First originate in the Bay of Bengal
causing rainfall over the plains of north India.
Second is the Arabian Sea current of the south-
west monsoon which brings rain to the west
coast of India. Much of the rainfall along the
Western Ghats is orographic as the moist air is
obstructed and forced to rise along the Ghats.
The intensity of rainfall over the west coast of
India is, however, related to two factors:
(i) The offshore meteorological conditions.
(ii) The position of the equatorial jet stream
along the eastern coast of Africa.
EI-Nino and the Indian Monsoon
EI-Nino is a complex weather system that appears once every three to seven years, bringing
drought, floods and other weather extremes to different parts of the world.
The system involves oceanic and atmospheric phenomena with the appearance of warm
currents off the coast of Peru in the Eastern Pacific and affects weather in many places including
India. EI-Nino is merely an extension of the warm equatorial current which gets replaced temporarily
by cold Peruvian current or Humbolt current (locate these currents in your atlas).  This current
increases the temperature of water on the Peruvian coast by 10°C.  This results in:
(i) the distortion of equatorial atmospheric circulation;
(ii) irregularities in the evaporation of sea water;
(iii) reduction in the amount of planktons which further reduces the number of fish in the sea.
The word EI-Nino means ‘Child Christ’ because this current appears around Christmas
in December.  December is a summer month in Peru (Southern Hemisphere).
EI-Nino is used in India for forecasting long range monsoon rainfall.  In 1990-91, there
was a wild EI-Nino event and the onset of southwest monsoon was delayed over most parts of
the country ranging from five to twelve days.
Figure 4.4 : Onset of Monsoon
slowly, the low pressure cell attracts the
southeast trades across the Equator.  These
conditions help in the northward shift in the
position of the ITCZ.  The southwest monsoon
may thus, be seen as a continuation of the
southeast trades deflected towards the Indian
subcontinent after crossing the Equator. These
winds cross the Equator between 40°E and
60°E longitudes.
CLIMATE
Figure 4.5 : India : Normal Dates of Onset of the Southwest Monsoon
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
The frequency of the tropical depressions
originating from the Bay of Bengal varies from
year to year.  Their paths over India are mainly
determined by the position of ITCZ which is
generally termed as the monsoon trough.  As
the axis of the monsoon trough oscillates, there
are  fluctuations in the track and direction of
these depressions, and the intensity and the
amount of rainfall vary from year to year.  The
rain which comes in spells, displays a declining
trend from west to east over the west coast, and
from the southeast towards the northwest over
the North Indian Plain and the northern part
of the Peninsula.
Break in the Monsoon
During the south-west monsoon period after
having rains for a few days, if rain fails to occur
for one or more weeks, it is known as break in
the monsoon.  These dry spells are quite
common during the rainy season. These
breaks in the different regions are due to
different reasons:
In northern India rains are likely to fail if
the rain-bearing storms are not very
frequent  along the monsoon trough or
the ITCZ over this region.
Over the west coast the dry spells are
associated with days when winds blow
parallel to the coast.
THE RHYTHM OF SEASONS
The climatic conditions of India can best be
described in terms of an annual cycle of
seasons. The meteorologists recognise the
following four seasons :
(i) the cold weather season
(ii) the hot weather season
(iii) the southwest monsoon season
(iv) the retreating monsoon season.
The Cold Weather Season
Temperature : Usually, the cold weather
season sets in by mid-November in northern
India.  December and January are the coldest
months in the northern plain. The mean daily
temperature remains below 21°C over most
parts of northern India.  The night temperature
may be quite low, sometimes going below
freezing point in Punjab and Rajasthan.
There are three main reasons for the excessive
cold in north India during this season :
(i) States like Punjab, Haryana and
Rajasthan being far away from the
moderating influence of sea experience
continental climate.
(ii) The snowfall in the nearby Himalayan
ranges creates cold wave situation; and
(iii) Around February, the cold winds coming
from the Caspian Sea and Turkmenistan
bring cold wave along with frost and fog
over the northwestern parts of India.
Understanding the Monsoon
Attempts
understand
nature
mechanism of the monsoon on the
basis of data collected on land, oceans
and in the upper atmosphere.  The
intensity of southwest monsoon winds
of southern oscillation can be
measured, among others, by measuring
the difference in pressure between
Tahiti (roughly 20°S and 140°W) in
French Polynesia in East Pacific and
port Darwin (12°30'S and 131°E) in
northern Australia. Indian  Meteorological
Department (IMD) can forecast the
possible behaviour of monsoons on the
basis of 16 indicators.
The Peninsular region of India, however,
does not have any well-defined cold weather
season. There is hardly any seasonal change
in the distribution pattern of the temperature
in coastal areas because of moderating
influence of the sea and the proximity to
equator. For example, the mean maximum
temperature for January at Thiruvanantapuram
is as high as 31°C, and for June, it is 29.5°C.
Temperatures at the hills of Western Ghats
remain comparatively low (Figure 4.6).
Pressure and Winds : By the end of December
(22nd December), the sun shines vertically
over the Tropic of Capricorn in the southern
hemisphere.  The weather in this season is
characterised by feeble high pressure
conditions over the northern plain.  In south
CLIMATE
Figure 4.6 : India : Mean Monthly Temperatures of the Day in January
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
India, the air pressure is slightly lower.  The
isobars of 1019 mb and 1013 mb pass
through northwest India and far south,
respectively (Figure 4.7).
As a result, winds start blowing from
northwestern high pressure zone to the low air
pressure zone over the Indian Ocean in the
south.
Due to low pressure gradient, the light
winds with a low velocity of about 3-5 km per
hour begin to blow outwards. By and large,
the topography of the region influences the
wind direction.  They are westerly or
northwesterly down the Ganga Valley. They
become northerly in the Ganga-Brahmaputra
delta.  Free from the influence of topography,
they are clearly northeasterly over the Bay of
Bengal.
During the winters, the weather in India
is pleasant. The pleasant weather conditions,
however, at intervals, get disturbed by shallow
cyclonic depressions originating over the east
Mediterranean Sea and travelling eastwards
across West Asia, Iran, Afghanistan and
Pakistan before they reach the northwestern
parts of India.  On their way, the moisture
content gets augmented from the Caspian Sea
in the north and the Persian Gulf in the south.
What is the role of Westerly Jet Streams in
steering these depressions in India?
Rainfall : Winter monsoons do not cause
rainfall as they move from land to the sea.  It is
because firstly, they have little humidity; and
secondly, due to anti cyclonic circulation on
land, the possibility of rainfall from them
reduces.  So, most parts of India do not have
rainfall in the winter season. However, there are
some exceptions to it:
In northwestern India, some weak
temperate
cyclones
Mediterranean sea cause rainfall in
Punjab, Haryana, Delhi and western
Uttar Pradesh.  Although the amount
is meagre, it is highly beneficial for
rabi crops. The precipitation is in the
form of snowfall in the lower
Himalayas.  It is this snow that
sustains the flow of water in the
Himalayan rivers during the summer
months. The precipitation goes on
decreasing from west to east in the
plains and from north to south in the
mountains. The average winter rainfall
in Delhi is around 53 mm. In Punjab
and Bihar, rainfall remains between 25
mm and 18 mm respectively.
Central parts of India and northern
parts of southern Peninsula also get
winter rainfall occasionally.
(iii) Arunachal Pradesh and Assam in the
northeastern parts of India also have
rains between 25 mm and 50 mm
during these winter months.
(iv) During October and November,
northeast monsoon while crossing over
the Bay of Bengal, picks up moisture
and causes torrential rainfall over the
Tamil Nadu coast,  southern Andhra
Pradesh, southeast Karnataka and
southeast Kerala.
The Hot Weather Season
Temperature: With the apparent northward
movement of the sun towards the Tropic of
Cancer in March, temperatures start rising
in north India.  April, May and June are the
months of summer in north India. In most
parts of India, temperatures recorded are
between 30°-32°C. In March, the highest day
temperature of about 38°C occurs in the
Deccan Plateau while in April, temperature
ranging between 38°C and 43°C are found
in Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh.  In May,
the heat belt moves further north, and in the
north-western part of India, temperatures
around 48°C are not uncommon (Figure 4.8).
The hot weather season in south India is
mild and not so intense as found in north
India.  The Peninsular situation of south
India with moderating effect of the oceans
keeps the temperatures lower than that
prevailing in north India.  So, temperatures
remain between 26°C and 32°C. Due to
altitude, the temperatures in the hills of
Western Ghats remain below 25°C.  In the
coastal regions, the north-south extent of
CLIMATE
Figure 4.7 : India : Pressure and Surface Winds (January)
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 4.8 : India : Mean Monthly Temperature of the Day in July
CLIMATE
isotherms parallel to the coast confirms that
temperature does not decrease from north
to south rather it increases from the coast
to the interior. The mean daily minimum
temperature during the summer months
also remains quite high and rarely goes
below 26°C.
Pressure and Winds : The summer months
are a period of excessive heat and falling air
pressure in the northern half of the country.
Because of the heating of the subcontinent,
the ITCZ moves northwards occupying a
position centred at 25°N in July.  Roughly,
this elongated low pressure monsoon
trough extends over the Thar desert in the
north-west to Patna and Chotanagpur
plateau in the east-southeast (Figure 4.9).
The location of the ITCZ attracts a surface
circulation of the winds which are
southwesterly on the west coast as well as
along the coast of West Bengal and
Bangladesh.  They are easterly or south-
easterly over north Bengal and Bihar.  It has
been discussed earlier that these currents
of southwesterly monsoon are in reality
‘displaced’ equatorial westerlies. The influx
of these winds by mid-June brings about a
change in the weather towards the rainy
season.
In the heart of the ITCZ in the northwest,
the dry and hot winds known as ‘Loo’, blow
in the afternoon, and very often, they
continue  to well into midnight. Dust storms
in the evening are very common during May
in Punjab, Haryana, Eastern Rajasthan and
Uttar Pradesh. These temporary storms
bring a welcome respite from the oppressing
heat since they bring with them light rains
and a pleasant cool breeze. Occasionally, the
moisture-laden winds are attracted towards
the periphery of the trough. A sudden
contact between dry and moist air masses
gives rise to local storms of great intensity.
These local storms are associated with
violent winds, torrential rains and even
hailstorms.
Some Famous Local Storms of Hot
Weather Season
Mango Shower :  Towards the end of
summer, there are pre-monsoon
showers which are a common
phenomena in Kerala and coastal
areas of Karnataka.  Locally, they
are known as mango showers since
they help in the early ripening of
mangoes.
Blossom Shower : With this shower,
coffee flowers blossom in Kerala and
nearby areas.
(iii) Nor Westers : These are dreaded
evening thunderstorms in Bengal
and Assam.  Their notorious nature
can be understood from the local
nomenclature of ‘Kalbaisakhi’, a
calamity of the month of Baisakh.
These showers are useful for tea,
jute and rice cultivation.  In Assam,
these storms are known as “Bardoli
Chheerha”.
(iv) Loo : Hot, dry and oppressing winds
blowing in the Northern plains from
Punjab to Bihar with higher
intensity between Delhi and Patna.
THE SOUTHWEST MONSOON SEASON
As a result of rapid increase of temperature in
May over the northwestern plains, the low
pressure conditions over there get further
intensified. By early June, they are powerful
enough to attract the trade winds of Southern
Hemisphere coming from the Indian Ocean.
These southeast trade winds cross the equator
and enter the Bay of Bengal and the Arabian
Sea, only to be caught up in the air circulation
over India. Passing over the equatorial warm
currents, they bring with them moisture in
abundance. After crossing the equator, they
follow a southwesterly direction. That is why
they are known as southwest monsoons.
The rain in the southwest monsoon season
begins rather abruptly. One result of the first
rain is that it brings down the temperature
substantially. This sudden onset of the
moisture-laden winds associated with
violent thunder and lightening, is often
termed as the “break” or “burst” of the
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 4.9 : India : Pressure and Surface Winds (July)
CLIMATE
monsoons. The monsoon may burst in the
first week of June in the coastal areas of Kerala,
Karnataka, Goa and Maharashtra while in the
interior parts of the country, it may be delayed
to the first week of July. The day temperature
registers a decline of 5°C to 8°C between mid-
June and mid-July.
As these winds approach the land, their
southwesterly direction is modified by the relief
and thermal low pressure over the northwest
India. The monsoon approaches the landmass
in two branches:
(i) The Arabian Sea branch
(ii) The Bay of Bengal branch.
Monsoon Winds of the Arabian Sea
The monsoon winds originating over the
Arabian Sea further split into three branches:
Its one branch is obstructed by the
Western Ghats. These winds climb the
slopes of the Western Ghats from
900-1200 m. Soon, they become cool,
and as a result, the windward side of the
Sahyadris and Western Coastal Plain
receive very heavy rainfall ranging
between 250 cm and 400 cm. After
crossing the Western Ghats, these winds
descend and get heated up. This reduces
humidity in the winds. As a result, these
winds cause little rainfall east of the
Western Ghats. This region of low rainfall
is known as the rain-shadow area. Find
out the rainfall at Kozhikode, Mangalore,
Pune and Bangalore and note the
difference (Figure 4.10).
Another branch of the Arabian sea
monsoon strikes the coast north of
Mumbai. Moving along the Narmada and
Tapi river valleys, these winds cause
rainfall in extensive areas of central India.
The Chotanagpur plateau gets 15 cm
rainfall from this part of the branch.
Thereafter, they enter the Ganga plains
and mingle with the Bay of Bengal branch.
(iii) A third branch of this monsoon wind
strikes the Saurashtra Peninsula and the
Kachchh. It then passes over west
Rajasthan and along the Aravallis,
causing only a scanty rainfall. In Punjab
and Haryana, it too joins the Bay of
Bengal branch. These two branches,
reinforced by each other, cause rains in
the western Himalayas,
Monsoon Winds of the Bay of Bengal
The Bay of Bengal branch strikes the coast
of Myanmar and part of southeast
Bangladesh. But the Arakan Hills along the
coast of Myanmar deflect a big portion of this
branch towards the Indian subcontinent. The
monsoon, therefore, enters West Bengal and
Bangladesh from south and southeast
instead of from the south-westerly direction.
From here, this branch splits into two under
the influence of the Himalayas and the
thermal low is northwest India. Its one
branch moves westward along the Ganga
plains reaching as far as the Punjab plains.
The other branch moves up the Brahmaputra
valley in the north and the northeast, causing
widespread rains. Its sub-branch strikes the
Garo and Khasi hills of Meghalaya.
Mawsynram, located on the crest of Khasi
hills, receives the highest average annual
rainfall in the world.
Here it is important to know why the Tamil
Nadu coast remains dry during this season.
There are two factors responsible for it:
The Tamil Nadu coast is situated
parallel to the Bay of Bengal branch of
southwest monsoon.
It lies in the rainshadow area of the
Arabian Sea branch of the south-west
monsoon.
Characteristics of Monsoonal Rainfall
Rainfall  received from the southwest
monsoons is seasonal in character,
which occurs between June and
September.
Monsoonal rainfall is largely governed
by relief or topography. For instance
the windward side of the Western Ghats
register a rainfall of over 250 cm. Again,
the heavy rainfall in the northeastern
states can be attributed to their hill
ranges and the Eastern Himalayas.
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 4.10 : India : Seasonal Rainfall (June-September)
CLIMATE
(iii) The monsoon rainfall has a declining
trend with increasing distance from the
sea. Kolkata receives 119 cm during
the southwest monsoon period, Patna
105 cm, Allahabad 76 cm and Delhi
56 cm.
(iv) The monsoon rains occur in wet spells
of few days duration at a time. The wet
spells are interspersed with rainless
interval  known as ‘breaks’. These breaks
in rainfall are related to the cyclonic
depressions mainly formed at the head
of the Bay of Bengal, and their crossing
into the mainland. Besides the frequency
and intensity of these depressions, the
passage followed by them determines
the spatial distribution of rainfall.
(v) The summer rainfall comes in a heavy
downpour leading to considerable run
off and soil erosion.
(vi) Monsoons play a pivotal role in the
agrarian economy of India because over
three-fourths of the total rain in the
country is received during the south-
west monsoon season.
(vii) Its spatial distribution is also uneven
which ranges from 12 cm to more than
250 cm.
(viii) The beginning of the rains sometimes
is considerably delayed over the whole
or a part of the country.
(ix) The rains sometimes end considerably
earlier than usual, causing great
damage to standing crops and making
the sowing of winter crops difficult.
Season of Retreating Monsoon
The months of October and November are
known for retreating monsoons. By the end
of September, the southwest monsoon
becomes weak as the low pressure trough of
the Ganga plain starts moving southward in
response to the southward march of the sun.
The monsoon retreats from the western
Rajasthan by the first week of September. It
withdraws from Rajasthan, Gujarat, Western
Ganga plain and the Central Highlands by the
end of the month. By the beginning of October,
the low pressure covers northern parts of the
Bay of Bengal and by early November, it moves
over Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. By the
middle of December, the centre of low pressure
is completely removed from the Peninsula.
The retreating southwest monsoon season
is marked by clear skies and rise in
temperature. The land is still moist. Owing to
the conditions of high temperature and
humidity, the weather becomes rather
oppressive. This is commonly known as the
‘October heat’. In the second half of October,
the mercury begins to fall rapidly, particularly
in northern India. The weather in the
retreating monsoon is dry in north India but
it is associated with rain in the eastern part of
the Peninsula. Here, October and November
are the rainiest months of the year.
The widespread rain in this season is
associated with the passage of cyclonic
depressions which originate over the
Andaman Sea and manage to cross the
eastern coast of the southern Peninsula. These
tropical cyclones are very destructive. The
thickly populated deltas of the Godavari,
Krishna and Kaveri are their preferred targets.
Every year cyclones bring disaster here. A few
cyclonic storms also strike the coast of West
Bengal, Bangladesh and Myanmar. A bulk of
the rainfall of the Coromondal coast is derived
from these depressions and cyclones. Such
cyclonic storms are less frequent in the
Arabian Sea.
TRADITIONAL INDIAN SEASONS
In the Indian tradition, a year is divided into
six two-monthly seasons. This cycle of seasons,
which the common people in north and central
India follow is based on their practical
experience and age-old perception of weather
phenomena. However, this system does not
match with the seasons of south India where
there is little variation in the seasons.
Seasons
Months
Months
(According to the
(According to the
Indian Calendar)
Indian Calendar)
Vasanta
Chaitra-Vaisakha
March-April
Grishma
Jyaistha-Asadha
May-June
Varsha
Sravana-Bhadra
July-August
Sharada
Asvina-Kartika
September-October
Hemanta
Margashirsa-Pausa
November-December
Shishira
Magha-Phalguna
January-February
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Distribution of Rainfall
The average annual rainfall in India is about
125 cm, but it has great spatial variations
(Figure 4.11).
Areas of High Rainfall : The highest rainfall
occurs along the west coast, on the Western
Ghats, as well as in the sub-Himalayan areas
is the northeast and the hills of Meghalaya. Here
the rainfall exceeds 200 cm. In some parts of
Khasi and Jaintia hills, the rainfall exceeds
1,000 cm.  In the Brahmaputra valley and the
adjoining hills, the rainfall is less then 200 cm.
Areas of Medium Rainfall : Rainfall between
100-200 cm is received in the southern parts
of Gujarat, east Tamil Nadu, northeastern
Peninsula covering Orissa, Jharkhand, Bihar,
eastern Madhya Pradesh, northern Ganga plain
along the sub-Himalayas and the Cachar Valley
and Manipur.
Areas of Low Rainfall : Western Uttar Pradesh,
Delhi, Haryana, Punjab, Jammu and Kashmir,
eastern Rajasthan, Gujarat and Deccan Plateau
receive rainfall between 50-100 cm.
Areas of Inadequate Rainfall: Parts of the
Peninsula, especially in Andhra Pradesh,
Karnataka and Maharashtra, Ladakh and most
of western Rajasthan receive rainfall below 50 cm.
Snowfall is restricted to the Himalayan
region.
Identify the pattern of rainfall after
consulting the rainfall map.
Variability of Rainfall
A characteristic feature of rainfall in India is its
variability. The variability of rainfall is computed
with the help of the following formula:
Standard Deviation
where C.V. is the coefficient of variation.
The values of coefficient of variation show
the change from the mean values of rainfall. The
actual rainfall in some places deviates from
20-50 per cent. The values of coefficient of
variation show variability of rainfall in India. A
variability of less than 25 per cent exists on the
western coasts, Western Ghats, northeastern
Peninsula, eastern plains of the Ganga,
northeastern India, Uttaranchal and Himachal
Pradesh and south-western part of Jammu and
Kashmir. These areas have an annual rainfall
of over 100 cm. A variability of over 50 per cent
exists in the western part of Rajasthan, northern
part of Jammu and Kashmir and interior parts
of the Deccan plateau. These areas have an
annual rainfall of less than 50 cm. Rest of India
have a variability of 25-50 per cent and these
areas receive an annual rainfall between
50 -100 cm (Figure 4.12).
Climatic Regions of India
The whole of India has a monsoon type of
climate. But the combination of elements of the
weather, however, reveal many regional
variations. These variations represent the sub-
types of the monsoon climate. It is on this basis
that the climatic regions can be identified. A
climatic region has a homogeneous climatic
condition which is the result of a combination
of factors. Temperature and rainfall are two
important elements which are considered to be
decisive in all the schemes of climatic
classification. The classification of climate,
however, is a complex exercise. There are
different schemes of classification of climate.
Major climatic types of India based on
Koeppen’s scheme have been described below:
Koeppen based his scheme of Climatic
classification on monthly values of temperature
and precipitation. He identified five major
climatic types, namely:
Tropical climates, where mean monthly
temperature throughout the year is over
18°C.
Dry climates, where precipitation is very
low in comparison to temperature, and
hence, dry. If dryness is less, it is  semi-
arid (S); if it is more, the climate is arid(W).
(iii)
Warm temperate climates, where mean
temperature of the coldest month is
between 18°C and minus 3°C.
Cool temperate climates, where mean
temperature of the warmest month is over
10°C, and mean temperature of the
coldest month is under minus 3°C.
Ice climates, where mean temperature of
the warmest month is under 10°C.
CLIMATE
Figure 4.11 : India : Annual Rainfall
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 4.12 : India : Variability of Annual Rainfall
CLIMATE
Koeppen used letter symbols to denote
climatic types as given above. Each type is
further sub-divided into sub-types on the
basis of seasonal variations in the
distributional pattern of rainfall and
temperature. He used S for semi-arid and W
for arid and the following small letters to define
sub-types: f (sufficient precipitation), m (rain
forest despite a dry monsoon season), w (dry
season in winter), h (dry and hot), c (less than
four months with mean temperature over
10°C), and g (Gangetic plain). Accordingly,
India can be divided into eight climatic regions
(Table 4.1; Figure 4.13).
Monsoons and the Economic Life in India
(i) Monsoon is that axis around which
revolves the entire agricultural cycle of
India. It is because about 64 per cent
people of India depend on agriculture for
their livelihood and agriculture itself is
based on southwest monsoon.
(ii) Except Himalayas all the parts of the
country have temperature above the
threashold level to grow the crops or
plants throughout the year..
(iii) Regional variations in monsoon climate
help in growing various types of  crops.
(iv) Variability of rainfall brings droughts or
floods every year in some parts of the country.
(v) Agricultural prosperity of India depends
very much on timely and adequately
distributed rainfall. If it fails, agriculture
is adversely affected particularly in those
regions where means of irrigation are not
developed.
(vi) Sudden monsoon burst creates problem
of soil erosion over large areas in India.
(vii) Winter rainfall by temperate cyclones in
north India is highly beneficial for rabi crops.
(viii) Regional climatic variation in India is
reflected in the vast variety of food, clothes
and house types.
GLOBAL WARMING
You know that change is the law of nature.
Climate has also witnessed change in the past
at the global as well as at local levels.  It is
changing even now but the change is
imperceptible.  A number of geological
evidences suggest that once upon a time,
(see geological time scale in Chapter 2 of
Fundamentals of Physical Geography, NCERT,
2006) large part of the earth was under ice cover.
Now you might have read or heard the debate
on global warming. Besides the natural causes,
human activities such as large scale
industrialisation and presence of polluting gas
in the atmosphere are also important factors
responsible for global warming. You might have
heard about the “green house effect” while
discussing global warming.
The temperature of the world is
significantly increasing. Carbon dioxide
produced by human activities is a major
source of concern. This gas, released to the
atmosphere in large quantities by burning
of fossil fuel, is increasing gradually. Other
gases like methane, chlorofluorocarbons,
and nitrous oxide which are present in much
smaller concentrations in the atmosphere,
together with carbon dioxide are known as
green house gases.  These gases are better
absorbers of long wave radiations than carbon
Table 4.1 : Climatic Regions of India According to Koeppen’s Scheme
Type of Climate
Areas
Amw Monsoon with short dry season
West coast of India south of Goa
As – Monsoon with dry summer
Coromandel coast of Tamil Nadu
Aw – Tripical savannah
Most of the Peninsular plateaus, south of the Tropic of Cancer
Bwhw – Semi-arid steppe climate
North-western Gujarat, some parts of western Rajasthan and
Punjab
Bwhw – Hot desert
Extreme western Rajasthan
Cwg – Monsoon with dry winter
Ganga plain, eastern Rajasthan, northern Madhya Pradesh,
most of North-east India
Dfc – Cold humid winter with short summer
Arunachal Pradesh
E – Polar type
Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttaranchal
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 4.13 : India : Climatic Regions According to Koppen’s Scheme
CLIMATE
dioxide, and so, are more effective at
enhancing the green house effect.  These
gases have been contributing to global
warming. It is said that due to global warming
the polar ice caps and mountain glaciers
would melt and the amount of water in the
oceans would increase.
The mean annual surface temperature
of the earth in the past 150 years has
increased. It is projected that by the year
2,100, global temperature will warm about
2°C. This rise in temperature will
accompany many other changes: one of
these is a rise in sea level, as glacier and sea
ice melt in response to warming. According
to the current prediction, on an average, the
sea level will rise 48 cm by the end of twenty
first century. This would increase the
incidence of annual flooding. Climatic
change would promote insect-borne
diseases like malaria, and lead to shift in
climatic boundaries, making some regions
wetter and others drier. Agricultural pattern
would shift and human population as well
as the ecosystem would experience change.
What would happen to the Indian sea
coasts if the sea level rises 50 cm above the
present one?
Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
What causes rainfall on the coastal areas of Tamil Nadu in the beginning
of  winters?
South-West monsoon
North-Eastern monsoon
Temperate cyclones
Local air circulation
What is the proportion of area of India which receives annual rainfall less
than 75 cm?
Two-third
One-third
Three-fourth
(iii)
Which one of the following is not a fact regarding South India?
Diurnal range of temperature is less here.
Annual range of temperature is less here.
Temperatures here are high throughout the year.
Extreme climatic conditions are found here.
Which one of the following phenomenon happens when the sun shines
vertically over the Tropic of Capricorn in the southern hemisphere?
High pressure develops over North-western India due to low
temperatures.
Low pressure develops over North-western India due to high
temperatures.
No changes in temperature and pressure occur in north-western
India.
‘Loo’ blows in the North-western India.
In which of the following states in India do we find ‘As’ type of climate as
per Koeppen’s classification?
In Kerala and coastal Karnataka
In Andaman and Nicobar Islands
On Coromandal coast
In Assam and Arunachal Pradesh
EXERCISES
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
What are the three important factors which influence the mechanism of
Indian weather?
What is the Inter-Tropical Convergene Zone?
(iii)
What is meant by ‘bursting of monsoon’? Name the place of India which
gets the highest rainfall.
Define ‘climatic region’? What are the bases of Koeppen’s classification?
Which type(s) of cyclones cause rainfall in north-western India during
winter? Where do they originate?
Answer the following questions in not more than 125 words.
Notwithstanding the broad climatic unity, the climate of India has many
regional variations. Elaborate this statement giving suitable examples.
How many distinct seasons are found in India as per the Indian
Meteorological Department? Discuss the weather conditions associated
with any one season in detail.
Project/Activity
On the outline map of India, show the following:
Areas of winter rain
Wind direction during the summer season
(iii)
Areas having variability of rainfall over 50 per cent
Areas having less than 15°C temperature in January
Isohyte of 100 cm.
ave you ever been to a forest for a picnic?
You might have surely gone to a park if
you live in a city or to a mango, guava
or coconut orchard, if you live in a village. How
do you differentiate between the natural
vegetation and the planted vegetation? The same
variety may be found growing wild in the forest
under natural conditions and the same tree
may be the planted one in your garden under
human supervision.
Natural vegetation refers to a plant
community that has been left undisturbed over
a long time, so as to allow its individual species
to adjust themselves to climate and soil
conditions as fully as possible.
India is a land of great variety of natural
vegetation. Himalayan heights are marked with
temperate vegetation; the Western Ghats and
the Andaman Nicobar Islands have tropical
rain forests, the deltaic regions have tropical
forests and mangroves; the desert and semi
desert areas of Rajasthan are known for cactii,
a wide variety of bushes and thorny vegetation.
Depending upon the variations in the climate
and the soil, the vegetation of India changes
from one region to another.
On the basis of certain common features
such as predominant vegetation type and
climatic regions, Indian forests can be divided
into the following groups:
TYPES OF FORESTS
(i) Tropical Evergreen and Semi
Evergreen forests
(ii) Tropical Deciduous forests
(iii) Tropical Thorn forests
(iv) Montane forests
(v) Littoral and Swamp forests.
Tropical Evergreen and
Semi Evergreen Forests
These forests are found in the western slope
of the Western Ghats, hills of the northeastern
region and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
They are found in warm and humid areas with
an annual precipitation of over 200 cm and
mean annual temperature above 22oC.
Tropical evergreen forests are well stratified,
with layers closer to the ground and are
covered with shrubs and creepers, with short
structured trees followed by tall variety of trees.
In these forests, trees reach great heights up
to 60 m or above. There is no definite time for
trees to shed their leaves, flowering and
fruition. As such these forests appear green
all the year round. Species found in these
forests include rosewood, mahogony, aini,
ebony, etc.
The semi evergreen forests are found in the
less rainy parts of these regions. Such forests
have a mixture of evergreen and moist
deciduous trees. The undergrowing climbers
provide an evergreen character to these forests.
Main species are white cedar, hollock and kail.
NATURAL VEGETATION
C H A P T E R
Figure 5.1 : Evergreen Forest
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 5.2 : Natural Vegetation
NATURAL VEGETATION
The British were aware of the economic
value of the forests in India, hence, large scale
exploitation of these forests was started. The
structure of forests was also changed. The oak
forests in Garhwal and Kumaon were replaced
by pine (chirs) which was needed to lay railway
lines. Forests were also cleared for introducing
plantations of tea, rubber and coffee. The
British also used timber for construction
activities as it acts as an insulator of heat. The
protectional use of forests was, thus, replaced
by commercial use.
Tropical Deciduous Forests
These are the most widespread forests in India.
They are also called the monsoon forests. They
spread over regions which receive rainfall
between 70-200 cm. On the basis of the
availability of water, these forests are further
divided into moist and dry deciduous.
The Moist deciduous forests are more
pronounced in the regions which record rainfall
between 100-200 cm. These forests are found
in the northeastern states along the foothills of
Himalayas, eastern slopes of the Western Ghats
and Orissa. Teak, sal, shisham, hurra, mahua,
amla, semul, kusum, and sandalwood etc. are
the main species of these forests.
Dry deciduous forest covers vast areas of
the country, where rainfall ranges between
70 -100 cm. On the wetter margins, it has a
transition to the moist deciduous, while on the
drier margins to thorn forests. These forests
are found in rainier areas of the Peninsula and
the plains of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. In the
higher rainfall regions of the Peninsular plateau
and the northern Indian plain, these forests
have a parkland landscape with open stretches
in which teak and other trees interspersed with
patches of grass are common. As the dry
season begins, the trees shed their leaves
completely and the forest appears like a vast
grassland with naked trees all around. Tendu,
palas, amaltas, bel, khair, axlewood, etc.  are
the common trees of these forests. In the
western and southern part of Rajasthan,
vegetation cover is very scanty due to low
rainfall and overgrazing.
Tropical Thorn Forests
Tropical thorn forests occur in the areas which
receive rainfall less than 50 cm. These consist
of a variety of grasses and shrubs. It includes
semi-arid areas of south west Punjab,
Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh
and Uttar Pradesh. In these forests, plants
remain leafless for most part of the year and
give an expression of scrub vegetation.
Important species found are babool, ber, and
wild date palm, khair, neem, khejri, palas, etc.
Tussocky grass grows upto a height of 2 m as
the under growth.
Montane Forests
In mountainous areas, the decrease in
temperature with increasing altitude leads to
a corresponding change in natural vegetation.
Mountain forests can be classified into two
types, the northern mountain forests and the
southern mountain forests.
Figure 5.3 : Deciduous Forests
Figure 5.4 : Tropical Thorn Forests
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
The Himalayan ranges show a succession
of vegetation from the tropical to the tundra,
which change in with the altitude. Deciduous
forests are found in the foothills of the
Himalayas. It is succeeded by the wet
temperate type of forests between an altitude
of 1,000-2,000 m. In the higher hill ranges of
northeastern India, hilly areas of West Bengal
and Uttaranchal, evergreen broad leaf trees
such as oak and chestnut are predominant.
Between 1,500-1,750 m, pine forests are also
well-developed in this zone, with Chir Pine as
a very useful commercial tree. Deodar, a highly
valued endemic species grows mainly in the
western part of the Himalayan range. Deodar
is a durable wood mainly used in construction
activity.  Similarly, the chinar and the walnut,
which sustain the famous Kashmir
handicrafts, belong to this zone.  Blue pine and
spruce appear at altitudes of 2,225-3,048 m.
At many places in this zone, temperate
grasslands are also found. But in the higher
reaches there is a transition to Alpine forests
and pastures. Silver firs, junipers, pines, birch
and rhododendrons, etc. occur between
3,000-4,000 m. However, these pastures are
used extensively for transhumance by tribes
like the Gujjars, the Bakarwals, the Bhotiyas
and the Gaddis. The southern slopes of the
Himalayas carry a thicker vegetation cover
because of relatively higher precipitation than
the drier north-facing slopes. At higher
altitudes, mosses and lichens form part of the
tundra vegetation.
The southern mountain forests include
the forests found in three distinct areas of
Peninsular India viz; the Western Ghats, the
Vindhyas and the Nilgiris.  As they are closer
to the tropics, and only 1,500 m above the
sea level, vegetation is temperate in the higher
regions, and subtropical on the lower regions
of the Western Ghats, especially in Kerala,
Tamil Nadu and Karnataka.  The temperate
forests are called Sholas in the Nilgiris,
Anaimalai and Palani hills. Some of the other
trees of this forest of economic significance
include, magnolia, laurel, cinchona and
wattle. Such forests are also found in the
Satpura and the Maikal ranges.
Littoral and Swamp Forests
India has a rich variety of wetland habitats.
About 70 per cent of this comprises areas
under paddy cultivation.  The total area of wet
land is 3.9 million hectares.  Two sites —
Chilika Lake (Orissa) and Keoladeo National
Park (Bharatpur) are protected as water-fowl
habitats under the Convention of Wetlands of
International Importance (Ramsar Convention).
An international convention is an
agreement among member states of
the United Nations.
The country’s wetlands have been grouped
into eight categories, viz.  (i) the reservoirs of the
Deccan Plateau in the south together with the
lagoons and  other wetlands of the southern
west coast; (ii) the vast saline expanses of
Rajasthan, Gujarat and the Gulf of Kachchh;
(iii) freshwater lakes and reservoirs from Gujarat
eastwards through Rajasthan (Keoladeo
National Park) and Madhya Pradesh; (iv) the
delta wetlands and lagoons of India’s east coast
(Chilika Lake); (v) the freshwater marshes of the
Gangetic Plain; (vi) the floodplains of the
Brahmaputra; the marshes and swamps in the
hills of northeast India and the Himalayan
foothills; (vii) the lakes and rivers of the montane
region of Kashmir and Ladakh; and (viii) the
mangrove forest and other wetlands of the island
arcs of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
Mangroves  grow along the coasts in the salt
marshes, tidal creeks, mud flats and estuaries.
Figure 5.5 : Montane Forests
NATURAL VEGETATION
They consist of a number of salt-tolerant species
of plants.  Crisscrossed by creeks of stagnant
water and tidal flows, these forests give shelter
to a wide variety of birds.
In India, the mangrove forests spread over
6,740 sq. km which is 7 per cent of the world’s
mangrove forests. They are highly developed in
the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and the
Sunderbans of West Bengal. Other areas of
significance are the Mahanadi, the Godavari and
the Krishna deltas.  These forests too, are being
encroached upon, and hence, need conservation.
FOREST COVER IN INDIA
According to state records, the forest area
covers  23.28 per cent of the total land area of
the country.  It is important to note that the
forest area and the actual forest cover are not
the same.  The forest area is the area notified
and recorded as the forest land irrespective of
the existence of trees, while the actual forest
cover is the area occupied by forests with
canopy.  The former is based on the records of
the State Revenue Department, while the latter
is based on aerial photographs and satellite
imageries.  In 2001, the actual forest cover was
only 20.55 per cent.  Of the forest cover, the
share of dense and open forests was 12.60 per
cent and 7.87 per cent rerspectively.
Both forest area and forest cover vary from
state to state.  Lakshadweep has zero per cent
forest area; Andaman and Nicobar Islands have
86.93 per cent.  Most of the states with less than
10 per cent of the forest area lie in the north and
northwestern part of the country.  These are
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Punjab, Haryana and Delhi.
Most of the forests in Punjab and Haryana have
been cleared for cultivation.  States with 10-20
per cent forest area are Tamil Nadu and West
Bengal. In Peninsular India, excluding Tamil
Nadu, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Goa, the area
under forest cover is 20-30 per cent.  The
northeastern states have more than 30 per cent
of the land under forest. Hilly topography and
heavy rainfall are good for forest growth.
There is a lot of variation in actual forest cover,
which ranges from 9.56 per cent in Jammu and
Kashmir to 84.01 per cent in Andaman and
Nicobar Islands.  From the table showing the
distribution of forests in India (Appendix IV), it is
clear that there are 15 states where the forest cover
is more than one-third of the total area, which is
the basic requirement for maintaining the
ecological balance.
On the basis of the percentage of the actual
forest cover, the states have been grouped into
four regions:
The Region
Percentage
Cover of the
Forest
The region of high concentration
(ii) The region of medium concentration
20-40
(iii) The region of low concentration
10-20
(iv) The region of very low concentration
Taking the data from Appendix IV, list the states under
the four regins of forest cover
FOREST CONSERVATION
Forests have an intricate interrelationship with
life and environment. These provide numerous
direct and indirect advantages to our economy
and society. Hence, conservation of forest is of
vital importance to the survival and prosperity
of humankind. Accordingly, the Government
of India proposed to have a nation-wide forest
conservation policy, and adopted a forest
policy in 1952, which was further modified in
1988. According to the new forest policy, the
Government will emphasise sustainable forest
management in order to conserve and expand
forest reserve on the one hand, and to meet
the needs of local people on the other.
The forest policy aimed at : (i) bringing 33
per cent of the geographical areas under forest
Figure 5.6 : Mangrove Forests
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
cover;  (ii) maintaining environmental stability
and to restore forests where ecological balance
was disturbed; (iii) conserving the natural
heritage of the country, its biological diversity
and genetic pool; (iv) checks soil erosion,
extension of the desert lands and reduction of
floods and droughts; (v) increasing the forest
cover through social forestry and afforestation
on degraded land; (vi) increasing the
productivity of forests to make timber, fuel,
fodder and food available to rural population
dependant on forests, and encourage the
substitution of wood; (vii)  creating of a massive
peoples movement involving women to
encourage planting of trees, stop felling of trees
and thus, reduce pressure on the existing forest.
Forests and Life
To a vast number of tribal people, the
forest is a home, a livelihood, their
very existence. It provides them food,
fruits of all kinds, edible leaves, honey,
nourishing roots and wild game. It
provides them with material to build
their houses and items for practising
their arts. The importance of forests
in tribal economy is well-known as
they are the source of sustenance and
livelihood for tribal communities. It is
commonly believed that the tribal
communities live in harmony with
nature and protect forests. Out of a
total of 593 districts 187 (2001) have
been identified as tribal districts. The
tribal districts account for about 59.8
per cent of the total forest cover of the
country whereas the geographical
area of 187 tribal districts forms only
33.6 per cent of the total geographical
area of the country. It demonstrates
that tribal districts are generally rich
in forest cover.
Forest and tribals are very closely
related. The age-old knowledge of
tribals regarding forestry can be used
in the development of forests. Rather
than treating tribals as minor forest
produce collectors they should be
made growers of minor forest produce
and encouraged to participate in
conservation.
Based on the forest conservation policy the
following steps were initiated:
Social Forestry
Social forestry means the management and
protection of forests and afforestation on barren
lands with the purpose of helping in the
environmental, social and rural development.
The National Commission on Agriculture
(1976) has classified social forestry into three
categories. These are Urban forestry, Rural
forestry and Farm forestry.
Urban forestry pertains to the raising and
management of trees on public and privately
owned lands in and around urban centres
such as green belts, parks, roadside avenues,
industrial and commercial green belts, etc.
Rural forestry lays emphasis on promotion
of agro-forestry and community-forestry.
Agro-forestry is the raising of trees and
agriculture crops  on the same land inclusive
of the waste patches. It combines forestry with
agriculture, thus, altering the simultaneous
production of food, fodder, fuel, timber and
fruit. Community forestry involves the raising
of trees on public or community land such as
the village pasture  and  temple land, roadside,
canal bank, strips along railway lines, and
schools etc. Community forestry programme
aims at providing benefits to the community
as a whole. Community forestry provides a
means under which the people of landless
classes can associate themselves in tree-
raising and thus, get those benefits which
otherwise are restricted for landowners.
Farm Forestry
Farm forestry is a term applied to the process
under which farmers grow  trees for
commercial and non-commercial purposes on
their farm lands.
Forest departments of various states
distribute seedlings of trees free of cost to
small and medium farmers. Several lands
such as the margins of agricultural fields,
grasslands and pastures, land around homes
and cow sheds may be used for raising trees
under non-commercial farm forestry.
NATURAL VEGETATION
WILDLIFE
You would have visited a zoo and may have
seen animals and birds in captivity. Wildlife
of India is a great natural heritage. It is
estimated that about 4-5 per cent of all
known plant and animal species on the earth
are found in India. The main reason for this
remarkable diversity of life forms is the great
diversity of the ecosystem which this country
has preserved and supported through the
ages.  Over the years, their habitat has been
disturbed by  human activities and as a
result, their numbers have dwindled
significantly. There are certain species that
are at the brink of extinction.
Some of the important reasons of the
declining of wildlife are as follows:
(i) Industrial
technological
advancement brought about a rapid
increase in the exploitation of forest
resources.
(ii) More and more lands were cleared for
agriculture, human settlement, roads,
mining, reservoirs, etc.
(iii) Pressure on forests mounted due to
lopping for fodder and fuelwood and
removal of small timber by the local
people.
(iv) Grazing  by domestic cattle caused an
adverse effect on wildlife and its habitat.
(v) Hunting was taken up as a sport by
the elite and  hundreds of wild animals
were killed in a single hunt. Now
commercial poaching is rampant.
(vi) Incidence of forest fire.
It is being felt that conservation of wildlife
is of great significance to the national as well
as the world heritage along with the promotion
of ecotourism. What steps have been initiated
by the government in this direction?
WILDLIFE CONSERVATION IN INDIA
The protection of wildlife has a long tradition
in India. Many stories of Panchtantra and
Jungle Books, etc. have stood the test of time
relating to the love for wildlife. These have a
profound impact on young minds.
In 1972, a comprehensive Wildlife Act
was enacted, which provides the main legal
framework for conservation and protection
of wildlife in India. The two main objectives
of the Act are; to provide protection to the
endangered species listed in the schedule of
the Act and to provide legal support to the
conservation areas of the country classified
as National parks, sanctuaries and closed
areas. This Act has been comprehensively
amended in 1991, making punishments
more stringent and has also made provisions
for the protection of specified plant species
and conservation of endangered species of
wild animals.
There are 92 National parks and 492
wildlife sanctuaries covering an area of 15.67
million hectares in the country.
Wildlife conservation has a very large
ambit with unbounded potential for the well-
being of humankind. However, this can be
achieved only when every individual
understands its significance and contributes
his bit.
For the purpose of effective conservation
of flora and fauna, special steps have been
initiated by the Government of India in
collaboration with UNESCO’s ‘Man and
Biosphere Programme’.
Special schemes like Project Tiger (1973)
and Project Elephant (1992) have been
launched to conserve these species and their
habitat in a sustainable manner.
Project Tiger has been implemented since
1973. The main objective of the scheme is to
ensure maintenance of viable population of
tigers in India for scientific, aesthetic,
cultural and ecological values, and to
preserve areas of biological importance as
natural heritage for the benefit, education
and enjoyment of the people. Initially, the
Project Tiger was launched in nine tiger
reserves, covering an area of 16,339 sq. km,
which has now increased to 27 tiger reserves,
encompassing 37,761sq. km of tiger habitats
distributed in 17 states. The tiger population
in the country has registered an increase
from 1,827 in 1972 to 3,642 in 2001-2002.
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 5.8 : Objectives of a Biosphere Reserve
Project Elephant was launched in 1992
to assist states having free ranging
population of wild elephants. It was aimed
at ensuring long-term survival of identified
viable population of elephants in their
natural habitat. The project is being
implemented in 13 states.
Apart from this, some other projects such
as Crocodile Breeding Project, Project Hangul
and conservation of Himalayan Musk deer have
also been launched by the Government of India.
BIOSPHERE RESERVES
A Biosphere Reserve is a unique and
representative ecosystem of terrestrial and
coastal areas which are internationally
recognised within the framework of UNESCO’s
Man and Biosphere (MAB) Programme. The
Biosphere Reserve aims at achieving the three
objectives as depicted in Figure 5.8.
There are 14 Biosphere Reserves in India
(Table 5.1, Figure 5.9). Four Biosphere
Reserves, namely (i) Nilgiri; (ii) Nanda Devi;
Figure 5.7 : Elephants in their Natural Habitat
* have been recognised by the UNESCO on World Network of Biosphere Reserves
Source : Annual Report (2004-05), Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India
Table 5.1 : List of Biosphere Reserves
Name of the Biosphere
Total
Reserve
Geographical
Location (States)
Area (km2)
* Nilgiri
5,520
Part of Wynad, Nagarhole, Bandipur and Mudumalai,
Nilambur, Silent Valley and Siruvani Hills (Tamil Nadu,
Kerala and Karnataka)
* Nanda Devi
2,236.74
Part of Chamoli, Pithoragarh and Almora districts
(Uttar Pradesh) and part of Garo Hills (Meghalaya)
Nokrek
Part of Garo Hills (Meghalaya)
Manas
2,837
Part of Kokrajhar, Bongaigaon, Barpeta, Nalbari, Kamrup
and Darrang districts (Assam)
* Sunderbans
9,630
Part of delta of Ganges and Brahmaputra river system (West
Bengal)
* Gulf of Mannar
10,500
Indian part of Gulf of Mannar between India and Sri Lanka
(Tamil Nadu)
Great Nicobar
Southernmost islands of the Andaman and Nicobar
(A & N Islands)
Similipal
4,374
Part of Mayurbhanj district (Orissa)
Dibru-Saikhowa
Part of Dibrugarh and Tinsukia districts (Assam)
Dihang Dibang
5,111.5
Part of Siang and Debang valley in Arunachal Pradesh
Kanchenjunga
2,619.92
Parts of North and West Sikkim
Pachmari
4,926.28
Parts of Betul, Hoshangabad and Chindwara districts of
Madhya Pradesh
Agasthyamalai
1,701
Agasthyamalai Hills in Kerala
Achanakmar- Amarkantak
3,835.51
Parts of Anupur and Dindori district of MP and parts  of
Bilaspur district of Chhattisgarh
NATURAL VEGETATION
Figure 5.9 : India : Biosphere Reserves
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
EXERCISES
(iii) Sunderbans; and  (iv) Gulf of Mannar have
been recognised by the UNESCO on World
Network of  Biosphere Reserves.
Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve
The Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve (NBR), the first
of the fourteen biosphere reserves of India, was
established in September 1986. It embraces
the sanctuary complex of Wyanad, Nagarhole,
Bandipur and Mudumalai, the entire forested
hill slopes of Nilambur, the Upper Nilgiri
plateau, Silent Valley and the Siruvani hills.
The total area of the biosphere reserve is
around 5,520 sq. km.
The Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve possesses
different habitat types, unspoilt areas of
natural vegetation types with several dry
scrubs, dry and moist deciduous, semi-
evergreen and wet evergreen forests, evergreen
sholas, grasslands and swamps. It includes
the largest known population of two
endangered animal species, namely the Nilgiri
Tahr and the Lion-tailed macaque. The largest
south Indian population of elephant, tiger,
gaur, sambar and chital as well as a good
number of endemic and endangered plants are
also found in this reserve. The habitat of a
number of tribal groups remarkable for their
traditional modes of harmonious use of the
environment are also found here.
The topography of the NBR is extremely
varied, ranging from an altitude of 250 m to
2,650 m. About 80 per cent of the flowering
plants reported from the Western Ghats occur
in the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve.
Nanda Devi Biosphere Reserve
The Nanda Devi Biosphere Reserve situated
in Uttaranchal includes parts of Chamoli,
Almora, Pithoragarh and Bageshwar districts.
The major forest types of the reserve are
temperate. A few important species are silver
weed and orchids like latifolie and
rhododendron.  The biosphere reserve has a
rich fauna, for example the snow leopard,
black bear, brown bear, musk deer, snow-
cock, golden eagle and black eagle.
Major threats to the ecosystem are  the
collection of endangered plants for medicinal
use, forest fires and poaching.
Sunderbans Biosphere Reserve
It is located in the swampy delta of the river
Ganga in West Bengal. It extends over a vast
area of  9,630 sq. km and consists of mangrove
forests, swamps and forested islands.
Sunderbans is the home of nearly 200 Royal
Bengal tigers.
The tangled mass of roots of mangrove
trees provide safe homes for a large number
of species, from fish to shrimp. More than 170
birds species are known to inhabit these
mangrove forests.
Adapting itself to the saline and fresh water
environment, the tigers at the park are good
swimmers, and they hunt scarce preys such
as chital deer, barking deer, wild pig and even
macaques. In the Sunderbans, the mangrove
forests are characterised by Heritiera fomes,
a species valued for its timber.
Gulf of Mannar Biosphere Reserve
The Gulf of Mannar Biosphere Reserve covers
an area of 105,000 hectares on the southeast
coast of India. It is one of the world’s richest
regions from a marine biodiversity perspective.
The biosphere reserve comprises 21 islands
with estuaries, beaches, forests of the
nearshore environment, sea grasses, coral
reefs, salt marshes and mangroves. Among the
Gulf’’s 3,600 plant and animal species are the
globally endangered sea cow (Dugong dugon)
and six mangrove species, endemic to
Peninsular India.
Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
Sandalwood is an example of:
Evergreen forest
(c) Deltaic forest
Deciduous forest
(d) Thorny forest
NATURAL VEGETATION
Which one of the following was the purpose of Project Tiger?
to kill tigers
(c) to protect tigers from illegal hunting
to put tigers in the Zoo
(d) to make films on tigers
(iii)
In which one of the following  states is the Nandadevi Biosphere reserve
situated?
Bihar
(c) Uttaranchal
Uttar Pradesh
(d) Orissa
How many of the following numbers of Biosphere reserves are recognised
by the IUCN?
(c) Three
(d) Four
Which one of the following proportion of area of the country was targeted
to be under forest in Forest Policy of India?
(c) 55
(d) 22
Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
What is natural vegetation? Under what climatic conditions are tropical
evergreen forests develop?
What do you understand by social forestry?
(iii)
Define Biosphere reserves?
What is the difference between forest area and forest cover?
Answer the following questions in not more than 150 words.
What steps have been taken up to conserve forests?
How can people’s participation be effective in conserving forests and wildlife?
Project/Activity
On the outline map of India, mark and label the following.
Areas having Mangrove forests.
Biosphere reserves of Nanda Devi, Sunderbans, Gulf of Mannar and Nilgiri.
(iii)
Mark the location of Forest Survey of India Head Quarter.
List the trees, bush and shrub species found around your school. Write
their local names and their uses.
ave you ever thought about the most
important factor which supports trees,
grasses, crops and numerous life-
forms over the earth’s surface?  Can one grow
a blade of grass without soil? While some
plants and organisms which are aquatic in
nature can sustain in water, do they not derive
nutrients from soil through water?  You will
realise  that  soil is the most important layer of
the earth’s crust. It is a valuable resource. The
bulk of our food and much of our clothing is
derived from land-based crops that grow in the
soil. The soil on which we depend so much for
our day-to-day needs has evolved over
thousands of years. The various agents of
weathering and gradation have acted upon the
parent rock material to produce a thin layer of
soil.
Soil is the mixture of rock debris and
organic materials which develop on the earth’s
surface. The major factors affecting the
formation of soil are relief, parent material,
climate, vegetation and other life-forms and
time. Besides these, human activities also
influence it to a large extent. Components of
the soil are mineral particles, humus, water and
air. The actual amount of each of these depend
upon the type of soil. Some soils are deficient
in one or more of these, while there are some
others that have varied combinations.
Have you ever dug a pit in the field of your
school to plant a tree while celebrating Van-
Mahotsava? Was the pit of uniform layer of soil
or did you notice different colours from the top
to the bottom of the pit?
If we dig a pit on land and look at the soil,
we find that it consists of three layers which
are called horizons. ‘Horizon A’ is the topmost
zone, where organic materials have got
incorporated with the mineral matter,
nutrients and water, which are necessary for
the growth of plants. ‘Horizon B’ is a transition
zone between the ‘horizon A’ and ‘horizon C’,
and contains matter derived from below as well
as from above. It has some organic matter in
it, although the mineral matter is noticeably
weathered. ‘Horizon C’ is composed of the loose
parent material. This layer is the first stage in
the soil formation process and eventually forms
the above two layers. This arrangement of layers
is known as the soil profile. Underneath these
three horizons is the rock which is also known
as the parent rock or the bedrock. Soil, which
is a complex and varied entity has always
drawn the attention of the scientists.  In order
to understand its importance, it is essential to
attempt a scientific study of the soil.
Classification of the soil is an effort to achieve
this objective.
CLASSIFICATION OF SOILS
India has varied relief features, landforms,
climatic realms and vegetation types.  These
have contributed in the development of various
types of soils in India.
In ancient times, soils used to be classified
into two main groups – Urvara and Usara,
which were fertile and sterile, respectively. In
the 16th centrury A.D., soils were classified on
the basis of their inherent characteristics and
external features such as texture, colour, slope
of land and moisture content in the soil. Based
on texture, main soil types were identified as
SOILS
C H A P T E R
SOILS
sandy, clayey, silty and loam, etc. On the basis
of colour, they were red, yellow, black, etc.
Since Independence, scientific surveys of
soils have been conducted by various agencies.
Soil Survey of India, established in 1956, made
comprehensive studies of soils in selected areas
like in the Damodar Valley. The National
Bureau of Soil Survey and the Land Use
Planning an Institute under the control of the
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)
did a lot of studies on Indian soils. In their effort
to study soil and to make it comparable at the
international level, the ICAR has classified the
Indian soils on the basis of their nature and
character as per the United States Department
of Agriculture (USDA) Soil Taxonomy.
ICAR has classified the soils of India into the
following order as per the USDA soil taxonomy
Order
Percentage
(in Thousand
Hectares)
Inceptisols
130372.90
39.74
Entisols
92131.71
28.08
(iii)
Alfisols
44448.68
13.55
Vertisols
27960.00
Aridisols
14069.00
Ultisols
8250.00
Mollisols
1320.00
(viii)
Others
9503.10
Total
Source : Soils of India, National Bureau of Soil
Survey and Land Use Planning, Publication
Number 94
On the basis of genesis, colour,
composition and location, the soils of India
have been classified into:
Alluvial soils
Black soils
(iii)
Red and Yellow soils
Laterite soils
Arid soils
Saline soils
(vii)
Peaty soils
(viii)
Forest soils.
Alluvial Soils
Alluvial soils are widespread in the northern
plains and the river valleys.  These soils cover
about 40 per cent of the total area of the
country. They are depositional soils,
transported and deposited by rivers and
streams. Through a narrow corridor in
Rajasthan, they extend into the plains of
Gujarat. In the Peninsular region, they are
found in deltas of the east coast and in the river
valleys.
The alluvial soils vary in nature from sandy
loam to clay. They are generally rich in potash
but poor in phosphorous. In the Upper and
Middle Ganga plain, two different types of
alluvial soils have developed, viz. Khadar and
Bhangar. Khadar is the new alluvium and is
deposited by floods annually, which enriches
the soil by depositing fine silts. Bhangar
represents a system of older alluvium,
deposited away from the flood plains. Both the
Khadar and Bhangar soils contain calcareous
concretions (Kankars).  These soils are more
loamy and clayey in the lower and middle
Ganga plain and the Brahamaputra valley. The
sand content decreases from the west to east.
The colour of the alluvial soils varies from
the light grey to ash grey. Its shades depend
on the depth of the deposition, the texture of
the materials, and the time taken for attaining
maturity. Alluvial soils are intensively
cultivated.
Black Soil
Black soil covers most of the Deccan Plateau
which includes parts of Maharashtra, Madhya
Pradesh, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh and some
parts of Tamil Nadu. In the upper reaches of
the Godavari and the Krishna, and the north
Figure 6.1 : Alluvial Soil
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 6.2 : Major Soil Types of India
SOILS
western part of the Deccan Plateau, the black
soil is very deep. These soils are also known as
the ‘Regur Soil’ or  the ‘Black Cotton Soil’. The
black soils are generally clayey, deep and
impermeable. They swell and become sticky
when wet and shrink when dried.  So, during
the dry season, these soil develop wide cracks.
Thus, there occurs a kind of ‘self ploughing’.
Because of this character of slow absorption
and loss of moisture, the black soil retains the
moisture for a very long time, which helps the
crops, especially, the rain fed ones, to sustain
even during the dry season.
Chemically, the black soils are rich in lime,
iron, magnesia and alumina. They also contain
potash. But they lack in phosphorous,
nitrogen and organic matter. The colour of the
soil ranges from deep black to grey.
Red and Yellow Soil
Red soil develops on crystalline igneous rocks
in areas of low rainfall in the eastern and
southern part of the Deccan Plateau. Along the
piedmont zone of the Western Ghat, long stretch
of area is occupied by red loamy soil. Yellow and
red soils are also found in parts of Orissa and
Chattisgarh and in the southern parts of the
middle Ganga plain. The soil develops a reddish
colour due to a wide diffusion of iron in crystalline
and metamorphic rocks. It looks yellow when it
occurs in a hydrated form. The fine-grained red
and yellow soils are normally fertile, whereas
coarse-grained soils found in dry upland areas
are poor in fertility. They are generally poor in
nitrogen, phosphorous and humus.
Laterite Soil
Laterite has been derived from the Latin word
‘Later’ which means brick. The laterite soils
develop in areas with high temperature and
high rainfall.  These are the result of intense
leaching due to tropical rains. With rain, lime
and silica are leached away, and soils rich in
iron oxide and aluminium compound are left
behind. Humus content of the soil is removed
fast by bacteria that thrives well in high
temperature. These soils are poor in organic
matter, nitrogen, phosphate and calcium,
while iron oxide and potash are in excess.
Hence, laterites are not suitable for cultivation;
however, application of manures and fertilisers
are required for making the soils fertile for
cultivation.
Red laterite soils in Tamil Nadu, Andhra
Pradesh and Kerala are more suitable for tree
crops like cashewnut.
Laterite soils are widely cut as bricks for
use in house construction. These soils have
mainly developed in the higher areas of the
Peninsular plateau. The laterite soils are
commonly found in Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil
Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and the hilly areas of
Orissa and Assam.
Arid Soils
Arid soils range from red to brown in colour.
They are generally sandy in structure and
saline in nature. In some areas, the salt content
is so high that common salt is obtained by
evaporating the saline water. Due to the dry
climate, high temperature and accelerated
evaporation, they lack moisture and humus.
Nitrogen is insufficient and the phosphate
Figure 6.3 : Black Soil During Dry Season
Figure 6.4 : Arid Soil
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
content is normal. Lower horizons of the soil
are occupied by ‘kankar’ layers because of the
increasing calcium content downwards. The
‘Kankar’ layer formation in the bottom horizons
restricts the infiltration of water, and as such
when irrigation is made available, the soil
moisture is readily available for a sustainable
plant growth. Arid soils are characteristically
developed in western Rajasthan, which exhibit
characteristic arid topography. These soils are
poor and contain little humus and organic
matter.
Saline Soils
They are also known as Usara soils. Saline soils
contain a larger proportion of sodium,
potassium and magnesium, and thus, they are
infertile, and do not support any vegetative
growth. They have more salts, largely because
of dry climate and poor drainage. They occur
in arid and semi-arid regions, and in
waterlogged and swampy areas. Their
structure ranges from sandy to loamy. They
lack in nitrogen and calcium. Saline soils are
more widespread in western Gujarat, deltas of
the eastern coast and in Sunderban areas of
West Bengal. In the Rann of Kuchchh, the
Southwest Monsoon brings salt particles and
deposits there as a crust. Seawater intrusions
in the deltas promote the occurrence of saline
soils. In the areas of intensive cultivation with
excessive use of irrigation, especially in areas
of green revolution, the fertile alluvial soils are
becoming saline. Excessive irrigation with dry
climatic conditions promotes capillary action,
which results in the deposition of salt on the
top layer of the soil. In such areas, especially
in Punjab and Haryana, farmers are advised
to add gypsum to solve the problem of salinity
in the soil.
Peaty Soils
They are found in the areas of heavy rainfall
and high humidity, where there is a good
growth of vegetation. Thus, large quantity of
dead organic matter accumulates in these
areas, and this gives a rich humus and organic
content to the soil.  Organic matter in these
soils may go even up to 40-50 per cent. These
soils are normally heavy and black in colour.
At many places, they are alkaline also. It occurs
widely in the northern part of Bihar, southern
part of Uttaranchal and the coastal areas of West
Bengal, Orissa and Tamil Nadu.
Forest Soils
As the name suggests, forest soils are formed in
the forest areas where sufficient rainfall is
available. The soils vary in structure and texture
depending on the mountain environment where
they are formed. They are loamy and silty on
valley sides and coarse-grained in the upper
slopes. In the snow-bound areas of the
Himalayas, they experience denudation, and
are acidic with low humus content. The soils
found in the lower valleys are fertile.
It is evident from the foregoing discussions
that soils, their texture, quality and nature are
vital for the germination and growth of plant
and vegetation including crops. Soils are living
systems.  Like any other organism, they too
develop and decay, get degraded, respond to
proper treatment if administered in time. These
have serious repercussions on other
components of the system of which they
themselves are important parts.
SOIL DEGRADATION
In a broad sense, soil degradation can be
defined as the decline in soil fertility, when the
nutritional status declines and depth of the soil
goes down due to erosion and misuse. Soil
degradation is the main factor leading to the
depleting soil resource base in India.  The degree
of soil degradation varies from  place to place
according to the topography, wind velocity and
amount of the rainfall.
SOIL EROSION
The destruction of the soil cover is described as
soil erosion. The soil forming processes and the
erosional processes of running water and wind
go on simultaneously.  But generally, there is a
balance between these two processes.  The rate
of removal of fine particles from the surface is
the same as the rate of addition of particles to
the soil layer.
SOILS
Sometimes, such a balance is disturbed by
natural or human factors, leading to a greater
rate of removal of soil. Human activities too are
responsible for soil erosion to a great extent.
As the human population increases, the
demand on the land also increases. Forest and
other natural vegetation is removed for human
settlement, for cultivation, for grazing animals
and for various other needs.
Wind and water are powerful agents of soil
erosion because of their ability to remove soil
and transport it. Wind erosion is significant in
arid and semi-arid regions.  In regions with
heavy rainfall and steep slopes, erosion by
running water is more significant.  Water
erosion which is more serious and occurs
extensively in different parts of India, takes place
mainly in the form of sheet and gully erosion.
Sheet erosion takes place on level lands after a
heavy shower and the soil removal is not easily
noticeable.  But it is harmful since it removes the
finer and more fertile top soil. Gully erosion is
common on steep slopes.  Gullies deepen with
rainfall, cut the agricultural lands into small
fragments and make them unfit for cultivation.
A region with a large number of deep gullies or
ravines is called a badland topography. Ravines
are widespread, in the Chambal basin.  Besides
this, they are also found in Tamil Nadu and West
Bengal.  The country is losing about 8,000
hectares of land to  ravines every year. What types
are prone to gully erosion?
Soil erosion is a serious problem for  Indian
agriculture and its negative effects are seen in other
spheres also. Eroded materials are carried down
to rivers and they lower down their carrying
capacity, and cause frequent floods and damage
to agricultural lands.
Deforestation is one of the major causes of soil
erosion.  Plants keep soils bound in locks of roots,
and thus, prevent erosion.  They also add humus
to the soil by shedding leaves and twigs. Forests
have been denuded  practically in most parts of
India but their effect on soil erosion are more in
hilly parts of the country.
A fairly large area of arable land in the irrigated
zones of India is becoming saline because of over-
irrigation.  The salt lodged in the lower profiles of
the soil comes up to the surface and destroys its
fertility. Chemical fertilisers in the absence of
organic manures are also harmful to the soil.
Unless the soil gets enough humus, chemicals
harden it and reduce its fertility in the long run.
This problem is common in all the command
areas of the river valley projects, which were the
first beneficiaries of the Green Revolution.
According to estimates, about half of the total land
of India is under some degree of degradation.
Every year, India loses millions of tonnes of
soil and its nutrients to the agents of its
degradation, which adversely affects our national
productivity.  So, it is imperative to initiate
immediate steps to reclaim and conserve soils.
Soil Conservation
If soil erosion and exhaustion are caused by
humans; by corollary, they can also be
prevented by humans.  Nature has its own laws
of maintaining balance.  Nature offers enough
opportunities for humans to develop their
economy without disturbing the ecological
balance.  Soil conservation is a methodology
to maintain soil fertility, prevent soil erosion
and exhaustion, and improve the degraded
condition of the soil.
Soil erosion is essentially aggravated by
faulty practices.  The first step in any rational
solution is to check open cultivable lands on
slopes from farming.  Lands with a slope
gradient of 15 - 25 per cent should not be used
Figure 6.5 : Soil Erosion
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
for cultivation. If at all the land is to be used
for agriculture, terraces should carefully be
made. Over-grazing and shifting cultivation  in
many parts of India have affected the natural
cover of land and given rise to extensive erosion.
It should be regulated and controlled by
educating villagers about the consequences.
Contour bunding, Contour terracing,
regulated forestry, controlled grazing, cover
cropping, mixed farming and crop rotation are
some of the remedial measures which are often
adopted to reduce soil erosion.
Efforts should be made to prevent gully
erosion and control their formation. Finger
gullies can be eliminated by terracing.  In
bigger gullies, the erosive velocity of water may
be reduced by constructing a series of check
dams. Special attention should be made to
control headward extension of gullies.  This can
be done by gully plugging, terracing or by
planting cover vegetation.
In arid and semi-arid areas, efforts should
be made to protect cultivable lands from
encroachment by sand dunes through
developing shelter belts of trees and
agro-forestry.  Lands not suitable for
cultivation should be converted into pastures
for grazing. Experiments have been made to
stabilise sand dunes in western Rajasthan by
the Central  Arid Zone Research Institute
(CAZRI).
The Central Soil Conservation Board, set up
by the Government of India, has prepared a
number of plans for soil conservation in different
parts of the country. These plans are based on
the climatic conditions, configuration of land
and the social behaviour of people. Even these
plans are fragmental in nature.  Integrated land
use planning, therefore, seems to be the best
technique for proper soil conservation.  Lands
should be classified according to their
capability; land use maps should be prepared
and lands should be put to right uses.  The final
responsibility for achieving the conservation of
land will rest on the people who operate on it
and receive the benefits.
Figure 6.6 : Terrace Farming
Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
Which one of the following is the most widespread and most productive
category of soil?
Alluvial Soil
Black Soil
Laterite Soil
Forest Soil
‘Regur Soil’ is another name for the.
Saline Soil
Black Soil
Arid Soil
Laterite Soil
(iii)
Which one of the following is the main reason for the loss of the top soil
in India?
Wind erosion
Excessive leaching
Water erosion
None of these
EXERCISES
SOILS
Arable land in the irrigated zones of India is turning saline due to which
of the following reasons?
Addition of gypsum
Over irrigation
Over grazing
Use of fertilisers
Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
What is soil?
What are the main factors responsible for the formation of soil?
(iii)
Mention the three horizons of a soil profile.
What is soil degradation?
What is the difference between Khadar and Bhangar?
Answer the following questions in not more than 125 words.
What are black soils? Describe their formation and characteristics.
What is soil conservation? Suggest some measures to conserve soil.
(iii)
How do you know that a particular type of soil is fertile or not? Differentiate
between naturally determined fertility and culturally induced fertility.
Project/Activity
Collect various samples of soil and prepare a report on the type(s) of soils
found in your region.
On an outline map of India, mark the areas coverd by the following soil
categories.
Red soil
Laterite soil
(iii)
Alluvial soil.
NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS:
CAUSES, CONSEQUENCES AND MANAGEMENT
This unit deals with
• Floods and droughts
• Earthquakes and tsunami
• Cyclones
• Landslides
ou might have read about tsunami or
seen the images of horror on
television set immediately after it
happened. You may also be aware of the severe
earthquake in Kashmir on both sides of the
Line of Control (LOC). The damage caused to
human life and properties during these
episodes has moved us all. What are these as
phenomena and how they are caused? How
can we save ourselves? These are some
questions which come to our minds. This
chapter will attempt to analyse some of these
questions.
Change is the law of nature. It is a continuous
process that goes on uninterruptedly involving
phenomena, big and small, material and non-
material that make our physical and socio-
cultural environment. It is a process present
everywhere with variations in terms of
magnitude, intensity and scale. Change can be
a gradual or slow process like the evolution of
landforms and organisms and it can be as
sudden and swift as volcanic eruptions,
tsunamis, earthquakes and lightening, etc.
Similarly, it may remain confined to a smaller
area occurring within a few seconds like
hailstorms, tornadoes and dust storms, and it
can also have global dimensions such as global
warming and depletion of the ozone layer.
Besides these, changes have different
meanings for different people. It depends upon
the perspective one takes while trying to
understand them. From the perspective of
nature, changes are value-neutral (these are
neither good nor bad). But from the human
perspective, these are value-loaded. There are
some changes that are desirable and good like
the change of seasons, ripening of fruits, while
there are others like earthquakes, floods and
wars that are considered bad and undesirable.
Observe the environment you live in and
prepare a list of changes, which take
place over a long period of time and
those, which take place within a short
period of time. Do you know why some
changes are considered good and others
bad? Prepare a list of changes, which
you notice in your daily life and give
reasons why some of these are
considered good and others bad.
In this chapter, we will read about some of
these changes, which are considered bad and
have haunted humankind for a long time.
Disasters in general and natural disasters
in particular, are some such changes that are
always disliked and feared by humankind.
What is a Disaster?
“Disaster is an undesirable occurrence
resulting from forces that are largely
outside human control, strikes quickly
with little or no warning, which causes
or threatens serious disruption of life
and property including death and injury
to a large number of people, and requires
therefore, mobilisation of efforts in excess
of that which are normally provided by
statutory emergency services”.
For a long time, geographical literature
viewed disasters as a consequence of natural
forces; and human beings were treated as
innocent and helpless victims in front of the
mighty forces of nature.  But natural forces are
NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS
C H A P T E R
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
not the only causes of disasters. Disasters are
also caused by some human activities. There
are some activities carried by human beings
that are directly responsible for disasters.
Bhopal Gas tragedy, Chernobyl nuclear disaster,
wars, release of CFCs (Chlorofluorocarbons) and
increase of green house gases, environmental
pollutions like noise, air, water and soil are some
of the disasters which are caused directly by
human actions. There are some other activities
of human beings that accelerate or intensify
disasters indirectly. Landslides and floods due
to deforestation, unscientific land use and
construction activities in fragile areas are some
of the disasters that are the results of indirect
human actions. Can you identify some other
human activities going on in and around your
neighbourhood and schools that can lead to
disasters in the near future? Can you suggest
some measures to prevent it? It is a common
experience that human-made disasters have
increased both in their numbers and
magnitudes over the years and concerted
efforts are on at various levels to prevent and
minimise their occurrences. Though the
success has been only nominal so far, it is
possible to prevent some of these disasters
created by human actions. As opposed to this,
very little is possible to prevent natural
disasters; therefore, the best way out is to
emphasise on natural disaster mitigation and
management. Establishment of National
Institute of Disaster Management, India, Earth
Summit at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 1993 and
the World Conference on Disaster Management
in May 1994 at Yokohama, Japan, etc. are
some of the concrete steps towards this
direction initiated at different levels.
Most often it is observed that scholars use
disasters and natural hazards as interchangeable.
Both are related phenomena, yet quite distinct
from each other. Hence, it is necessary to
distinguish between the two.
Natural Hazards are elements of
circumstances in the Natural environment that
have the potential to cause harm to people or
property or both. These may be swift or
permanent aspects of the respective
environmental settings like currents in the
oceans, steep slope and unstable structural
features in the Himalayas or extreme climatic
conditions in deserts or glaciated areas.
As compared to natural hazards, natural
disasters are relatively sudden and cause
large scale, widespread death, loss of
property and disturbance to social systems
and life over which people have a little or no
control. Thus, any event can be classed as
disaster when the magnitude of destruction
and damage caused by it is very high.
Generally, disasters are generalised
experiences of people the world over, and no
two disasters are similar and comparable to
each other. Every disaster is unique in terms
of the local socio-environmental factors that
control it, the social response it generates, and
the way each social group negotiates with it.
However, the opinion mentioned above is
indicative of three important things. Firstly, the
magnitude, intensity, frequency and damages
caused by natural disasters have increased
over the years. Secondly, there is a growing
concern among people the world over to deal
with the menace created by these so that the
loss of human life and property can be
minimised. And finally, significant changes
have taken place in the pattern of natural
disasters over the years.
There has also been a change in the
perception of natural disasters and hazards.
Previously, hazards and disasters were seen
as two closely associated and interrelated
phenomena, i.e. areas prone to natural
hazards, were more vulnerable to disasters.
Hence, people avoided tampering with the
delicate balance that existed in a given
ecosystem. People avoided intensification of
their activities in such areas and that is how
disasters were less damaging. Technological
power has given large capacity to human
intervention in nature. Consequently, now,
human beings tend to intensify their activities
into disaster prone areas increasing their
vulnerability to disasters.   Colonisation of flood
plains of most of the rivers and development of
large cities and port-towns like – Mumbai and
Chennai along the coast, and touching the
shore due to high land values, make them
vulnerable to the occurrence of cyclones,
hurricanes and tsunamis.
NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS
These observations can also be corroborated
by the data given in Table 7.1  showing the
magnitude of deaths caused by twelve serious
natural disasters in the past sixty years in
different countries of the world.
It is evident from the table that natural
disasters have caused widespread loss of life and
property. Concerted efforts are on at various
levels to take appropriate measures to deal with
the situation. It is also being felt that the damages
caused by natural disasters have global
repercussions that are beyond the means and
capabilities of individual nation-states to cope
up with. Hence, this issue was raised at the U.N.
General Assembly in 1989 and it was finally
formalised at the World Conference on Disaster
Management in May 1994 at Yokohama, Japan.
This was subsequently called the Yokohama
Strategy and Plan of Action for a Safer World.
Source : United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP), 1991
*News Report from National Institute for Disaster Management, Government of India, New Delhi
Table 7.1  : Top Twelve Natural Disasters Since 1948
Location
Deaths
The Soviet Union (now Russia)
Earthquakes
110,000
China
Floods
57,000
China
Floods
30,000
East Pakistan (now Bangladesh)
Tropical Cyclones
36,000
Earthquakes
30,000
Earthquakes
66,794
East Pakistan (now Bangladesh)
Tropical Cyclones
500,000
India
Tropical Cyclones
30,000
China
Earthquakes
700,000
Earthquakes
50,000
Indonesia, Sri Lanka, India, etc.
Tsunamis
500,000*
Pakistan, India
Earthquakes
70,000*
CLASSIFICATION OF NATURAL DISASTERS
Human beings the world over have
experienced disasters and have faced and lived
with them. Now people are becoming aware
and various steps have been initiated at
different levels for mitigating the effects of
disasters. Identification and classification of
disasters is being considered as an effective and
scientific step to deal promptly and efficiently
with the disasters. Broadly, natural disasters
can be classified under four categories (See
Table 7.2).
India is one of those countries which has
experienced most of the natural disasters
mentioned in Table 7.2. Every year it loses
thousands of lives and property worth
millions of rupees due to these natural
calamities. In the following section, some of
Table 7.2 : Classification of Natural Disasters
Atmospheric
Terrestrial
Aquatic
Biological
Blizzards
Earthquakes
Floods
Thunderstorms
Volcanic Eruptions
Tidal Waves
Lightning
Landslides
Ocean Currents
Tornadoes
Avalanches
Storm Surge
Tropical Cyclone
Subsidence
Tsunami
Drought
Soil Erosion
Hailstorm
Frost, Heat Wave or
Loo.Cold Waves, etc.
Plants and Animals as
colonisers (Locusts, etc.).
Insects infestation— fungal,
bacterial and viral diseases
such as bird flu, dengue,
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Yokohama Strategy and International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction (IDNDR)
Yokohama Strategy and Plan of Action for a Safer World
All the member states of the United Nations and other states met at the World Conference on
Natural Disaster Reduction in the city of Yokohama from May 23rd-27th 1994. It acknowledged
that the impact of natural disasters in terms of human and economic losses has risen in recent
years, and society, in general, has become vulnerable to natural disasters. It also accepted that
these disasters affected the poor and disadvantageous groups the worst, particularly in the
developing countries, which are ill-equipped to cope with them.  Hence, the conference adopted
the Yokohama strategy as a guide to rest of the decade and beyond, to mitigate the losses due to
these disasters.
The resolution of the World Conference on Natural Disasters Reduction is as mentioned below:
(i) It will note that each country has the sovereign responsibility to protect its citizens from
natural disasters;
(ii) It  will give priority attention to the developing countries, particularly the least developed,
land-locked countries and small-island developing states;
(iii) It will develop and strengthen national capacities and capabilities and, where appropriate,
national legislation for natural and other disaster prevention, mitigation and preparedness,
including the mobilisation of non-governmental organisations and participation of local
communities;
(iv) It will promote and strengthen sub-regional, regional and international cooperation in activities
to prevent, reduce and mitigate natural and other disasters, with particular emphasis on:
(a) human and institutional capacity-building and strengthening;
(b) technology sharing: the collection, the dissemination and utilisation of information; and
(c) mobilisation of resources.
It also declared the decade 1990-2000 as the International Decade for Natural Disaster
Reduction (IDNDR).
the highly devastating natural disasters have been
discussed, particularly in the context of India.
NATURAL DISASTERS AND HAZARDS IN INDIA
It was discussed in one of the previous chapters
that India is vast and diverse in terms of its
physical and socio-cultural attributes. It is
largely due to its vast geographical area,
environmental diversities and cultural
pluralities that scholars often described it
using two meaningful adjectives like the
‘Indian-subcontinent’ and the ‘land of unity in
diversity’. Its vastness in terms of natural
attributes combined with its prolonged colonial
past, continuing various forms of social
discriminations and also equally large
population have enhanced its vulnerability to
natural disasters. These observations can also
be illustrated by focussing on some of the
major natural disasters in India.
Earthquakes
Earthquakes are by far the most unpredictable
and highly destructive of all the natural
disasters. You have already learnt the causes
of earthquakes in your book Fundamentals
of Physical Geography (NCERT, 2006).
Earthquakes that are of tectonic origin have
proved to be the most devastating and their
area of influence is also quite large.  These
earthquakes result from a series of earth
movements brought about by a sudden release
of energy during the tectonic activities in the
earth’s crust. As compared to these, the
earthquakes associated with volcanic
eruption, rock fall, landslides, subsidence,
particularly in the mining areas, impounding
of dams and reservoirs, etc. have limited  area of
influence and the scale of damage.
It was mentioned in Chapter 2 of the book
that the Indian plate is moving at a speed of one
centimetre per year towards the north and
northeastern direction and this movement of
plates is being constantly obstructed by the
Eurasian plate from the north. As a result of this,
both the plates are said to be locked with each
other resulting in accumulation of energy at
different points of time.  Excessive accumulation
of energy results in building up of stress, which
ultimately leads to the breaking up of the lock
and the sudden release of energy causes
NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS
earthquakes along the Himalayan arch. Some
of the most vulnerable states are Jammu and
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal,
Sikkim, and the Darjiling and subdivision of West
Bengal and all the seven states of the northeast.
Apart from these regions, the central-western
parts of India, particularly Gujarat (in 1819,
1956 and 2001) and Maharashtra (in 1967 and
1993) have also experienced some severe
earthquakes. Earth scientists have found it
difficult to explain the occurrence of earthquakes
in one of the oldest, most stable and mature
landmass of Peninsular block for a long time.
Recently, some earth scientists have come up
with a theory of emergence of a fault line and
energy build-up along the fault line represented
by the river Bhima (Krishna) near Latur and
Osmanabad (Maharashtra) and the possible
breaking down of the Indian plate (Figure 7.2).
National
Geophysical
Laboratory,
Geological Survey of India, Department of
Meteorology, Government of India, along with
the recently formed National Institute of Disaster
Management, have made an intensive analysis
of more than 1,200 earthquakes that have
occurred in India in different years in the past,
and based on these, they divided India into the
following five earthquake zones:
Very high damage risk zone
High damage risk zone
(iii)
Moderate damage risk zone
Low damage risk zone
Very low damage risk zone.
Out of these, the first two zones had
experienced some of the most devastating
earthquakes in India. As shown in the Figure 7.2,
areas vulnerable to these earthquakes are the
North-east states, areas to the north of Darbhanga
and  Araria along the Indo-Nepal border in Bihar,
Uttaranchal, Western Himachal Pradesh (around
Dharamshala) and Kashmir Valley in the
Himalayan region and the Kuchchh (Gujarat).
These are included in the Very High Damage Risk
Zone.  Similarly, the remaining parts of Jammu
and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Northern parts
of Punjab, Eastern parts of Haryana, Delhi,
Western Uttar Pradesh, and Northern Bihar fall
under the High Damage Risk Zone. Remaining
parts of the country fall under moderate to very
Low Damage Risk Zone. Most of the areas that
can be considered safe are from the stable
landmass covered under the Deccan plateau.
Socio-Environmental
Consequences
Earthquakes
The idea of an earthquake is often associated with
fear and horror due to the scale, magnitude and
suddenness at which it spreads disasters on the
surface of the earth without discrimination. It
becomes a calamity when it strikes the areas of
high density of population. It not only damages
and destroys the settlements, infrastructure,
transport and communication network,
industries and other developmental activities but
also robs the population of their material and
socio-cultural gains that they have preserved
over generations. It renders them homeless,
which puts an extra-pressure and stress,
particularly on the weak economy of the
developing countries.
Effects of Earthquakes
Earthquakes have all encompassing disastrous
effects on the area of their occurrence. Some of
the important ones are listed in Table 7.3.
Table 7.3 : Effects of Earthquakes
On Ground
On Manmade
On Water
Structures
Fissures
Cracking
Waves
Settlements
Slidings
Hydro-Dynamic
Pressure
Landslides
Overturning
Tsunami
Liquefaction
Buckling
Earth Pressure
Collapse
Possible
Chain-effects
Possible
Possible
Chain-effects
Chain-effects
Figure 7.1 : A Damaged Building Due to an Earthquake
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 7.2 : India: Earthquake Hazard Zones
NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS
Apart from these, earthquakes also have
some serious and far-reaching environmental
consequences. Surface seismic waves produce
fissures on the upper layers of the earth’s crust
through which water and other volatile
materials gush out, inundating the
neighbouring areas. Earthquakes are also
responsible for landslides and often these
cause obstructions in the flow of rivers and
channels resulting in the formation of
reservoirs. Sometimes, rivers also change their
course causing floods and other calamities in
the affected areas.
Earthquake Hazard Mitigation
Unlike other disasters, the damages caused
by earthquakes are more devastating. Since
it also destroys most of the transport and
communication links, providing timely relief
to the victims becomes difficult. It is not
possible to prevent the occurrence of an
earthquake;  hence, the next best option is to
emphasis on disaster preparedness and
mitigation rather than curative measures
such as:
(i) Establishing earthquake monitoring
centres (seismological centres) for
regular
monitoring
dissemination of information among the
people in the vulnerable areas. Use of
Geographical Positioning System (GPS)
can be of great help in monitoring the
movement of tectonic plates.
(ii) Preparing a vulnerability map of the
country
dissemination
vulnerability risk information among the
people and educating them about the
ways and means minimising the adverse
impacts of disasters.
(iii) Modifying the house types and building-
designs in the vulnerable areas and
discouraging construction of high-rise
buildings, large industrial establishments
and big urban centres in such areas.
(iv) Finally, making it mandatory to adopt
earthquake-resistant designs and use
light materials in major construction
activities in the vulnerable areas.
Tsunami
Earthquakes and volcanic eruptions that
cause the sea-floor to move abruptly resulting
in sudden displacement of ocean water in the
form of high vertical waves are called tsunamis
(harbour waves) or seismic sea waves.
Normally, the seismic waves cause only one
instantaneous vertical wave; but, after the initial
disturbance, a series of afterwaves are created
in the water that oscillate between high crest
and low trough in order to restore the water
level.
The speed of wave in the ocean depends
upon the depth of water. It is more in the
shallow water than in the ocean deep. As a
result of this, the impact of tsunami is less over
the ocean and more near the coast where they
cause large-scale devastations. Therefore, a
ship at sea is not much affected by tsunami
and it is difficult to detect a tsunami in the
deeper parts of sea. It is so because over deep
water the tsunami has very long wave-length
and limited wave-height. Thus, a tsunami wave
raises the ship only a metre or two and each
rise and fall takes several minutes. As opposed
to this, when a tsunami enters shallow water,
its wave-length gets reduced and the period
remains unchanged, which increases the wave-
height. Sometimes, this height can be up to
15m or more, which causes large-scale
destructions along the shores. Thus, these are
also called Shallow Water Waves. Tsunamis
are frequently observed along the Pacific ring
of fire, particularly along the coast of Alaska,
Japan, Philippines, and other islands of South-
east Asia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, Sri
Lanka, and India etc.
After reaching the coast, the tsunami waves
release enormous energy stored in them and
water flows turbulently onto the land
destroying port-cities and towns, structures,
buildings and other settlements. Since the
coastal areas are densely populated the world
over, and these are also centres of intense
human activity, the loss of life and property is
likely to be much higher by a tsunami as
compared to other natural hazards in the
coastal areas. The extent of devastation caused
by tsunami can be assessed through the
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 7.3 : Tsunami Affected Area
(i) Large and continuous supply of warm
and moist air that can release enormous
latent heat.
(ii) Strong Coriolis force that can prevent
filling of  low pressure at the centre
(absence of Coriolis force near the
equator prohibits the formation of
tropical cyclone between 0°-5°
latitude).
(iii) Unstable condition through the
troposphere that creates local disturbances
around which a   cyclone develops.
(iv) Finally, absence of strong vertical wind
wedge, which disturbs the vertical
transport of latent heat.
Structure of Tropical Cyclone
Tropical cyclones are characterised by large
pressure gradients. The centre of the cyclone
is mostly a warm and low-pressure,
cloudless core known as eye of the storm.
Generally, the isobars are closely placed to
each other showing high-pressure
gradients. Normally, it varies between
14-17mb/100 km, but sometimes it can be
as high as 60mb/100km. Expansion of the
wind belt is about 10-150 km from the
centre.
Spatio-temporal Distribution of Tropical
Cyclone in India
Owing to its Peninsular shape surrounded
by the Bay of Bengal in the east and the
Arabian Sea in the west, the tropical
cyclones in India also originate in these two
important locations. Though most of the
cyclones originate between 10°-15° north
latitudes during the monsoon season, yet
in case of the Bay of Bengal, cyclones
mostly develop during the months of
October and November. Here, they
originate between 16°-2° N latitudes and
to the west of 92° E.  By July the place of
origin of these storms shifts to around 18° N
latitude and west of 90°E near the
Sunderban Delta. Table 7.4 and Figure 7.4
show the frequency and tracks of time of
cyclonic storms in India.
visuals on Banda Ache (Indonesia) presented
in the book Practical Work in Geography - Part I
(NCERT, 2006).
Unlike other natural hazards, the
mitigation of hazards created by tsunami is
difficult, mainly because of the fact that losses
are on a much larger scale.
It is beyond the capacity of individual state
or government to mitigate the damage. Hence,
combined efforts at the international levels are
the possible ways of dealing with these
disasters as has been in the case of the tsunami
that occurred on 26th December 2004 in which
more than 300,000 people lost their lives. India
has volunteered to join the International
Tsunami Warning System after the December
2004 tsunami disaster.
Tropical Cyclone
Tropical cyclones are intense low-pressure
areas confined to the area lying between 30° N
and 30° S latitudes, in the atmosphere around
which high velocity winds blow. Horizontally,
it extends up to 500-1,000 km and vertically
from surface to 12-14 km. A tropical cyclone
or hurricane is like a heat engine that is
energised by the release of latent heat on
account of the condensation of moisture that
the wind gathers after moving over the oceans
and seas.
There are differences of opinion among
scientists about the exact mechanism of a
tropical cyclone. However, some initial
conditions for the emergence of a tropical
cyclone are:
NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS
Figure 7.4 : Tropical Cyclone Hazard Zones
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Table 7.4 : Frequency of Cyclonic Storms in India
Months
Bay of Bengal
Arabian
January
4 (1.3) ∗
2 (2.4)
February
1 (0.3)
0 (0.0)
March
4 (1.30)
0 (0.0)
April
18 (5.7)
5 (6.1)
28 (8.9)
13 (15.9)
34 (10.8)
13 (15.9)
38 (12.1)
3 (3.7)
August
25 (8.0)
1 (1.2)
September
27 (8.6)
4 (4.8)
October
53 (16.9)
17 (20.7)
November
56 (17.8)
21 (25.6)
December
26 (8.3)
3 (3.7)
Total
314 (100)
82 (100)
*Data in the brackets are in percentage to total number
of storms taking place in a year
Consequences of Tropical Cyclones
It was mentioned that the energy to the tropical
cyclone comes from the latent heat released by
the warm moist air. Hence, with the increase
in distance from the sea, the force of the cyclone
decreases. In India, the force of the cyclone
decreases with increase in distance from the
Bay of Bengal and the Arabian Sea. So, the
coastal areas are often struck by severe cyclonic
storms with an average velocity of 180 km/h.
Often, this results in abnormal rise in the sea
level known as Storm Surge.
A surge is generated due to interaction
of air, sea and land. The cyclone provides
the driving force in the form of very high
horizontal pressure-gradient and very
strong surface winds. The sea water flows
across the coast along with strong winds
and heavy downpour.
This results in inundation of human
settlements, agricultural fields, damaging
crops and destruction of structures created by
human beings.
Floods
You read in newspapers and watch images of
floods on televisions occurring in some regions
during rainy seasons. Inundation of land and
human settlements by the rise of water in the
channels and its spill-over presents the
condition of flooding. Unlike other natural
disasters, the causes of floods are well-
established. Floods are relatively slow in
occurrences and often, occur in well-identified
regions and within expected time in a year.
Floods occur commonly when water in the
form of surface run-off exceeds the carrying
capacity of the river channels and streams and
flows into the neighbouring low-lying flood
plains. At times, this even goes beyond the
capacity of lakes and other inland water bodies
in which they flow. Floods can also be caused
due to a storm surge (in the coastal areas), high
intensity rainfall for a considerably longer time
period, melting of ice and snow, reduction in
the infiltration rate and presence of eroded
material in the water due to higher rate of soil
erosion. Though floods occur frequently over
wide geographical area having disasterous
ramifications in many parts of the world, floods
in the South, Southeast and East Asian
countries, particularly in China, India and
Bangladesh, are frequent and equally
disastrous.
Once again, unlike other natural disasters,
human beings play an important role in the
genesis as well as spread of floods.
Indiscriminate deforestation, unscientific
agricultural practices, disturbances along the
natural drainage channels and colonisation of
flood-plains and river-beds are some of the
human activities that play an important role
in increasing the intensity, magnitude and
gravity of floods.
Figure 7.5 :  Brahmaputra During Flood
NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS
Figure 7.6 : Flood Hazard Zones
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Various states of India face heavy loss of
lives and property due to recurrent floods.
Rashtriya Barh Ayog (National Flood
Commission) identified 40 million hectares of
land as flood-prone in India. The Figure 7.6
shows the flood-affected areas in India. Assam,
West Bengal and Bihar are among the high
flood-prone states of India. Apart from these,
most of the rivers in the northern states like
Punjab and Uttar Pradesh, are also vulnerable
to occasional floods. It has been noticed that
states like Rajasthan, Gujarat, Haryana and
Punjab are also getting inundated in recent
decades due to flash floods. This is partly
because of the pattern of the monsoon and
partly because of blocking of most of the
streams and river channels by human
activities. Sometimes, Tamil Nadu
experiences flooding during November-
January due to the retreating monsoon.
Consequence and Control of Floods
Frequent inundation of agricultural land and
human settlement, particularly in Assam, West
Bengal, Bihar and Eastern Uttar Pradesh
(flooding rivers), coastal areas of Orissa, Andhra
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Gujarat (cyclone) and
Punjab, Rajasthan, Northern Gujarat and
Haryana (flash floods) have serious
consequences on the national economy and
society. Floods do not only destroy valuable
crops every year but these also damage physical
infrastructure such as roads, rails, bridges and
human settlements. Millions of people are
rendered homeless and are also washed down
along with their cattle in the floods. Spread of
diseases like cholera, gastro-enteritis, hepatitis
and other water-borne diseases spread in the
flood-affected areas. However, floods also make
a few positive contributions. Every year, floods
deposit fertile silt over agricultural fields which
is good for the crops. Majuli (Assam), the largest
riverine island in the world, is the best example
of good paddy crops after the annual floods in
Brahmaputra. But these are insignificant
benefits in comparison to the grave losses.
The Government of India as well as the state
governments are well aware of the menace
created by floods every year. How do these
governments generally respond to the floods?
Construction of flood protection embankments
in the flood-prone areas, construction of dams,
afforestation and discouraging major
construction activities in the upper reaches of
most of the flood-creating rivers, etc. are some
steps that need to be taken up on urgent basis.
Removal of human encroachment from the
river channels and depopulating the flood
plains can be the other steps. This is
particularly true in western and northern parts
of the country which experience flash-floods.
Cyclone centres may provide relief in coastal
areas which are hit by a storm surge.
Droughts
The term ‘drought’ is applied to an extended
period when there is a shortage of water
availability due to inadequate precipitation,
excessive
evaporation
over-utilisation of water from the reservoirs and
other storages, including the ground water.
Drought is a complex phenomenon as it
involves elements of meteorology like
precipitation, evaporation, evapo-
transpiration, ground water, soil
moisture, storage and surface run-off,
agricultural practices, particularly the
types of crops grown, socio-economic
practices and ecological conditions.
Types of Droughts
Meteorological Drought : It is a situation when
there is a prolonged period of inadequate
rainfall marked with mal-distribution of the
same over time and space.
Agricultural Drought  : It is also known as soil
moisture drought, characterised by low soil
moisture that is necessary to support the crops,
thereby resulting in crop failures. Moreover, if
an area has more than 30 per cent of its gross
cropped area under irrigation, the area is
excluded from the drought-prone category.
Hydrological Drought : It results when the
availability of water in different storages and
reservoirs like aquifers, lakes, reservoirs, etc.
falls below what the precipitation can replenish.
NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS
Figure  7.8 : Drought Prone Areas
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Ecological Drought : When the productivity of
a natural ecosystem fails due to shortage of
water and as a consequence of ecological
distress, damages are induced in the
ecosystem.
Various parts of India experience these
droughts recurrently which result in some
serious socio-economic and ecological problems.
Drought Prone Areas in India
Indian agriculture has been heavily dependent
on the monsoon rainfall. Droughts and floods
are the two accompanying features of Indian
climate. According to some estimates, nearly
19 per cent of the total geographical area of
the country and 12 per cent of its total
population suffer due to drought every year.
About 30 per cent of the country’s total area is
identified as drought prone affecting around
50 million people. It is a common experience
that while some parts of the country reel under
floods, there are regions that face severe
drought during the same period. Moreover, it
is also a common sight to witness that one
region suffers due to floods in one season and
experiences drought in the other. This is mainly
because of the large-scale variations and
unpredictability in the behaviour of the
monsoon in India. Thus, droughts are
widespread and common phenomena in most
parts of the country, but these are most
recurrent and severe in some and not so in
others. On the basis of severity of droughts,
India can be divided into the following regions:
Extreme Drought Affected Areas : It is evident
from the Figure 7.8 that most parts of
Rajasthan, particularly areas to the west of the
Aravali hills, i.e. Marusthali and Kachchh
regions of Gujarat fall in this category. Included
here are also the districts like Jaisalmer and
Barmer from the Indian desert that receive less
that 90 mm average annual rainfall.
Severe Drought Prone Area : Parts of eastern
Rajasthan, most parts of Madhya Pradesh,
eastern parts of Maharashtra, interior parts of
Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka Plateau,
northern parts of interior Tamil Nadu and
southern parts of Jharkhand and interior
Orissa are included in this category.
Moderate Drought Affected Area : Northern
parts of Rajasthan, Haryana, southern districts
of Uttar Pradesh, the remaining parts of
Gujarat, Maharashtra except Konkan,
Jharkhand and Coimbatore plateau of Tamil
Nadu and interior Karnataka are included in
this category.  The remaining parts of India can
be considered either free or less prone to the
drought.
Consequences of Drought
Droughts have cascading effects on various
other aspects of environment and society. Crop
failure leading to scarcity of food grains (akal),
fodder (trinkal), inadequate rainfall, resulting
in shortage of water (jalkal), and often shortage
in all the three  (trikal) is most devastating.
Large-scale death of cattle and other animals,
migration of humans and livestock are the
most common sight to be seen in the drought-
affected areas. Scarcity of water compels people
to consume contaminated water resulting in
spread of many waterborne diseases like
gastro-enteritis, cholera, hepatitis, etc.
Droughts have both immediate as well as
long-term disastrous consequences on the
social
physical
environments.
Consequently, planning for drought has to
take both aspects into consideration.
Provision for the distribution of safe drinking
water, medicines for the victims and
availability of fodder and water for the cattle
and shifting of the people and their livestock
Figure 7.7 : Drought
NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS
to safer places, etc. are some steps that need
to be taken immediately. Identification of
ground water potential in the form of aquifers,
transfer of river water from the surplus to the
deficit areas, and particularly planning for
inter-linking of rivers and construction of
reservoirs and dams, etc. should be given a
serious thought. Remote sensing and satellite
imageries can be useful in identifying the
possible river-basins that can be inter-linked
and in identifying the ground water potential.
Dissemination of knowledge about
drought-resistant crops and proper training
to practise the same can be some of the
long-term measures that will be helpful in
drought-mitigation. Rainwater harvesting can
also be an effective method in minimising the
effects of drought.
Observe the methods adopted for roof-
top rainwater harvesting in your
locality and suggest measures to make
it more effective.
Landslides
Have you ever read about the blocking of roads
to Srinagar or disruption of rail services by
stones falling on the Konkan Railway track? It
happens due to landslide, which is the rapid
sliding of large mass of bedrocks. Disasters
due to landslides, are in general, far less
dramatic than due to earthquakes, volcanic
eruptions, tsunamis and cyclones but their
impact on the natural environment and
national economy is in no way less severe.
Unlike other disasters that are sudden,
unpredictable and are largely controlled by
macro or regional factors, landslides are largely
controlled by highly localised factors. Hence,
gathering information and monitoring the
possibilities of landslide is not only difficult but
also immensely cost-intensive.
It is always difficult to define in a precise
statement and generalise the occurrence and
behaviour of a landslide. However, on the
basis of past experiences, frequency and
certain causal relationships with the
controlling factors like geology, geomorphic
agents, slope,  land-use, vegetation cover and
human activities, India has been divided into
a number of zones.
Landslide Vulnerability Zones
Very High Vulnerability Zone : Highly unstable,
relatively young mountainous areas in the
Himalayas and Andaman and Nicobar, high
rainfall regions with steep slopes in the Western
Ghats and Nilgiris, the north-eastern regions,
along with areas that experience frequent
ground-shaking due to earthquakes, etc. and
areas of intense human activities, particularly
those related to construction of roads, dams,
etc. are included in this zone.
High Vulnerability Zone : Areas that have
almost similar conditions to those included in
the very high vulnerability zone are also
included in this category. The only difference
between these two is the combination, intensity
and frequency of the controlling factors. All the
Himalayan states and the states from the
north-eastern regions except the plains of
Assam are included in the high vulnerability
zones.
Moderate to Low Vulnerability Zone : Areas that
receive less precipitation such as Trans-
Himalayan areas of Ladakh and Spiti (Himachal
Pradesh), undulated yet stable relief and low
precipitation areas in the Aravali, rain shadow
areas in the Western and Eastern Ghats and
Deccan plateau also experience occasional
landslides. Landslides due to mining and
Figure 7.9 : Landslide
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
subsidence are most common in states like
Jharkhand, Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh,
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Goa and Kerala.
Other Areas : The remaining parts of India,
particularly states like Rajasthan, Haryana,
Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal (except
district Darjiling), Assam (except district Karbi
Anglong) and Coastal regions of the southern
States are safe as far as landslides are
concerned.
Consequences of Landslides
Landslides have relatively small and localised
area of direct influence, but roadblock,
destruction of railway lines and channel-
blocking due to rock-falls have far-reaching
consequences.  Diversion of river courses due
to landslides can also lead to flood and loss of
life and property. It also makes spatial
interaction difficult, risky as well as a costly
affair, which, in turn, adversely affects the
developmental activities in these areas.
Mitigation
It is always advisable to adopt area-specific
measures to deal with landslides. Restriction on
the construction and other developmental
activities such as roads and dams, limiting
agriculture to valleys and areas with moderate
slopes, and control on the development of large
settlements in the high vulnerability zones, should
be enforced. This should be supplemented by
some positive actions like promoting large-scale
afforestation programmes and construction of
bunds to reduce the flow of water. Terrace farming
should be encouraged in the northeastern hill
states where Jhumming (Slash and Burn/Shifting
Cultivation) is still prevalent.
DISASTER MANAGEMENT
Disasters due to cyclones, unlike the ones
caused by earthquakes, tsunamis and volcanic
eruptions are more predictable in terms of the
time and place of their occurrences. Moreover,
with the help of development of techniques to
monitor the behaviour of cyclones, their
intensity, direction and magnitude, it has
become possible to manage the cyclonic hazard
to some extent. Construction of cyclone-
shelters, embankments, dykes, reservoirs and
afforestation to reduce the speed of the winds
are some of the steps that can help in
minimising the damages. However, increase in
the loss of life and property in countries like
India, Bangladesh, Myanmar, etc. in successive
storms is largely due to high vulnerability of
their population residing in the coastal areas.
Disaster Management Bill, 2005
The Disaster Management Bill, 2005,
defines disaster as a catastrophe,
mishap, calamity or grave occurrence
affecting any area, arising from
natural or man-made causes, or by
accident or negligence which results
in substantial loss of life or human
suffering
damage
destruction of, environment, and is of
such nature or magnitude as to be
beyond the coping capacity of the
community of the affected area.
CONCLUSION
On the basis of the above discussion, it can be
concluded that disasters can be natural or the
results of human activities, and all hazards
need not turn into disasters since it is difficult
to eliminate disasters, particularly natural
disasters. Then the next best option is
mitigation and preparedness.  There are three
stages involved in disaster mitigation and
management:
Pre-disaster management involves
generating data and information about the
disasters, preparing vulnerability zoning
maps and spreading awareness among the
people about these. Apart from these,
disaster planning, preparedness and
preventive measures are other steps that
need to be taken in the vulnerable areas.
(ii) During disasters, rescue and relief
operations such as evacuation, construction
of shelters and relief camps, supplying of
water, food, clothing and medical aids etc.
should be done on an emergency basis.
(iii) Post-disaster operations should involve
rehabilitation and recovery of victims. It
NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS
Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
Which one of the following states of India experiences floods frequently?
Bihar
Assam
West Bengal
(d) Uttar Pradesh
In which one of the following districts of Uttaranchal did Malpa Landslide
disaster take place?
Bageshwar
Almora
Champawat
(d) Pithoragarh
(iii) Which one of the following states receives floods in the winter months?
Assam
Kerala
West Bengal
(d) Tamil Nadu
(iv) In which of the following rivers is the Majuli River Island situated?
Ganga
Godavari
Brahmaputra
(d) Indus
Under which type of natural hazards do blizzards come?
Atmospheric
Terrestrial
Aquatic
(d) Biological
Answer the following questions in less than 30 words.
(i) When can a hazard become a disaster?
(ii) Why are there more earthquakes in the Himalayas and in the north-eastern
region of India?
(iii) What are the basic requirements for the formation of a cyclone?
(vi) How are the floods in Eastern India different from the ones in Western India?
(v) Why are there more droughts in Central and Western India?
Answer the following questions in not more than 125 words.
Identify the Landslide-prone regions of India and suggest some measures to
mitigate the disasters caused by these.
What is vulnerability? Divide India into natural disaster vulnerability zones
based on droughts and suggest some mitigation measures.
When can developmental activities become the cause of disasters?
Project/Activity
Prepare a project report on any one of the topics given below.
(i) Malpa Landslide
(v) Tehri Dam/Sardar Sarovar
(ii) Tsunami
(vi) Bhuj/Latur Earthquakes
(iii) Orissa and Gujarat Cyclones (vii) Life in a delta/riverine island
(iv) Inter-linking of rivers
(viii) Prepare a model of rooftop rainwater
harvesting
EXERCISES
should also concentrate on capacity-
building in order to cope up with future
disasters, if any.
These measures have special significance
to a country like India, which has about
two-third of its geographical area and equal
proportion of its population, vulnerable to
disasters. Introduction of the Disaster
Management Bill, 2005 and establishment of
National Institute of Disaster Management are
some examples of the positive steps taken by
the Government of India.
APPENDIX
STATES, THEIR CAPITALS, NUMBER OF DISTRICTS, AREA AND POPULATION
State
Capital
No. of
Area in sq. km
Population
Districts
Andhra Pradesh
Hyderabad
2,75,060
7,57,27,541
Arunachal Pradesh
Itanagar
83,743
10,91,117
Assam
Dispur
78,438
2,66,38,407
Bihar
Patna
94,163
8,28,78,796
Chhattisgarh
Raipur
1,36,034
2,07,95,956
Panji
3,702
13,43,998
Gujarat
Gandhi Nagar
1,96,024
5,05,96,992
Haryana
Chandigarh
44,212
2,10,82,982
Himachal Pradesh
Shimla
55,673
60,77,248
Jammu and Kashmir
Srinagar
2,22,236
1,00,69,917
Jharkhand
Ranchi
79,714
2,69,09,428
Karnataka
Bangalore
1,91,791
5,27,83,958
Kerala
Tiruvanantapuram
38,863
3,18,38,619
Madhya Pradesh
Bhopal
3,08,000
6,03,85,118
Maharashtra
Mumbai
3,07,713
9,67,52,247
Manipur
Imphal
22,327
23,88,634
Meghalaya
Shillong
22,327
23,06,069
Mizoram
Aizawl
21,081
8,91,058
Nagaland
Kohima
16,579
19,88,636
Orissa
Bhubaneshwar
1,55,707
3,67,06,920
Punjab
Chandigarh
50,362
2,42,89,296
Rajasthan
Jaipur
3,42,239
5,64,73,122
Sikkim
Gangtok
7,096
5,40,493
Tamil Nadu
Chennai
1,30,058
6,21,10,839
Tripura
Agartala
10,49,169
31,91,168
Uttaranchal
Dehra Dun
53,484
84,79,562
Uttar Pradesh
Lucknow
2,38,566
16,60,52,859
West Bengal
Kolkata
88,752
8,02,21,171
* Delhi has the status of National Capital Territory with a Legislative Assembly
** Pondicherry also has a Legislative Assembly
Source :
India-2005, A Reference Annual, Publications Division, Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting
Union Territories
Capital
Population
Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Port Blair
8,249
3,56,152
Chandigarh
Chandigarh
9,00,914
Dadra and Nagar Haveli
Silvassa
2,20,490
Daman and Diu
Daman
1,58,204
NCT Delhi
* Delhi
1,38,00000
Lakshadweep
Kavaratti
60,595
Pondicherry
**Pondicherry
9,73,829
APPENDIX
UNION TERRITORIES, THEIR CAPITALS, AREA AND POPULATION
Rivers
Length
Catchment
Average
Estimated
(in km)
Area (sq. km)
Annual
Utilisable
Potential
Discharge in the
Excluding the
River (km3)
Groundwater
(km3)
Indus (in India)
1,114
321,289
73.31
Ganga  (in India)
2,525
861,452
525.02
250.0
Brahmaputra (in India)
194,413
Barak and others
41,723
Flowing to Meghna
Sabarmati
21,674
34,842
11.02
Narmada
1,312
98,796
45.64
34.30
Tapti
65,145
14.88
14.50
Brahmani and Baitarni
799+365
39,033+12,789
28.48
18.30
Mahanadi
141,589
66.88
49.99
Godavari
1,465
312,812
110.54
76.30
Krishna
1,401
258,948
78.12
58.00
Penner
55,213
Kaveri
81,155
21.36
19.00
Suvarnarekha
19,296
12.37
Total
2,528,084
1,869.35
690.31
Medium river basins flowing
towards the east and west directions
248,505
255.02
59.03
Total
2,776,589
2,124.37
749.34
APPENDIX
IMPORTANT RIVER BASINS
Source : State Forest Report, 2001
APPENDIX
STATE/UNION TERRITORY WISE FOREST COVER
State/UT
Geographic
Forest Cover
Dense
Total
Percent
Andhra Pradesh
275,069
25,827
18,810
44,637
16.23
Arunachal Pradesh
83,743
53,932
14,113
68,045
81.25
Assam
78,438
15,830
11,884
27,714
35.33
Bihar
94,163
3,372
2,348
5,720
Chhattisgarh
135,191
37,880
18,568
56,448
41.75
Delhi
1,483
3,702
1,785
2,095
56.59
Gujarat
196,022
8,673
6,479
15,152
Haryana
44,212
1,139
1,754
Himachal Pradesh
55,673
10,429
3,931
14,360
25.79
Jammu & Kashmir
222,236
11,848
9,389
21,237
Jharkhand
79,714
11,787
10,850
22,637
28.40
Karnataka
191,791
26,156
10,835
36,991
19.29
Kerala
38,863
11,772
3,788
15,560
40.04
Madhya Pradesh
308,245
44,384
32,881
77,265
25.07
Maharashtra
307,713
30,894
16,588
47,482
15.43
Manipur
22,327
5,710
11,216
16,926
75.81
Meghalaya
22,429
5,681
9,903
15,584
69.48
Mizoram
21,081
8,936
8,558
17,494
82.98
Nagaland
16,579
5,393
7,952
13,345
80.49
Orissa
155,707
27,972
20,866
48,838
31.36
Punjab
50,362
1,549
2,432
Rajasthan
342,239
6,322
10,045
16,367
Sikkim
7,096
2,391
3,193
45.00
Tamilnadu
130,058
12,499
8,983
21,482
16.52
Tripura
10,486
3,463
3,602
7,065
67.38
Uttar Pradesh
240,928
8,965
4,781
13,746
Uttaranchal
53,483
19,023
4,915
23,938
44.76
West Bengal
88,752
6,346
4,347
10,693
12.05
Andaman & Nicobar
8,249
6,593
6,930
84.01
Chandigarh
Dadra & Nagar Haveli
44.60
Daman & Diu
Lakshadweep
85.91
Pondicherry
Total
3,287,263
416,809
258,729
675,538
20.55
State/UT
Area of State
National Parks
Area Covered
(km2)
(km2)
State Area
Andhra Pradesh
275,068
373.23
Arunachal Pradesh
83,743
2290.82
Assam
78,438
1968.60
Bihar
94,163
335.65
Chhattisgarh
135,194
2929.50
3,702
107.00
Gujarat
196,024
480.11
Haryana
442,122
117.13
Himachal Pradesh
55,673
1429.40
Jammu and Kashmir
222,235
4680.25
Jharkhand
79,714
231.67
Karnataka
191,791
2435.14
Kerala
38,863
549.34
Madhya Pradesh
308,252
3656.36
Maharashtra
307,690
955.93
Manipur
22,327
40.00
Meghalaya
22,429
267.48
Mizoram
21,081
250.00
Nagaland
16,579
202.02
Orissa
155,707
990.70
Punjab
50,362
Rajasthan
342,239
4122.33
Sikkim
7,096
1784.00
25.14
Tamil Nadu
130,058
307.84
Tripura
10,486
Uttar Pradesh
240,926
490.00
Uttaranchal
53,485
4725.00
West Bengal
88,752
1693.25
Union Territories
Andaman and Nicobar
8,249
1156.91
14.02
Chandigarh
Dadra and Nagar Haveli
Daman & Diu
Delhi
1,483
Lakshadweep
Pondicherry
India
3,287,263
38,569.66
Source: State Forest Report, 2001
APPENDIX
NATIONAL PARKS OF INDIA
GLOSSARY
Alluvial Plain : A level tract of land made up of alluvium or fine rock material brought
down by a river.
Archipelago : A group of islands that lie in fairly close proximity.
Arid : Denoting any climate or region in which the rainfall is insufficient or barely
sufficient to support vegetation.
Backwater : A stretch of water that has become bypassed by the main flow of a
stream, although still joined to it.  It has a very low rate of flow.
Bedrock : The solid rock lying beneath soil and weathered material.
Biosphere Reserve : These are multi-purpose protected areas, where every plant
and animal size is to be protected in its natural habitat. Its major objectives are :
(i) to conserve and maintain diversity and integrity of the natural heritage in its full
form, i.e. physical environment, the flora and the fauna; (ii) to promote research on
ecological conservation and other aspects of environment at preservation; (iii) to provide
facilities for education, awareness and explaining.
Bunding : The practice of constructing embankments of earth or stone for conserving
water and soil to increase crop production.
Calcareous : Composed of or containing a high proportion of calcium carbonate.
Catchment Area : The area drained by a major river and its tributaries.
Climate  : The average weather conditions of a sizeable area of the earth’s surface
over a period of time (usually spread over a span of at least 30 years).
Coast : The boundary between land and sea.  It includes the strip of land that borders
the sea shore.
Coastal Plain : It is a flat low lying land between the coast and higher ground inland.
Conservation : The protection of natural environment and natural resources for the
future. It includes the management of minerals, landscape, soil and forests to prevent
their destruction and over exploitation.
Coral : It is a small calcium secreting marine polyp that occurs in colonies, mainly in
warm shallow sea water.  It forms the coral reefs.
Depression : In meteorology; it denotes an area of relatively low atmospheric pressure,
which is found mainly in temperate regions.  It is also used as synonym for temperate
cyclones.
Estuary : The tidal mouth of a river where fresh and saline water get mixed.
Fauna : The animal life of a given area or time.
Fold : A bend in rock strata resulting from compression of an area of the earth’s
crust.
Glacier : A mass of snow and ice that moves slowly away from its place of accumulation
carving gradually a broad and steepsided valley on its way.
Gneiss : A coarse grained metamorphic rock with a banded structure.  It is formed by
the large scale application of heat and pressure associated with mountain building
and volcanic activity.
Gorge : A deep valley with steep and rocky side walls.
GLOSSARY
Gully Erosion : It is the erosion of the soil and rock by the concentration of runoff into
gullies.
Humus : The dead organic content of the soil.
Island : A mass of land that is surrounded by water and is smaller than a continent.
Jet Stream : A very strong and steady westerly wind blowing just below the tropopause.
Lake : A body of water that lives in a hollow in the earth’s surface and is entirely
surrounded by land.
Landslide : A form of mass movement in which rock and debris moves rapidly
downslope under the influence of gravity as a result of failure along a shear plane.
Meander : A pronounced curve or loop in the course of a river channel.
Monsoon : A complete reversal of winds over a large area leading to a change of
seasons.
National Park : A National park is an area which is strictly reserved for the protection
of the wildlife and where activities such as forestry, grazing or cultivation are not
allowed.
Pass : A route through a mountain range which follows the line of a col or a gap.
Peninsula : A piece of land jutting out into the sea.
Plain : An extensive area of flat or gently undulating land.
Plateau : An extensive elevated area of relatively flat land.
Playa : The low flat central area of a basin of inland drainage. Playas occur in areas
of low rainfall.
Protected Forest : An area notified under the provisions of Indian Forest Act or the
State Forest Acts having limited degree of protection. In Protected Forests, all activities
are permitted unless prohibited.
Rapids : A stretch of swift flowing water where a river bed suddenly becomes steeper
due to the presence of hard rocks.
Reserved Forest : An area notified under the provisions of Indian Forest Act or the
State Forest Acts having full degree of protection. In Reserved Forests, all activities
are prohibited unless permitted.
Sanctuary : A sanctuary is an area, which is reserved for the conservation of animals
only and operations such as harvesting of timber, collection of minor forest products
are allowed so long as they do not affect the animals adversely.
Soil Profile : It is the vertical section of soil from the ground surface to the parent
rock.
Subcontinent : A big geographical unit which stands out distinctly from the rest of
the continent.
Terai : A belt of marshy ground and vegetation on the lower parts of the alluvial fans.
Tectonic : Forces originating within the earth and responsible for bringing widespread
changes in the landform features.
Unclassed Forest : An area recorded as forest but not included in reserved or protected
forest category. Ownership status of such forests varies from state to state.
