INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
TEXTBOOK FOR CLASS XI
2015-16(20/01/2015)
First Edition
February 2006  Phalguna 1927
Reprinted
October 2006 Kartika 1928
December 2007 Pausa 1929
December 2008 Pausa 1930
January 2010 Pausa 1931
January 2011 Pausa 1932
March 2012 Phalguna 1933
January 2013 Pausa 1934
January 2014 Pausa 1935
PD 115T RNB
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006
` 70.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with
NCERT watermark
ISBN 81-7450-551-2
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior
permission of the publisher.
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of
trade,  be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without
the publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than
that in which it is published.
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this
page, Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker
or by any other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.
Publication Team
Head, Publication
: Ashok Srivastava
Division
Chief Production
: Kalyan Banerjee
Officer
Chief Business
: Gautam Ganguly
Manager
Chief Editor
: Naresh Yadav
(Contractual Service)
Editor
: R. N. Bhardwaj
(Contractual Service)
Assistant Production
: Rajender Chauhan
Officer
Cover and Illustrations
Sarita Verma Mathur
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016
Phone : 011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bangaluru 560 085
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata  700 114
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021
Phone :  0361-2674869
Published at the Publication
Division by the Secretary, National
Council of Educational Research
and Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg,
New Delhi 110 016 and printed at
New Bharat Offset Printers, B-16,
Sector-6, Noida 201 301 (UP)
2015-16(20/01/2015)
FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF) 2005, recommends that
children’s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school.
This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning
which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the
school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on
the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They
also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp
boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures
will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system
of education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals
and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own
learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must
recognise that, given space, time and freedom, children generate new
knowledge by engaging with the information passed on to them by adults.
Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one
of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat
children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of
knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode
of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour
in implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of
teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for
teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook
proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather
than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to
address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring and
reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration for
child psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook
attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space
to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small
groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committee
responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the
advisory group in Social Sciences, Professor Hari Vasudevan and the
Chief Advisor for this book, Professor Tapas Majumdar for guiding the
work of this committee. Several teachers contributed to the development
of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for making this
possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations which
have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material
and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National
Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and
Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under the
Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande,
for their valuable time and contribution. As an organisation committed
to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its
products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable
us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi
National Council of  Educational
20 December 2005
Research and Training
2015-16(20/01/2015)
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SOCIAL SCIENCES
AT HIGHER SECONDARY LEVEL
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Calcutta,
Kolkata
CHIEF ADVISOR
Tapas Majumdar, Emeritus Professor, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New
Delhi
MEMBERS
Bharat C. Thakur, PGT, Government Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Surajmal
Vihar, Delhi
Gopinath Perumula, Lecturer, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai
Jaya Singh, Lecturer, DESS, NCERT, New Delhi
Nishit Ranjan Das, PGT, New Alipore Multipurpose School, Behala, Kolkata
Naushad Ali Azad, Professor, Department of Economics, Jamia Milia
Islamia, New Delhi
Neeraja Rashmi, Reader, DESS, NCERT, New Delhi
Rama Gopal, Professor, Department of Economics, Annamalai University,
Annamalai Nagar, Tamil Nadu
Pratima Kumari, Lecturer, DERPP, NCERT, New Delhi
Poonam Bakshi, Senior Lecturer, Department of Economics, Punjab
University, Chandigarh
R. Srinivasan, S.G. Lecturer, Department of Economics, Arignar Anna
Government Arts College, Villupuram, Tamil Nadu
Sabitha Patnaik, PGT, Demonstration School, Regional Institute of
Education, Sachivalaya Marg, Bhubaneswar
Sharmista Banerjee, Headmistress, Bidya Bharti Girls High School, Kolkata
MEMBER–COORDINATOR
M.V. Srinivasan, Lecturer, DESS, NCERT, New Delhi
2015-16(20/01/2015)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Many friends and colleagues have helped in preparing this textbook. The
National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges
M. Karpagam, Lecturer, Department of Economics, Meenakshi College,
Chennai; J. John, Director, Centre for Education and Communication, New
Delhi; Pratyusa K. Mandal, Reader, DESS, NCERT, New Delhi; Nandana
Reddy, Director (Development), Concern for Working Children, Bangalore;
V. Selvam, Research Scholar, Centre for Study of Regional Development and
Satish Jain, Professor, Centre for Economic Studies and Planning,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi; Pooja Kapoor, Modern School,
Barakhamba Road, New Delhi; Priya Vaidya, Sardar Patel Vidyalaya, Lodhi
Estate, New Delhi; and Nalini Padmanabhan, DTEA Senior Secondary
School, Janakpuri, New Delhi for providing their feedback and inputs.
The Council expresses its gratitude to Jan Breman and Parthiv Shah
for using photographs from their book, Working in the mill no more, published
by Oxford University Press, Delhi. Some stories were taken from the book,
Everybody Loves a Good Drought, authored by P. Sainath and published by
Penguin Books, New Delhi. A photo relating to farmers committing suicides
has been used from The Hindu. A few photographs and text materials on
environmental issues have been used from the State of India’s Environment
1 and 2 published by the Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi.
The Council thanks the authors, copyright holders and publishers of these
reference materials. The Council also acknowledges the Press Information
Bureau, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, New Delhi; National
Rail Museum, New Delhi for allowing  to use photographs available in their
photo library. Some photographs were given by S. Thirumal Murugan,
Principal, Adhiyaman Matriculation School, Uthangarai, Tamil Nadu; John
Suresh Kumar, Synodical Board of Social Service; Sindhu Menon of Labour
File, New Delhi; R. C. Das of CIET, New Delhi; Renuka of National Institute
of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi. The Council acknowledges their
contribution as well.
Special thanks are due to Savita Sinha, Professor and Head, Department
of Education in Social Sciences and Humanities for her support.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contributions of
Mamta and Arvind Sharma, DTP Operators; Neena Chandra, Copy Editor;
Dillip Kumar Agasti, Proof Reader; and Dinesh Kumar, Incharge Computer
Station in shaping this book. The efforts of the Publication Department,
NCERT are also duly acknowledged.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
The main objective of this book, Indian Economic Development, is to
expose the learners to some of the key issues facing the Indian economy.
In this process, as young adults, they are expected to be sensitised about
these issues, appreciate and learn to critically assess the role of the
government in various economic spheres. The book also provides
opportunities for knowing what economic resources are and how these
resources are being utilised in different sectors. The learners are also
exposed to numerical information relating to various aspects of Indian
economy and India’s economic policies. They are expected to develop
analytical skills, interpret the economic events and visualise the
economic future of India. Nevertheless, conscious effort has been made
not to burden the learner with concepts and data.
With regard to various economic issues and trends, this book
attempts to bring out alternative views on every issue so that students
can engage themselves in well-informed debates. On completion of the
course, Indian Economic Development, the learners are expected to
acquire skills to understand macroeconomic events which occur around
them, and to critically evaluate and interpret the relevant information
provided by the media.
This course comprises of many activities with each chapter. The
students have to carry out such activities under the guidance of their
teachers. In fact, the role of the teacher in enriching the understanding
of the Indian economy is greater in this course. The activities include
classroom discussions, collecting information from
government documents such as Economic Survey, archival
materials, from newspapers, television and others sources.
Learners should also be encouraged to read the works of
scholars on various topics.
For all this to happen, the teachers have to initiate the
process by taking some steps before starting the course. At the beginning
of the academic year, students may be asked to collect clippings from
newspapers and magazines relating to different topics under the course
— five year plans; allocation of funds to various sectors like agriculture,
industry, services and for  specific causes such as poverty and
employment; key issues of rural development, environment, various
2015-16(20/01/2015)
infrastructures, health, education and energy; and economic events in
China and Pakistan. They have to maintain these clippings, and when
the teacher starts teaching a particular topic, they can cull out those
news items, which they have collected from the beginning of the course,
and display/use them  in the classroom. It is necessary for learners to
build this collection right from the beginning of the course so that the
relevent information is at hand as and when needed; this habit will also
come in handy during later stages of education.
The schools will have to buy a hard copy of the Economic Survey
for the latest year. You will notice that information relating to the Indian
Economy is updated in the Economic Survey. It is necessary for the
students to familiarise themselves with such reports and work on
relevant activities. The statistical tables available as Appendix in the
Economic Survey would be immensely helpful in understanding various
issues.
While discussing a particular issue, discussion of the numerical
information about the issue is inevitable. For instance, when we talk of
growth rates — overall growth rates and growth of different sectors —
though it may be necessary for the learners to have a rough idea about
the trends in growth rates, they may also be encouraged to learn the
process involved in reaching the level of growth and factors contributing
to the trend rather than mere reproduction of tabular data of growth
rate.
You will notice numbered boxes in all chapters. These boxes
supplement the information given in the text. Through these boxes,  an
attempt has been made to lend a humane touch and, thus, bring the
issue under discussion closer to real life. However, these boxes, as also
‘Work These Out’ activities, are not meant for examination/evaluation
purposes.
Besides the relatively conventional
‘Exercises’, each chapter has ‘Suggested
Additional Activities’ at the end and ‘Work This/
These Out’ as part of the text; the more elaborate
of these can be treated as projects. Teachers
need to encourage the learners to explore beyond the text while attempting
these activities.
Understandably, Information Technology facilities may not  be
available in all the schools, however, it is important to take note that
various information relating to the Indian economy are available on the
Internet. Students need to be introduced to the Internet and encouraged
2015-16(20/01/2015)
to access the websites of the various government departments  to get
the required information. For instance, the details relating to poverty
are published by the Planning Commission. Students should know that
the Planning Commission of the Government of India has
a website in which various reports relating to different
aspects of India, including poverty, are available in the
form of reports. Since it may not always be possible to
procure such reports in hard copy, students and teachers may attempt
to download such reports from websites and use them in the classroom.
The reports such as Economic Surveys of the last 10 years are
available on the website: http://www.budgetindia.nic.in. Many
organisations change their website addresses. In case a website given in
this book is not accessible, kindly search those websites through search
engines such as GOOGLE (www.google.co.in).
For the first time, each chapter has been briefly summed up in the
‘Recap’ to facilitate learning. Also, please take note that sources for all
tables have not been given with the table as these tables were sourced
from various research materials which have been covered under
‘References’ for each chapter.
We wish to reiterate the fact that the prime objective of this course
on Indian economy is to introduce the basic macro issues of the Indian
economy to the student community and to initiate a well-informed
debate on our economy. We also stress that collaborative learning is an
important aspect of this course, hence the involvement of students as
well as teachers in collecting information on the Indian economy from
other sources is necessary and such collected information should be
used as important inputs for both teaching as well as learning about
the Indian economy.
You can send your queries and feedback relating to any part of this book
to the following address.
Programme Coordinator (Economics)
Department of Education in Social Sciences
National Council of Educational Research and Training
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016
Email : classtenecons2007@hotmail.com
2015-16(20/01/2015)
PEOPLE
INDIA,
[SOVEREIGN
SOCIALIST
SECULAR
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC]
JUSTICE,
LIBERTY
EQUALITY
FRATERNITY
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY
HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO
OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION.
having
solemnly resolved to constitute India into a
and to secure
to all its citizens :
social,
economic
political;
of thought, expression, belief,
faith and worship;
of status and of opportunity
and to promote among them all;
assuring the dignity of
individual
[unity
integrity of the Nation];
this twenty-sixth day of November, 1949 do
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, Sec.2,
for "Sovereign Democratic Republic" (w.e.f. 3.1.1977)
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, Sec.2,
for "Unity of the Nation" (w.e.f. 3.1.1977)
THE CONSTITUTION OF
INDIA
PREAMBLE
2015-16(20/01/2015)
CONTENTS
FOREWORD
UNIT I : DEVELOPMENT POLICIES AND EXPERIENCE (1947-1990)
CHAPTER 1: INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE
LOW LEVEL OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT UNDER THE COLONIAL RULE
AGRICULTURAL SECTOR
INDUSTRIAL SECTOR
FOREIGN TRADE
DEMOGRAPHIC CONDITION
OCCUPATIONAL STRUCTURE
INFRASTRUCTURE
CHAPTER 2 : INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990
THE GOALS OF FIVE YEAR PLANS
AGRICULTURE
INDUSTRY AND TRADE
TRADE POLICY: IMPORT SUBSTITUTION
UNIT II : ECONOMIC REFORMS SINCE 1991
36-56
CHAPTER 3 : LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION : AN APPRAISAL
BACKGROUND
LIBERALISATION
PRIVATISATION
GLOBALISATION
INDIAN ECONOMY DURING REFORMS: AN ASSESSMENT
UNIT III: CURRENT CHALLENGES FACING THE INDIAN ECONOMY
57-178
CHAPTER 4 : POVERTY
WHO ARE THE POOR?
HOW ARE POOR PEOPLE IDENTIFIED?
THE NUMBER OF POOR IN INDIA
2015-16(20/01/2015)
WHAT CAUSES POVERTY?
POLICIES AND PROGRAMMES TOWARDS POVERTY ALLEVIATION
POVERTY ALLEVIATION PROGRAMMES —A CRITICAL ASSESSMENT
CHAPTER 5 : HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA
WHAT IS HUMAN CAPITAL?
SOURCES OF HUMAN CAPITAL
HUMAN CAPITAL AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
STATE OF HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA
EDUCATION SECTOR IN INDIA
FUTURE PROSPECTS
CHAPTER 6 : RURAL DEVELOPMENT
WHAT IS RURAL DEVELOPMENT?
CREDIT AND MARKETING IN RURAL AREAS
AGRICULTURAL MARKET SYSTEM
DIVERSIFICATION INTO PRODUCTIVE ACTIVITIES
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND ORGANIC FARMING
CHAPTER 7 : EMPLOYMENT: GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES
WORKERS  AND EMPLOYMENT
PARTICIPATION OF PEOPLE IN EMPLOYMENT
SELF-EMPLOYED AND HIRED WORKERS
EMPLOYMENT IN FIRMS, FACTORIES AND OFFICES
GROWTH AND CHANGING STRUCTURE OF EMPLOYMENT
INFORMALISATION OF INDIAN WORKFORCE
UNEMPLOYMENT
GOVERNMENT AND EMPLOYMENT GENERATION
CHAPTER 8 : INFRASTRUCTURE
WHAT IS INFRASTRUCTURE?
RELEVANCE OF INFRASTRUCTURE
THE STATE OF INFRASTRUCTURE IN INDIA
ENERGY
HEALTH
2015-16(20/01/2015)
CHAPTER 9 :  ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
ENVIRONMENT — DEFINITION AND FUNCTIONS
STATE OF INDIA’S ENVIRONMENT
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
STRATEGIES FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
UNIT IV : DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA : A COMPARISON
179-197
WITH NEIGHBOURS
CHAPTER 10 : COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF
INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS
DEVELOPMENTAL PATH — A SNAPSHOT VIEW
DEMOGRAPHIC INDICATORS
GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT AND SECTORS
INDICATORS OF HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES — AN APPRAISAL
GLOSSARY
198-206
2015-16(20/01/2015)
Constitution of India
Fundamental Duties
It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle
for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to
do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all
the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or
sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of
women;
to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers, wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and
reform;
to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective
activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour
and achievement;
*(k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to
his child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and
fourteen years.
Note: The Article 51A containing Fundamental Duties was inserted by the Constitution
(42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 (with effect from 3 January 1977).
*(k) was inserted by the Constitution (86th Amendment) Act, 2002 (with effect from
1 April 2010).
Part IV A (Article 51 A)
2015-16(20/01/2015)
DEVELOPMENT POLICIES AND EXPERIENCE
(1947-90)
© NCERT
not to be republished
The two chapters in this unit give us an overview
of the state of the Indian economy as it was at the
eve of independence till after four decades of
planned development, which was a path that India
chose. This meant that the Government of India
had to take a series of steps such as the
establishment of the Planning Commission and
announcement of five year plans. An overview of
the goals of five year plans and a critical appraisal
of the merits and limitations of planned development
has been covered in this unit.
© NCERT
not to be republished
After studying this chapter, the learners will
become familiar with the state of the Indian economy in 1947, the
year of India’s Independence
understand the factors that led to the underdevelopment and
stagnation of the Indian economy.
INDIAN ECONOMY
ON THE
EVE OF INDEPENDENCE
© NCERT
not to be republished
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
1.1 INTRODUCTION
The primary objective of this book,
Indian Economic Development, is to
familiarise you with the basic features
of the Indian economy, and its
development, as it is today, in the
aftermath of Independence. However, it
is equally important to know something
about the country’s economic past even
as you learn about its present state and
future prospects. So, let us first look at
the state of India’s economy prior to the
country’s independence and form an
idea of the various considerations that
shaped India’s
post-independence
development strategy.
The structure of India’s present-
day economy is not just of current
making; it has its roots steeped in
history, particularly in the period when
India was under British rule which
lasted for almost two centuries before
India finally won its independence on
15 August 1947. The sole purpose of
the British colonial rule in India was
to reduce the country to being a raw
material supplier for Great Britain’s
own rapidly expanding modern
industrial base. An understanding of
the exploitative nature of this
relationship is essential for any
assessment of the kind and level of
development
which the Indian
economy has been able to attain over
the last six and half decades. 1.2
LOW LEVEL OF ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT UNDER THE
COLONIAL RULE
India had an independent economy
before the advent of the British rule.
Though agriculture was the main
source of livelihood for most people,
yet, the country’s economy was
characterised by various kinds of
manufacturing activities. India was
particularly well known for its
handicraft industries in the fields of
cotton and silk textiles, metal and
precious stone works etc. These
products enjoyed a worldwide market
based on the reputation of the fine
quality of material used and the high
standards of craftsmanship seen in all
imports from India.
“India is the pivot of our Empire... If the Empire loses any other part of its
Dominion we can survive, but if we lose India, the sun of our Empire will have
set.”
Victor Alexander Vruce, the Viceroy of British India in 1894
Box 1.1: Textile Industry in Bengal
Muslin is a type of cotton textile which had its origin in Bengal, particularly,
places in and around Dhaka (spelled during the pre-independence period as
Dacca),  now the capital city of Bangladesh. ‘Daccai Muslin’ had gained worldwide
fame as an exquisite type of  cotton textile. The finest variety of muslin was
called malmal. Sometimes, foreign travellers also used to refer to it as malmal
shahi or malmal khas implying that it was worn by, or fit for, the royalty.
© NCERT
not to be republished
INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE
The economic policies pursued by
the colonial government in India were
concerned more with the protection
and promotion of the economic
interests of their home country than
with the development of the Indian
economy. Such policies brought about
a fundamental change in the structure
of the Indian economy — transforming
the country into supplier of raw
materials and consumer of finished
industrial products from Britain.
Obviously, the colonial govern-
ment never made any sincere
attempt to estimate India’s national
and per capita income. Some
individual attempts which were
made to measure such incomes
yielded conflicting and inconsistent
results. Among the notable estimators
— Dadabhai Naoroji, William Digby,
Findlay Shirras, V.K.R.V. Rao and
R.C. Desai — it was Rao, whose
estimates during the colonial period
was considered very significant.
However, most studies did find that
the country’s growth of aggregate real
output during the first half of the
twentieth century was less than two
per cent coupled with a meagre half
per cent growth in per capita output
per year.
1.3 AGRICULTURAL SECTOR
India’s economy under the British
colonial rule remained fundamentally
agrarian — about 85 per cent
of the country’s population lived
mostly in villages and derived
livelihood directly or indirectly from
agriculture. However, despite being
the occupation of such a large
population, the agricultural sector
Fig. 1.1 India’s agricultural stagnation
under the British colonial rule
Box 1.2: Agriculture During
Pre-British India
The French traveller, Bernier, described
seventeenth century Bengal in the
following way: “The knowledge I have
acquired of Bengal in two visits inclines
me to believe that it is richer than Egypt.
It exports, in abundance, cottons and
silks, rice, sugar and butter. It produces
amply — for its own consumption —
wheat, vegetables, grains, fowls, ducks
and geese. It has immense herds of pigs
and flocks of sheep and goats. Fish of
every kind it has in profusion. From
rajmahal to the sea is an endless
number of canals, cut in bygone ages
from the Ganges by immense labour for
navigation and irrigation.”
Take note of the agricultural prosperity in our country in the seventeenth century. Contrast it
with agricultural stagnation around the time when the British left India, around 200 years later.
© NCERT
not to be republished
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
continued to experience stagnation
and, not infrequently, unusual
deterioration. Agricultural pro-
ductivity became low though, in
absolute terms, the sector experienced
some growth due to the expansion of
the aggregate area under cultivation.
This stagnation in the agricultural
sector was caused mainly because of
various
systems of
settlement that were introduced by
the colonial government.  Particularly,
under the zamindari system which
was implemented in the then Bengal
Presidency comprising parts of
India’s present-day eastern states,
the profit accruing out of the
agriculture sector went to the
zamindars instead of the cultivators.
However, a considerable number of
zamindars, and not just the colonial
government, did nothing to improve
the condition of agriculture. The main
interest of the zamindars was only to
collect rent
regardless of the
economic condition of the cultivators;
this caused immense misery and
social tension among the latter. To a
very great extent, the terms of the
revenue settlement
were also
responsible for the
zamindars
adopting such an attitude; dates for
depositing specified sums of revenue
were fixed, failing which the
zamindars were to lose their rights.
Besides this, low levels of technology,
lack of irrigation facilities and
negligible use of fertilisers, all added
up to aggravate the plight of the
farmers and contributed to the
dismal
level
agricultural
productivity. There was, of course,
some evidence of a relatively higher
yield of cash crops in certain
areas of the country due to
commercialisation of agriculture.
Work These Out
Compare the map of British India with that of independent India and find
out the areas that became parts of Pakistan. Why were those parts so
important to India from the economic point of view? (Refer, to your
advantage, Dr Rajendra Prasad’s book, India Divided).
What were the various forms of revenue settlement adopted by the British
in India? Where did they implement them and to what effect? How far do
you think those settlements have a bearing on the current agricultural
scenario in India? (In your attempt to find answers to these questions, you
may refer to Ramesh Chandra Dutt’s Economic History of India, which comes
in three volumes, and B.H. Baden-Powell’s The Land Systems of British
India, also in two volumes. For better comprehension of the subject, you
can also try and develop an illustrated agrarian map of British India either
by hand or with the help of your school computer. Remember, nothing
helps better than an illustrated map to understand the subject at hand).
© NCERT
not to be republished
INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE
But this could hardly help farmers in
improving their economic condition
as, instead of producing food crops,
now they were producing cash crops
which were to be ultimately used by
British industries back home. Despite
some progress made in irrigation,
India’s agriculture was starved of
investment in terracing, flood-control,
drainage and desalinisation of soil.
While a small section of farmers
changed their cropping pattern from
food crops to commercial crops, a large
section of tenants, small farmers and
sharecroppers neither had resources
and technology nor had incentive to
invest in agriculure.
1.4 INDUSTRIAL SECTOR
As in the case of agriculture, so also
in manufacturing, India could not
develop a sound industrial base under
the colonial rule. Even as the country’s
world famous handicraft industries
declined, no corresponding modern
industrial base was allowed to come
up to take pride of place so long
enjoyed by the former. The primary
motive of the colonial government
behind this policy of systematically de-
industrialising India was two-fold. The
intention was, first, to reduce India to
the status of a mere exporter of
important raw materials for the
upcoming modern industries in
Britain and, second, to turn India into
a sprawling market for the finished
products of those industries so that
their continued expansion could be
ensured to the maximum advantage of
their home country — Britain. In the
unfolding economic scenario, the
decline of the indigenous handicraft
industries created not only massive
unemployment in India but also a new
demand in the Indian consumer
market, which was now deprived of the
supply of locally made goods. This
demand was profitably met by the
increasing
imports
cheap
manufactured goods from Britain.
During the second half of the
nineteenth century, modern industry
began to take root in India but its
progress remained very slow.
Initially, this development was
confined to the setting up of cotton
and jute textile mills. The cotton
textile mills, mainly dominated by
Indians, were located in the western
parts of the country, namely,
Maharashtra and Gujarat, while
the jute mills dominated by  the
foreigners were mainly concentrated
in Bengal. Subsequently, the iron
and steel industries began coming up
in the beginning of the twentieth
century. The Tata Iron and Steel
Company (TISCO) was incorporated
in 1907. A few other industries in the
fields of sugar, cement, paper etc.
came up after the Second World War.
However, there was hardly any
capital goods industry to help
promote further industrialisation in
India. Capital goods industry means
industries which can produce machine
tools which are, in turn, used for
producing articles for current
consumption. The establishment of a
few manufacturing units here and
© NCERT
not to be republished
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
there was no substitute to the near
wholesale displacement of the
country’s traditional handicraft
industries. Furthermore, the growth
rate of the new industrial sector and
its contribution to the Gross Domestic
Product (GDP)  remained very small.
Another significant drawback of the
new industrial sector was the very
limited area of operation of the public
sector. This sector remained confined
only to the railways, power generation,
communications, ports and some
other departmental undertakings.
1.5 FOREIGN TRADE
India has been an important trading
nation since ancient times. But the
restrictive policies of commodity
production, trade and tariff pursued
by the colonial government adversely
affected the structure, composition and
volume of India’s foreign trade.
Consequently, India became an
exporter of primary products such as
raw silk, cotton, wool, sugar, indigo,
jute etc. and an importer of finished
consumer goods like cotton, silk and
woollen clothes and capital goods like
light machinery produced in the
factories of Britain. For all practical
purposes, Britain maintained a
monopoly control over India’s exports
and imports.  As a result, more than
half of India’s foreign trade was
restricted to Britain while the rest was
allowed with a few other countries like
China, Ceylon (Sri Lanka) and Persia
(Iran). The opening of the Suez Canal
further intensified British control over
India’s foreign trade (see Box 1.3).
The most important characteristic
of India’s foreign trade throughout the
colonial period was the generation of
a large export surplus. But this
surplus came at a huge cost to the
country’s economy. Several essential
commodities—food grains, clothes,
Work These Out
Prepare a list showing where and when other modern industries of India
were first set up. Can you also find out what the basic requirements are for
setting up any modern industry? What, for example, might have been the
reasons for the setting up of the Tata Iron and Steel Company at Jamshedpur,
which is now in the state of Jharkhand?
How many iron and steel factories are there in India at present? Are these
iron and steel factories among the best in the world or do you think that
these factories need restructuring and upgradation? If yes, how can this be
done? There is an argument that industries which are not strategic in nature
should not continue to be in the public sector. What is your view?
On a map of India, mark the cotton textiles, jute mills and textile mills that
existed at the time of independence.
© NCERT
not to be republished
INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE
kerosene etc. — were scarcely available
in the domestic market. Furthermore,
this export surplus did not result in
any flow of gold or silver into India.
Rather, this was used to make
payments for the expenses incurred by
an office set up by the colonial
government in Britain, expenses on war,
again
fought
British
government, and the import of invisible
items, all of which led to the drain of
Indian wealth.
1.6 DEMOGRAPHIC CONDITION
Various details about the population
of British India were first collected
through a census in 1881. Though
suffering from certain limitations, it
revealed the unevenness in India’s
population growth. Subsequently,
Fig.1.2 Suez Canal: Used as highway
between India and Britain
Box 1.3: Trade Through the Suez
Canal
Suez Canal is an artificial waterway
running from north to south across the
Isthmus of Suez in north-eastern
Egypt. It connects Port Said on the
Mediterranean Sea with the Gulf of
Suez, an arm of the Red Sea. The canal
provides a direct trade route for ships
operating
between
European
American ports and ports located in
South Asia, East Africa and Oceania by
doing away with the need to sail around
Africa. Strategically and economically,
it is one of the most important
waterways in the world. Its opening in
1869 reduced the cost of transportation
and made access to the Indian market
easier.
Not to scale
Work These Out
Prepare a list of items that were exported from and imported into India during
the British rule.
Collect information from the Economic Survey for various years published
by the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, on various items of export
from India and its imports. Compare these with imports and exports from
the  pre-independence era. Also find out the names of prominent ports which
now handle the bulk of India’s foreign trade.
Not to scale
© NCERT
not to be republished
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
every ten years such census operations
were carried out. Before 1921, India
was in the first stage of demographic
transition. The second stage of
transition began after 1921. However,
neither the total population of India nor
the rate of population growth at this
stage was very high.
The various social development
indicators were also not quite
encouraging. The overall literacy level
was less than 16 per cent. Out of this,
the female literacy level was at a
negligible low of about seven per
cent.
Public health facilities were
either unavailable to large chunks of
population or, when available, were
highly inadequate. Consequently,
water and air-borne diseases  were
rampant and took a huge toll on
life.  No wonder, the overall mortality
rate was very high and in that,
particularly, the infant mortality
rate was quite alarming—about 218
per thousand in contrast to the
present infant mortality rate of   63 per
thousand. Life expectancy was also
very low—44 years in contrast to the
present 66 years. In the absence of
reliable data, it is difficult to specify the
extent of poverty at that time but there
is no doubt that extensive poverty
prevailed in India during the colonial
period which contributed to the
worsening profile of India’s population
of the time.
1.7 OCCUPATIONAL STRUCTURE
During the colonial period, the
occupational structure of India, i.e.,
distribution of working persons
across different industries and
sectors, showed little sign of change.
The agricultural sector accounted for
Fig. 1.3 A large section of India’s population did not have basic needs such as housing
© NCERT
not to be republished
INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE
the largest share of workforce, which
usually remained at a high of 70-75
per cent while the manufacturing and
the services sectors accounted for only
10 and 15-20 per cent respectively.
Another striking aspect was the
growing regional variation. Parts
of the then Madras Presidency
(comprising areas of the present-day
states of Tamil Nadu, Andhra
Pradesh, Kerala and Karnataka),
Bombay and Bengal witnessed a
decline in the dependence of the
workforce on the agricultural sector
with a commensurate increase in the
manufacturing and the services
sectors. However, there had been an
increase in the share of workforce in
agriculture during the same time in
states such as Orissa, Rajasthan and
Punjab.
1.8 INFRASTRUCTURE
Under the colonial regime, basic
infrastructure such as railways,
ports, water transport, posts and
telegraphs did develop. However, the
real motive behind this development
was not to provide basic amenities to
the people but to subserve various
colonial interests. Roads constructed
in India prior to the advent of the
British rule were not fit for modern
transport. The roads that were built
primarily served the purposes  of
mobilising the army within India and
drawing out raw materials from the
countryside to the nearest railway
station or the port to send these to
far away England or other lucrative
foreign destinations. There always
remained an acute shortage of all-
weather roads to reach out to the
rural areas during the rainy season.
Naturally, therefore, people mostly
living in these areas suffered
grievously during natural calamities
and famines.
The British introduced the
railways in India in 1850 and it is
considered as one of their most
important
contributions.
railways affected the structure of the
Indian economy in two important
ways. On the one hand it enabled
people to undertake long distance
travel
thereby
break
geographical and cultural barriers
while, on the other hand, it fostered
commercialisation
Indian
agriculture which adversely affected
the self-sufficiency of the village
economies in India. The volume of
India’s
exports
undoubtedly
expanded but its benefits rarely
accrued to the Indian people.
The social benefits, which the
Work These Out
Can you find out the
reasons behind frequent
occurrence of famines in
India before independence?
You may read from Nobel
Laureate Amartya Sen’s
book, Poverty and Famines.
Prepare a pie chart for
the occupational structure
in India at the time of
independence.
© NCERT
not to be republished
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Indian people gained owing to the
introduction of the railways, were
thus outweighed by the country’s
huge economic loss.
Along with the development of
roads and railways, the colonial
dispensation also took measures for
developing the inland trade and sea
lanes. However, these measures were
far from satisfactory. The inland
waterways, at times, also proved
uneconomical as in the case of the
Coast Canal on the Orissa coast.
Though the canal was built at a huge
cost to the government exchequer, yet,
it failed to compete with the railways,
which soon traversed the region
running parallel to the canal, and had
to be ultimately abandoned. The
introduction of the expensive system
of electric telegraph in India, similarly,
served the purpose of maintaining law
and order. The postal services, on the
other hand, despite serving a useful
public purpose, remained all through
Fig.1.5 Tata Airlines, a division of Tata and
Sons, was established in 1932
inaugurating the aviation sector in India
Fig. 1.4 First Railway Bridge linking  Bombay with Thane, 1854
Work This Out
There is a perception still
going around that in
ways  the  British
administration in India
was quite beneficial. This
perception
needs
informed debate. How
would you look at this
perception? Argue this
out in your class — ‘Was
the British Raj good for
India’?
© NCERT
not to be republished
INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE
inadequate. You will learn more about
the present status of various
infrastructure in Chapter 8.
1.9 CONCLUSION
By the time India won its independence,
the impact of the two-century long
British colonial rule was already
showing on all aspects of the Indian
economy. The agricultural sector was
already saddled with surplus labour
and extremely low productivity. The
industrial sector was crying for
modernisation, diversification, capacity
building and increased public
investment. Foreign trade was oriented
to feed the Industrial Revolution in
Britain. Infrastructure facilities,
including the famed railway network,
needed upgradation, expansion and
public orientation. Prevalence of
rampant poverty and unemployment
required welfare orientation of public
economic policy. In a nutshell, the
social and economic challenges before
the country were enormous.
Recap
An understanding of the economy before independence is necessary to
know and appreciate the level of development achieved during the post-
independence period.
Under the colonial dispensation, the economic policies of the government
were concerned more with the protection and promotion of  British
economic interests than with the need to develop the economic condition
of the colonised country and its people.
The agricultural sector continued to experience stagnation and
deterioration despite the fact that the largest section of Indian population
depended on it for sustenance.
The rule of the British-India government led to the collapse of India’s
world famous handicraft industries without contributing, in any
significant manner, to its replacement by a modern industrial base.
Lack of adequate public health facilities, occurrence of frequent natural
calamities and famines pauperised the hapless Indian people and
resulted in engendering high mortality rates.
Some efforts were made by the colonial regime to improve infrastructure
facilities but these efforts were spiced with selfish motives. However, the
independent Indian government had to built on this base through
planning.
© NCERT
not to be republished
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
What was the focus of the economic policies pursued by the colonial
government in India? What were the impacts of these policies?
Name some notable economists who estimated India’s per capita
income during the colonial period.
What were the main causes of India’s agricultural stagnation during
the colonial period?
Name some modern industries which were in operation in our country
at the time of independence.
What was the two-fold motive behind the systematic de-
industrialisation effected by the British in pre-independent India?
The traditional handicrafts industries were ruined under the British
rule. Do you agree with this view? Give reasons in support of your
answer.
What objectives did the British intend to achieve through their
policies of infrastructure development in India?
Critically appraise some of the shortfalls of the industrial policy
pursued by the British colonial administration.
What do you understand by the drain of Indian wealth during the
colonial period?
Which is regarded as the defining year to mark the demographic
transition from its first to the second decisive stage?
Give a quantitative appraisal of India’s demographic profile during
the colonial period.
Highlight the salient features of India’s pre-independence occupational
structure.
Underscore some of India’s most crucial economic challenges at the
time of independence.
When was India’s first official census operation undertaken?
Indicate the volume and direction of trade at the time of
independence.
Were there any positive contributions made by the British in India?
Discuss.
EXERCISES
© NCERT
not to be republished
INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE
REFERENCES
SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES
Prepare a list of goods and services that were available to people in
pre-independence India in rural and urban areas. Compare it with
the consumption pattern of such goods and services by the people
today. Highlight the perceptible difference in the people’s standard
of living.
Find pictures of towns/villages, in your vicinity, of the pre-
independence period and compare these with their present scenario.
What changes can you mark? Are such changes for better or for
worse? Discuss.
Rally around your teacher and organise a group discussion on ‘Has
the zamindari system really been abolished in India’?  If the
consensus is negative, then what measures would you think should
be taken to banish it and why?
Identify the major occupations followed by the people of our country
at the time of independence. What major occupations do the people
follow today? In the light of reform policies, how would you visualise
the occupational scenario in India 15 years from now—say, 2020?
BADEN-POWELL, B.H. 1892. The Land Systems of British India, Vols I, II and III.
Oxford Clarendon Press, Oxford.
BUCHANAN, D.H. 1966. Development of Capitalist Enterprise in India. Frank
Cass and Co, London.
CHANDRA, BIPAN. 1993.  ‘The Colonial Legacy’ in Bimal Jalan (ed.), The Indian
Economy: Problems and Prospects. Penguin Books, New Delhi.
DUTT, R.C. 1963. Economic History of India, Vols. I and II. Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, Government of India, New Delhi.
KUMAR, D. AND MEGHNAD DESAI (Eds.). 1983. Cambridge Economic History of
India. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
MILL, JAMES.1972. History of British India. Associated Publishing House, New
Delhi.
PRASAD, RAJENDRA. 1946. India Divided. Hind Kitabs, Bombay.
SEN, AMARTYA. 1999. Poverty and Famines. Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
© NCERT
not to be republished
After studying this chapter, the learners will
come to know the goals of India’s five year plans
know about the development policies in different sectors such as
agriculture and industry from 1950-1990
learn to think about the merits and limitations of a regulated economy.
Indian Economy
1950-1990
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990
2.1 INTRODUCTION
On 15 August 1947, India woke to a
new dawn of freedom. Finally we were
masters of our own destiny after
some two hundred years of British
rule; the job of nation building was
now in our own hands.  The leaders
of independent India had to decide,
among other things, the type of
economic system most suitable for
our nation, a system which would
promote the welfare of all rather than
a few.  There are different types of
economic systems (see Box 2.1) and
among them, socialism appealed to
Jawaharlal Nehru the most. However,
he was not in favour of the kind of
socialism established in the former
Soviet Union where all the means of
production, i.e. all the factories and
farms in the country, were owned by
the government. There was no private
property. It is not possible in a
democracy like India for the
government to change the ownership
pattern of land and other properties
of its citizens in the way that it was
done in the former Soviet Union.
Nehru, and many other leaders and
thinkers of the newly independent
India, sought an alternative to the
extreme versions of capitalism and
socialism. Basically sympathising with
the socialist outlook, they found the
answer in an economic system which,
in their view, combined the best
features of socialism without its
drawbacks. In this view, India would
be a socialist society with a strong
public sector but also with private
property and democracy; the government
would plan (see Box 2.2) for the
The central objective of Planning in India... is to initiate a process of
development which will raise the living standards and open out to the people
new opportunities for a richer and more varied life.
First Five Year Plan
Work These Out
Ø Prepare a chart on the
different types of economic
systems prevalent in the
world. List out the countries
as capitalist, socialist and
mixed economy.
Ø Plan a class trip to an
agriculture farm. Divide the
class into seven groups with
each group to plan a specific
goal, for example, the
purpose of the visit, money
expenditure involved, time
taken, resources, people
accompanying the group
and who need to be
contacted, possible places
of visit, possible questions
to be asked etc. Now, with
the help of your teacher,
compile these specific goals
and compare with long-term
goals of successful visit to
an agricultural farm.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Box 2.1: Types of Economic Systems
Every society has to answer three questions
ØWhat goods and services should be produced in the country?
ØHow should the goods and services be produced? Should producers use
more human labour or more capital (machines) for producing things?
ØHow should the goods and services be distributed among people?
One answer to these questions is to depend on the market forces of
supply and demand. In a market economy, also called capitalism, only those
consumer goods will be produced that are in demand, i.e., goods that can
be sold profitably either in the domestic or in the foreign markets. If cars
are in demand, cars will be produced and if bicycles are in demand, bicycles
will be produced. If labour is cheaper than capital, more labour-intensive
methods of production will be used and vice-versa. In a capitalist society
the goods produced are distributed among people not on the basis of what
people need but on the basis of Purchasing Power—the ability to buy goods
and services. That is, one has to have the money in the pocket to buy it. Low
cost housing for the poor is much needed but will not count as demand in
the market sense because the poor do not have the purchasing power to
back the demand. As a result this commodity will not be produced and
supplied as per market forces. Such a society did not appeal to Jawaharlal
Nehru, our first prime minister, for it meant that the great majority of people
of the country would be left behind without the chance to improve their
quality of life.
A socialist society answers the three questions in a totally different
manner. In a socialist society the government decides what goods are to be
produced in accordance with the needs of society. It is assumed that the
government knows what is good for the people of the country and so the
desires of individual consumers are not given much importance. The
government decides how goods are to be produced and how they should be
distributed. In principle, distribution under socialism is supposed to be based
on what people need and not on what they can afford to purchase. Unlike
under capitalism, for example, a socialist nation provides free health care
to all its citizens.  Strictly, a socialist society has no private property since
everything is owned by the state. In Cuba and China, for example, most of
the economic activities are governed by the socialistic principles.
Most economies are mixed economies, i.e. the government and the
market together answer the three questions of what to produce, how to
produce and how to distribute what is produced. In a mixed economy, the
market will provide whatever goods and services it can produce well, and
the government will provide essential goods and services which the market
fails to do.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990
economy with the private sector being
encouraged to be part of the plan effort.
The ‘Industrial Policy Resolution’ of
1948 and the Directive Principles of
the Indian Constitution reflected
this outlook.  In 1950, the Planning
Commission was set up with the
Prime Minister as its Chairperson. The
era of five year plans had begun.
2.2 THE GOALS OF FIVE YEAR PLANS
A plan should have some clearly
specified goals.  The goals of the five
year plans are: growth, modernisation,
self-reliance and equity. This does not
mean that all the plans have given
equal importance to all these goals.
Due to limited resources, a choice has
to be made in each plan about which
of the goals is to be given primary
importance. Nevertheless, the planners
have to ensure that, as far as possible,
the policies of the plans do not
contradict these four goals. Let us now
learn about the goals of planning in
some detail.
Growth: It refers to increase in the
country’s capacity to produce the
output of goods and services within
the country. It implies either a
larger stock of productive capital,
or a larger size of supporting
services like transport and
banking, or an increase in the
efficiency of productive capital and
services. A good indicator of
economic growth, in the language of
Box 2.2: What is a Plan?
A plan spells out how the resources of a nation should be put to use. It
should have some general goals as well as specific objectives which are to
be achieved within a specified period of time; in India plans are of five years
duration and are called five year plans (we borrowed this from the former
Soviet Union, the pioneer in national planning). Our plan documents not
only specify the objectives to be attained in the five years of a plan but also
what is to be achieved over a period of twenty years. This long-term plan is
called ‘perspective plan’. The five year plans are supposed to provide the
basis for the perspective plan.
It will be unrealistic to expect all the goals of a plan to be given equal
importance in all the plans. In fact the goals may actually be in conflict. For
example, the goal of introducing modern technology may be in conflict with
the goal of increasing employment if the technology reduces the need for
labour. The planners have to balance the goals, a very difficult job indeed.
We find different goals being emphasised in different plans in India.
Our five year plans do not spell out how much of each and every good
and service is to be produced. This is neither possible nor necessary (the
former Soviet Union tried to do this and failed). It is enough if the plan  is
specific about the sectors where it plays a commanding role, for instance,
power generation and irrigation, while leaving the rest to the market.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Box 2.3: Mahalanobis: the Architect of Indian Planning
Many distinguished thinkers contributed to the formulation of our five year
plans. Among them, the name of the statistician, Prasanta Chandra
Mahalanobis, stands out.
Planning, in the real sense of the term, began with the Second Five Year
Plan. The Second Plan, a landmark contribution to development planning
in general, laid down the basic ideas regarding
goals of Indian planning; this plan was based
on the ideas of Mahalanobis. In that sense, he
can be regarded as the architect of Indian
planning.
Mahalanobis was born in 1893 in Calcutta.
He was educated at the Presidency College in
Calcutta and at Cambridge University in
England. His contributions to the subject of
statistics brought him international fame. In
1946 he was made a Fellow (member) of
Britain’s Royal Society, one of the most
prestigious organisations of scientists; only the
most outstanding scientists are made
members of this Society.
Mahalanobis established the Indian
Statistical Institute (ISI) in Calcutta and
started a journal, Sankhya, which still serves
as a respected forum for statisticians  to
discuss their ideas. Both, the ISI and Sankhya, are highly regarded by
statisticians and economists all over the world to this day.
During the second plan period, Mahalanobis invited many
distinguished economists from India and abroad to advise him on India’s
economic development. Some of these economists became Nobel Prize winners
later, which shows that he could identify individuals with talent. Among
the economists invited by Mahalanobis were those who were very critical of
the socialist principles of the second plan. In other words, he was willing to
listen to what his critics had to say, the mark of a great scholar.
Many economists today reject the approach to planning formulated by
Mahalanobis but he will always be remembered for playing a vital role in
putting India on the road to economic progress, and statisticians continue
to profit from his contribution to statistical theory.
Source: Sukhamoy Chakravarty, ‘Mahalanobis, Prasanta Chandra’ in John
Eatwell et.al, (Eds.) The New Palgrave Dictionary: Economic
Development, W.W. Norton, New York and London.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990
economics, is steady increase in the
Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The
GDP is the market value of all the
goods and services produced in the
country during a year. You can think
of the GDP as a cake and growth is
increase in the size of the cake. If the
cake is larger, more people can enjoy
it.  It is necessary to produce more
goods and services if the people of
India are to enjoy (in the words of the
First Five Year Plan) a more rich and
varied life.
The GDP of a country is derived
from the different sectors of the
economy, namely the agricultural
sector, the industrial sector and the
service sector. The contribution
made by each of these sectors makes
up the structural composition of
the economy.  In some countries,
growth in agriculture contributes
more to the GDP growth, while in
some countries the growth in the
service sector contributes more to
GDP growth (see Box 2.4).
Modernisation: To increase the
production of goods and services
the producers have to adopt new
technology. For example, a farmer can
increase the output on the farm by
using new seed varieties instead of
using the old ones. Similarly, a factory
can increase output by using a new
type of machine. Adoption of new
technology is called modernisation.
However, modernisation does not
refer only to the use of new technology
but also to changes in social outlook
such as the recognition that women
should have the same rights as men.
In a traditional society, women are
supposed to remain at home while
men work. A modern society makes
use of the talents of women in the
work place — in banks, factories,
schools etc. —  and such a society in
most occassions is also prosperous.
Self-reliance: A nation can promote
economic growth and modernisation
by using its own resources or by
using resources imported from other
nations. The first seven five year plans
gave importance to self-reliance
which means avoiding imports
of those goods which could be
Box 2.4: The Service Sector
As a country develops, it undergoes ‘structural change’. In the case of India,
the structural change is peculiar. Usually, with development, the share of
agriculture declines and the share of industry becomes dominant. At higher
levels of development, the service sector contributes more to the GDP than the
other two sectors. In India, the share of agriculture in the GDP was more than
50 per cent—as we would expect for a poor country. But by 1990 the share of
the service sector was 40.59 per cent, more than that of agriculture or industry,
like what we find in developed nations. This phenomenon of growing share of
the service sector was accelerated in the post 1991 period (this marked the
onset of globalisation in the country which will be discussed in a subsequent
chapter).
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
produced in India itself. This policy
was considered a necessity in order
to reduce our dependence on foreign
countries, especially for food. It is
understandable that people who
were recently freed from foreign
domination should give importance
to self-reliance. Further, it was feared
that dependence on imported food
supplies, foreign technology and
foreign capital may make India’s
sovereignty vulnerable to foreign
interference in our policies.
Equity: Now growth, modernisation
and self-reliance, by themselves, may
not improve the kind of life which
people are living. A country can have
high growth, the most modern
technology developed in the country
itself, and also have most of its people
living in poverty. It is important to
ensure that the benefits of economic
prosperity reach the poor sections as
well instead of being enjoyed only by
the rich. So, in addition to growth,
modernisation and self-reliance,
equity is also important. Every Indian
should be able to meet his or her basic
needs such as food, a decent house,
education and health care and
inequality in the distribution of wealth
should be reduced.
Let us now see how the first seven
five year plans, covering the period
1950-1990, attempted to attain these
four goals and the extent to which
they succeeded in doing so, with
reference to agriculture, industry
and trade. You will study the policies
and developmental issues taken up
after 1991 in Chapter 3.
2.3 AGRICULTURE
You have learnt in Chapter 1 that
during the colonial rule there was
neither growth nor equity in the
agricultural sector. The policy makers
of independent India had to address
these issues which they did through
land reforms and promoting the use
of ‘High Yielding Variety’ (HYV) seeds
which ushered in a revolution in
Indian agriculture.
Land Reforms: At the time of
independence, the land tenure system
was characterised by intermediaries
Work These Out
Ø Discuss in your class the changes in technology used for
(a)  Production of food grains
(b)  Packaging of products
(c)  Mass communication
Ø Find out and prepare a list of major items that India used to import and
export during 1990-91 and 2013-14.
(a) Observe the difference
(b) Do you see the impact of self-reliance? Discuss.
For getting these details you may refer to Economic Survey of the latest year.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990
(variously called zamindars, jagirdars
etc.) who merely collected rent from the
actual tillers of the soil without
contributing towards  improvements
on the farm.  The low productivity of
the agricultural sector forced India to
import food from the United States of
America (U.S.A.). Equity in agriculture
called for land reforms which primarily
refer to change in the ownership of
landholdings. Just a year after
independence, steps were taken to
abolish intermediaries and to make the
tillers the owners of land. The idea
behind this move was that ownership
of land would give incentives (see Box
2.5) to the tillers to invest in making
improvements provided sufficient
capital was made available to them.
Land ceiling was another policy to
promote equity in the agricultural
sector. This means fixing the maximum
size of land which could be owned by
an individual. The purpose of land
ceiling was to reduce the concentration
of land ownership in a few hands.
The abolition of intermediaries
meant that some 200 lakh tenants
came into direct contact with the
government — they were thus
freed from being exploited by the
zamindars. The ownership conferred
on tenants gave them the incentive to
increase output and this contributed
to growth in agriculture. However, the
goal of equity was not fully served
by abolition of intermediaries. In
some areas the former zamindars
Box 2.5: Ownership and Incentives
The policy of ‘land to the tiller’ is based on the idea that the cultivators will
take more interest — they will have more incentive —in increasing output if
they are the owners of the land. This is because ownership of land enables the
tiller to make profit from the increased output. Tenants do not have the incentive
to make improvements on land since it is the landowner who would benefit
more from higher output. The importance of ownership in providing incentives
is well illustrated by the carelessness with which farmers in the former Soviet
Union used to pack fruits for sale. It was not uncommon to see farmers packing
rotten fruits along with fresh fruits in the same box. Now, every farmer knows
that the rotten fruits will spoil the fresh fruits if they are packed together. This
will be a loss to the farmer since the fruits cannot be sold. So why did the
Soviet farmers do something which would so obviously result in loss for them?
The answer lies in the incentives facing the farmers. Since farmers in the
former Soviet Union did not own any land, they neither enjoyed the profits nor
suffered the losses. In the absence of ownership, there was no incentive on
the part of farmers to be efficient, which also explains the poor performance of
the agricultural sector in the Soviet Union despite availability of vast areas of
highly fertile land.
Source: Thomas Sowell, Basic Economics: A Citizen’s Guide to the Economy,
New York: Basic Books, 2004, Second Edition.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
continued to own large areas of land
by making use of some loopholes in
the legislation; there were cases where
tenants were evicted and the
landowners claimed to be self-
cultivators (the actual tillers), claiming
ownership of the land; and even when
the tillers got ownership of land, the
poorest of the agricultural labourers
(such as sharecroppers and landless
labourers) did not benefit from land
reforms.
The land ceiling legislation also
faced hurdles. The big landlords
challenged the legislation in the
courts, delaying its implementation.
They used this delay to register their
lands in the name of close relatives,
thereby
escaping
legislation. The legislation also had
a lot of loopholes which were
exploited by the big landholders to
retain their land. Land reforms were
successful in Kerala and West
Bengal because these states had
governments committed to the policy
of land to the tiller. Unfortunately
other states did not have the same
level of commitment and vast
inequality in landholding continues
to this day.
Green
Revolution:
independence, about 75 per cent of
the country’s population was
dependent
agriculture.
Productivity in the agricultural sector
was very low because of the use of old
technology and the absence of
required infrastructure for the vast
majority
farmers.
India’s
agriculture vitally depends on the
monsoon and if the monsoon fell short
the farmers were in trouble unless
they had access to irrigation facilities
which very few had. The stagnation in
agriculture during the colonial rule
was permanently broken by the green
revolution. This refers to the large
increase in production of food grains
resulting from the use of high yielding
variety (HYV) seeds especially for
wheat and rice.  The use of these seeds
required the use of fertiliser and
pesticide in the correct quantities as
well as regular supply of water; the
application of these inputs in correct
proportions is vital. The farmers who
could benefit from HYV seeds required
reliable irrigation facilities as well as
the financial resources to purchase
fertiliser and pesticide. As a result, in
the first phase of the green revolution
(approximately mid 1960s upto mid
1970s), the use of HYV seeds was
restricted to the more affluent states
such as Punjab, Andhra Pradesh and
Tamil Nadu. Further, the use of HYV
seeds primarily benefited  the wheat-
growing regions only.  In the second
phase of the green revolution
(mid-1970s to mid-1980s), the HYV
technology spread to a larger number
of states and benefited more variety
of crops. The spread of green
revolution technology enabled India
to achieve self-sufficiency in food
grains; we no longer had to be at the
mercy of America, or any other nation,
for meeting our nation’s food
requirements.
Growth in agricultural output is
important but it is not enough. If a
large proportion of this increase is
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990
consumed by the farmers themselves
instead of being sold in the market,
the higher output will not make much
of a difference to the economy as a
whole. If, on the other hand, a
substantial amount of agricultural
produce is sold in the market by the
farmers, the higher output can make
a difference to the economy. The
portion of agricultural produce which
is sold in the market by the farmers
is called marketed surplus.  A good
proportion of the  rice and wheat
produced during  the green revolution
period  (available as marketed
surplus) was sold by the farmers in
the market. As a result, the price of
food grains declined relative to other
items of consumption. The low-
income groups, who spend a large
percentage of their income on food,
benefited from this decline in relative
prices. The green revolution enabled
the government to procure sufficient
amount of food grains to build a stock
which could be used in times of food
shortage.
While the nation had immensely
benefited from the green revolution, the
technology involved was not free from
risks. One such risk was the possibility
that it  would increase the disparities
between small and big farmers—since
only the big farmers could afford the
required inputs, thereby reaping most
of the benefits of the green revolution.
Moreover, the HYV crops were also more
prone to attack by pests and the small
farmers who adopted this technology
could lose everything in a pest attack.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Fortunately, these fears did not
come true because of the steps taken
by the government. The government
provided loans at a low interest rate
to small farmers and subsidised
fertilisers so that small farmers could
also have access to the needed
inputs. Since the small farmers could
obtain the required inputs, the
output on small farms equalled the
output on large farms in the  course
of time. As a result, the green
revolution benefited the small as well
as rich farmers.  The risk of the small
farmers being ruined when pests
attack their crops was considerably
reduced by the services rendered by
research institutes established by the
government. You should note that
the green revolution would have
favoured the rich farmers only if the
state did not play an extensive role
in ensuring that the small farmer also
gains from the new technology.
The Debate Over Subsidies: The
economic justification of subsidies in
agriculture is, at present, a hotly
debated question. It is generally
agreed that it was necessary to use
subsidies to provide an incentive for
adoption of the new HYV technology
by farmers in general and small
farmers in particular. Any new
technology will be looked upon as
being risky by farmers. Subsidies
were, therefore, needed to encourage
farmers to test the new technology.
Some economists believe that once
the technology is found profitable
and is widely adopted, subsidies
should be phased out since their
purpose has been served. Further,
subsidies are meant to benefit the
farmers but a substantial amount of
fertiliser subsidy also benefits the
fertiliser industry; and among
farmers, the subsidy largely benefits
the farmers in the more prosperous
regions. Therefore, it is argued that
there is no case for continuing with
fertiliser subsidies; it does not benefit
the target group and it is a huge
burden on the government’s finances
(see also Box 2.6).
On the other hand, some believe
that the government should continue
with agricultural subsidies because
farming in India continues to be a
risky business. Most farmers are very
poor and they will not be able to
afford the required inputs without
subsidies. Eliminating subsidies will
increase the inequality between rich
and poor farmers and violate the goal
of equity. These experts argue that if
subsidies are largely benefiting the
fertiliser industry and big farmers,
the correct policy is not to abolish
subsidies but to take steps to ensure
that only the poor farmers enjoy the
benefits.
Thus, by the late 1960s, Indian
agricultural productivity had increased
sufficiently to enable the country to be
self-sufficient in food grains.  This is an
achievement to be proud of. On the
negative side, some 65 per cent of the
country’s population continued to be
employed in agriculture even as late as
1990. Economists have found that as
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990
a nation becomes more prosperous, the
proportion of GDP contributed by
agriculture as well as the proportion of
population working in the sector
declines considerably. In India,
between 1950 and 1990, the
proportion of GDP contributed by
agriculture declined significantly but
not the population depending on it
(67.5 per cent in 1950 to 64.9 per cent
by 1990). Why was such a large
proportion of the population engaged
in agriculture although agricultural
output could have grown with much
less people working in the sector? The
answer is that the industrial sector and
the service sector did not absorb the
people working in the agricultural
sector. Many economists call this an
important failure of our policies
followed during 1950-1990.
2.4 INDUSTRY AND TRADE
Economists have found that poor
nations can progress only if they have
a good industrial sector. Industry
provides employment which is more
stable than the employment in
agriculture; it promotes modernisation
and overall prosperity. It is for this
reason that the five year plans place
a lot of emphasis on industrial
development. You might have
studied in the previous chapter that,
at the time of independence, the
variety of industries was very narrow
Box 2.6: Prices as Signals
You would have learnt in an earlier class about how prices of goods are
determined in the market. It is important to understand that prices are signals
about the availability of goods. If a good becomes scarce, its price will rise and
those who use this good will have the incentive to make efficient decisions
about its use based on the price.  If the price of water goes up because of lower
supply, people will have the incentive to use it with greater care; for example,
they may stop watering the garden to conserve water. We complain whenever
the price of petrol increases and blame it on the government. But the increase
in petrol price reflects greater scarcity and the price rise is a signal that less
petrol is available— this provides an incentive to use less petrol or look for
alternate fuels.
Some economists point out that subsidies do not allow prices to indicate
the supply of a good. When electricity and water are provided at a subsidised
rate or free, they will be used wastefully without any concern for their scarcity.
Farmers will cultivate water intensive crops if water is supplied free, although
the water resources in that region may be scarce and such crops will further
deplete the already scarce resources. If water is priced to reflect scarcity,
farmers will cultivate crops suitable to the region. Fertiliser and pesticide
subsidies result in overuse of resources which can be harmful to the
environment. Subsidies provide an incentive for wasteful use of resources.
Think about subsidies in terms of incentives and ask yourself whether it is
wise from the economic viewpoint to provide free electricity to farmers.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
— largely confined to cotton textiles
and jute. There were two well-
managed iron and steel firms — one
in Jamshedpur and the other in
Kolkata — but, obviously, we needed
to expand the industrial base with a
variety of industries if the economy
was to grow.
Public and Private Sectors in Indian
Industrial Development: The big
question facing the policy makers was
—  what should be the role of the
government and the private sector in
industrial development? At the time of
independence, Indian industrialists did
not have the capital to undertake
Work These Out
Ø A group of students may visit an agricultural farm, prepare a case study on
the method of farming used, that is, types of seeds, fertilisers, machines,
means of irrigation, cost involved, marketable surplus and income earned.
It will be beneficial if the changes in cultivation methods could be collected
from an elderly member of the farming family
(a) Discuss the findings in your class.
(b) The different groups can then prepare a chart showing variations in
cost of production, productivity, use of seeds, fertilisers, means of
irrigation, time taken, marketable surplus and income of the family.
Ø Collect newspaper cuttings related to the World Bank, International
Monetary Fund, World Trade Organisation  (and meets of G7, G8, G10
countries). Discuss the views shared by the developed and developing
countries on farm subsidies.
Ø Prepare pie charts on the occupational structure of the Indian economy
available in the following table.
Sector
1950–51
1990–91
Agriculture
Industry
Services
Ø Study the arguments for and against agricultural subsidies. What is your
view on this issue?
Ø Some economists argue that farmers in other countries, particularly
developed countries, are provided with high amount of subsidies and are
encouraged to export their produce to other countries. Do you think our
farmers will be able to compete with farmers from developed countries?
Discuss.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990
investment in industrial ventures
required for the development of our
economy; nor was the market big
enough to encourage industrialists to
undertake major projects even if they
had the capital to do so. It is principally
for these reasons that the state had to
play an extensive role in promoting the
industrial sector. In addition, the
decision to develop the Indian economy
on socialist lines led to the policy of the
state controlling the commanding
heights of the economy, as the Second
Five  Year plan put it. This meant that
the state would have complete control
of those industries that were vital for
the economy. The policies of the private
sector would have to be complimentary
to those of the public sector, with the
public sector leading the way.
Industrial Policy Resolution 1956
(IPR 1956): In accordance with the
goal of the state controlling the
commanding heights of the economy,
the Industrial Policy Resolution of
1956 was adopted. This resolution
formed the basis of the Second Five
Year Plan, the plan which tried to
build the basis for a socialist pattern
of society. This resolution classified
industries into three categories. The
first category comprised industries
which would be exclusively owned by
the state; the second category
consisted of industries in which the
private sector could supplement the
efforts of the state sector, with the
state taking the sole responsibility for
starting new units; the third category
consisted of the remaining industries
which were to be in the private sector.
Although there was a category of
industries left to the private sector,
the sector was kept under state
control through a system of licenses.
No new industry was allowed unless
a license was obtained from the
government. This policy was used for
promoting industry in backward
regions; it was easier to obtain a
license if the industrial unit was
established in an economically
backward area. In addition, such
units were given certain concessions
such as tax benefits and electricity
at a lower tariff. The purpose of this
policy was to promote regional
equality.
Even an existing industry had to
obtain a license for expanding
output or for diversifying production
(producing a new variety of goods).
This was meant  to ensure that the
quantity of goods produced was not
more than what the economy
required. License to expand
production was given only if the
government was convinced that the
economy required a larger quantity
of goods.
Small-Scale Industry: In 1955, the
Village and Small-Scale Industries
Committee, also called the Karve
Committee, noted the possibility of
using small-scale industries for
promoting rural development. A
‘small-scale industry’ is defined with
reference to the  maximum invest-
ment allowed on the assets of a unit.
This limit has changed over a period
of time. In 1950 a small-scale
industrial unit was one which invested
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
a maximum of rupees five lakh; at
present the maximum investment
allowed is rupees one crore.
It is believed that small-scale
industries are more ‘labour intensive’
i.e., they use more labour than the
large-scale industries and, therefore,
generate more employment. But these
industries cannot compete with the big
industrial firms; it is obvious that
development of small-scale industry
requires them to be shielded from the
large firms. For this purpose, the
production of a number of products
was reserved for the small-scale
industry; the criterion of reservation
being the ability of these units to
manufacture the goods. They were also
given concessions such as lower excise
duty and bank loans at lower interest
rates.
2.5 TRADE POLICY: IMPORT SUBSTITUTION
The industrial policy that we adopted
was closely related to the trade
policy. In the first seven plans, trade
was characterised by what is
commonly called an inward looking
trade strategy. Technically, this
strategy is called import substi-
tution. This policy aimed at replacing
or substituting imports with domestic
production. For example, instead of
importing vehicles made in a foreign
country, industries would be
encouraged to produce them in India
itself. In this policy the government
protected the domestic industries
from foreign competition. Protection
from imports took two forms: tariffs
and quotas. Tariffs are a tax on
imported goods; they make imported
goods more expensive and discourage
their use. Quotas specify the quantity
of goods which can be imported. The
effect of tariffs and quotas is that they
restrict imports and, therefore, protect
the domestic firms from foreign
competition.
The policy of protection is based
on the notion that industries of
developing countries are not in a
position to compete against the
goods produced by more developed
economies. It is assumed that if the
domestic industries are protected
they will learn to compete in the
course of time. Our planners also
feared the possibility of foreign
exchange being spent on import of
luxury goods if no restrictions were
placed on imports. Nor was any
serious thought given to promote
exports until the mid-1980s.
Effect of Policies on Industrial
Development: The achievements of
India’s industrial sector during the
first seven plans are impressive
indeed. The proportion of GDP
contributed by the industrial
sector increased in the period from
11.8 per cent in 1950-51 to 24.6 per
cent in 1990-91. The rise in the
industry’s share of GDP is an
important indicator of development.
The six per cent annual growth rate
of the industrial sector during the
period is commendable. No longer
was Indian industry restricted largely
to cotton textiles and jute; in fact, the
industrial sector became well
diversified by 1990, largely due to
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990
the public sector. The promotion
of small-scale industries gave
opportunities to those people who did
not have the capital to start large
firms to get into business. Protection
from foreign competition enabled the
development of indigenous industries
in the areas of electronics and
automobile sectors which otherwise
could not have developed.
In spite of the contribution made
by the public sector to the growth of
the Indian economy, some economists
are critical of the performance of
many public sector enterprises. It
was proposed at the beginning of this
chapter that initially public sector
was required in a big way. It is now
widely held that state enterprises
continued to produce certain goods
and services (often monopolising
them) although this was no longer
required. An example is the provision
of telecommunication service. This
industry continued to be reserved for
the Public Sector even after it was
realised that private sector firms could
also provide it. Due to the absence of
competition, even till the late 1990s,
one had to wait for a long time to
get a telephone connection.
Another instance could be the
establishment of Modern Bread, a
bread-manufacturing firm, as if the
Work These Out
Ø Construct a pie chart for the following table on sectoral contribution to GDP
and discuss the difference in the contribution of the sectors in the light of
effects of development during 1950-91.
Sector
1950-51
1990-91
Agriculture
Industry
Services
Ø Conduct a debate in your classroom on the usefulness of Public Sector
Undertakings (PSUs) by dividing the class into two groups. One group may
speak in favour of PSUs and the other group against the motion (involve as
many students as possible and encourage them to give examples).
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
private sector could not manufacture
bread! In 2001 this firm was sold to
the private sector. The point is that
after four decades of Planned
development of Indian Economy no
distinction was made between (i)
what the public sector alone can do
and (ii) what the private sector can
also do.  For example, even now only
the public sector supplies national
defense. And even though the private
sector can manage hotels well, yet,
the government also runs hotels. This
has led some scholars to argue that
the state should get out of areas
which the private sector can manage
and the government may concentrate
its resources on important services
which the private sector cannot
provide.
Many public sector firms incurred
huge losses but  continued to
function because it is difficult to close
a government undertaking even if it
is a drain on the nation’s limited
resources. This does not mean that
private firms are always profitable
(indeed, quite a few of the public
sector firms were originally private
firms which were on the verge of
closure due to losses; they were then
nationalised to protect the jobs of the
workers). However, a loss-making
private firm will not waste resources
by being kept running despite the
losses.
The need to obtain a license to start
an industry was misused by
industrial houses; a big industrialist
would get a license not for starting a
new firm but to prevent competitors
from starting new firms. The excessive
regulation of what came to be called
the permit license raj prevented
certain firms from becoming more
efficient. More time was spent by
industrialists in trying to obtain a
license or lobby with the concerned
ministries rather than on thinking
about how to improve their products.
The protection from foreign
competition is also being criticised on
the ground that it continued even
after it proved to do more harm than
good. Due to restrictions on imports,
the Indian consumers had to
purchase whatever the Indian
producers produced. The producers
were aware that they had a captive
market; so they had no incentive to
improve the quality of their goods.
Why should they think of improving
quality when they could sell low
quality items at a high price?
Competition from imports forces our
producers to be more efficient.
A few economists also point out
that the public sector is not meant
for earning profits but to promote the
welfare of the nation. The public
sector firms, on this view, should be
evaluated on the basis of the extent
to which they contribute to the welfare
of people and not on the profits they
earn. Regarding protection, some
economists hold that we should
protect our producers from foreign
competition as long as the rich
nations continue to do so. Owing to
all these conflicts, economists called
for a change in our policy. This,
alongwith other problems, led the
government to introduce a new
economic policy in 1991.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990
2.6 CONCLUSION
The progress of the Indian economy
during the first seven plans was
impressive indeed. Our industries
became far more diversified compared
to the situation at independence.
India became self- sufficient in food
production thanks to the green
revolution. Land reforms resulted in
abolition of the hated zamindari
system. However, many economists
became dissatisfied with  the
performance of many public sector
enterprises. Excessive government
regulation prevented growth of
entrepreneurship. In the name of self-
reliance,  our producers were
protected against foreign competition
and this did not give them the
incentive to improve the quality of
goods that they produced. Our
policies were ‘inward oriented’ and so
we failed to develop a strong export
sector. The need for r eform of
economic policy was widely felt in the
context of changing global economic
scenario, and the new economic policy
was initiated in 1991 to make our
economy more efficient. This is the
subject of the next chapter.
Recap
Ø After independence, India envisaged an economic system which combines
the best features of socialism and capitalism —this culminated in the mixed
economy model.
Ø All the economic planning has been formulated through five year plans.
Ø Common goals of five year plans are growth, modernisation, self-sufficiency
and equity.
Ø The major policy initiatives in agriculture sector were land reforms and
green revolution. These initiatives helped India to become self-sufficient in
food grains production.
Ø The proportion of people depending on agriculture did not decline as expected.
Ø Policy initiatives in the industrial sector raised its contribution to GDP.
Ø One of the major drawbacks in the industrial sector was the inefficient
functioning of the public sector as it started incurring losses leading to
drain on the nation’s limited resources.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Define a plan.
Why did India opt for planning?
Why should plans have goals?
What are High Yielding Variety (HYV) seeds?
What is marketable surplus?
Explain the need and type of land reforms implemented in the
agriculture sector.
What is Green Revolution? Why was it implemented and how did
it benefit the farmers? Explain in brief.
Explain ‘growth with equity’ as a planning objective.
Does modernisation as a planning objective create contradiction
in the light of employment generation? Explain.
Why was it necessary for a developing country like India to follow
self-reliance as a planning objective?
What is sectoral composition of an economy? Is it necessary that
the service sector should contribute maximum to GDP of an
economy? Comment.
Why was public sector given a leading role in industrial
development during the planning period?
Explain the statement that green revolution enabled the
government to procure sufficient food grains to build its stocks
that could be used during times of shortage.
While subsidies encourage farmers to use new technology, they are
a huge burden on government finances. Discuss the usefulness of
subsidies in the light of this fact.
Why, despite the implementation of green revolution, 65 per cent
of our population continued to be engaged in the agriculture sector
till 1990?
Though public sector is very essential for industries, many public
sector undertakings incur huge losses and are a drain on the
economy’s resources. Discuss the usefulness of public sector
undertakings in the light of this fact.
EXERCISES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990
Explain how import substitution can protect domestic industry.
Why and how was private sector regulated under the IPR 1956?
Match the following:
1. Prime Minister
Seeds that give large proportion of output
2. Gross Domestic
B. Quantity of goods that can be imported
Product
3. Quota
C. Chairperson of the planning commission
4. Land Reforms
D. The money value of all the final goods
and services produced within the economy
in one year
5. HYV Seeds
Improvements in the field of agriculture
to increase its productivity
6. Subsidy
The monetary assistance given by
government for production
activities.
BHAGWATI, J. 1993. India in Transition: Freeing the Economy. Oxford
University Press, Delhi.
DANDEKAR, V.M. 2004.  Forty Years After Independence, in Bimal  Jalan,
(Ed.). The Indian Economy: Problems and Prospects. Penguin, Delhi.
JOSHI, VIJAY.  and I.M.D. LITTLE. 1996. India’s Economic Reforms 1991-2001.
Oxford University Press, Delhi.
MOHAN,  RAKESH. 2004. Industrial Policy and Controls, in Bimal  Jalan
(Ed.). The Indian Economy: Problems and Prospects. Penguin, Delhi.
RAO, C.H. HANUMANTHA. 2004. Agriculture: Policy and Performance, in Bimal
Jalan, (Ed.). The Indian Economy: Problems and Prospects. Penguin,
Delhi.
REFERENCES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
ECONOMIC REFORMS
SINCE 1991
2015-16(20/01/2015)
After forty years of planned development, India
has been able to achieve a strong industrial base
and became self-sufficient in the production of food
grains. Nevertheless, a major segment of the
population continues to depend on agriculture for
its livelihood. In 1991, a crisis in the balance of
payments led to the introduction of economic
reforms in the country. This unit is an appraisal of
the reform process and its implications for India.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
After studying this chapter, the learners will
understand the background of the reform policies introduced in India
in 1991
understand the mechanism through which reform policies were
introduced
comprehend the process of globalisation and its implications for India
be aware of the impact of the reform process in various sectors.
LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION
GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL
2015-16(20/01/2015)
LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL
3.1 INTRODUCTION
You have studied in the previous
chapter that, since independence,
India followed the mixed economy
framework by combining the
advantages of the capitalist economic
system with those of the socialist
economic system. Some scholars argue
that, over the years, this policy resulted
in the establishment of a variety of
rules and laws, which were aimed at
controlling and regulating the
economy, ended up instead in
hampering the process of growth and
development. Others state that India,
which started its developmental path
from near stagnation, has since been
able to achieve growth in savings,
developed a diversified industrial
sector which produces a variety of
goods and has experienced sustained
expansion of agricultural output
which has  ensured food security.
In 1991, India met with an
economic crisis relating to its external
debt — the government was not
able to make repayments on its
borrowings from abroad; foreign
exchange reserves, which we
generally maintain to import petrol
and other important items, dropped
to levels that were not sufficient for
even a fortnight. The crisis was
further compounded by rising prices
of essential goods. All these led the
government to introduce a new set of
policy measures which changed the
direction of our developmental
strategies.  In this chapter, we will
look at the background of the crisis,
measures that the government has
adopted and their impact on various
sectors of the economy.
3.2 BACKGROUND
The origin of the financial crisis can
be traced from the inefficient
management of the Indian economy
in the 1980s. We know that for
implementing various policies and
its general administration, the
government generates funds from
various sources such as taxation,
running of public sector enterprises
etc. When  expenditure is more than
income, the government borrows to
finance the deficit from banks and
also from people within the country
and from international financial
institutions. When we import goods
like petroleum, we pay in dollars
which we earn from our exports.
Development policies required that
even though the revenues were
very low, the government had
to overshoot its revenue to meet
problems like unemployment, poverty
and population explosion. The
continued spending on development
programmes of the government did not
generate additional revenue. Moreover,
the government was not able to
There is a consensus in the world today that economic development is not all
and the GDP is not necessarily a measure of progress of a society.
K.R. Narayanan
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
generate sufficiently from internal
sources such as taxation. When the
government was spending a large
share of its income on areas which do
not provide immediate returns such as
the social sector and defence, there was
a need to utilise the rest of its revenue
in a highly efficient manner. The
income
public
sector
undertakings was also not very high to
meet the growing expenditure. At
times, our foreign exchange,
borrowed from other countries and
international financial institutions,
was spent on meeting consumption
needs. Neither was an attempt made to
reduce such profligate spending nor
sufficient attention was given to boost
exports to pay for the growing imports.
In the late 1980s, government
expenditure began to exceed its
revenue by such large margins that
meeting the expenditure through
borrowings became unsustainable.
Prices of many essential goods rose
sharply. Imports grew at a very high
rate without matching growth of
exports. As pointed out earlier, foreign
exchange reserves declined to a level
that was not adequate to finance
imports for more than two weeks.
There was also not sufficient foreign
exchange to pay the interest that needs
to be paid to international lenders.
Also no country or international funder
was willing to lend to India.
India approached the International
Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD), popularly
known as World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF),
and received $7 billion as loan to
manage the crisis. For availing the
loan, these international agencies
expected India to liberalise and open
up the economy by removing
restrictions on the private sector,
reduce the role of the government in
many areas and remove trade
restrictions between India and other
countries.
India agreed to the conditionalities
of World Bank and IMF and
announced the New Economic Policy
(NEP). The NEP consisted of wide
ranging economic reforms. The
thrust of the policies was towards
creating a more competitive
environment in the economy and
removing the barriers to entry and
growth of firms. This set of policies
can broadly be classified into two
groups: the stabilisation measures
and the structural reform measures.
Stabilisation measures are short-
term measures, intended to correct
some of the weaknesses that have
developed in the balance of
payments and to bring inflation
under control. In simple words, this
means that there was a need to
maintain sufficient foreign exchange
reserves and keep the rising prices
under control. On the other hand,
structural reform policies are long-term
measures, aimed at improving the
efficiency of the economy and increasing
its international competitiveness by
removing the rigidities in various
segments of the Indian economy. The
government initiated a variety of
policies  which fall  under three heads
2015-16(20/01/2015)
LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL
viz., liberalisation, privatisation and
globalisation.
3.3 LIBERALISATION
As pointed out in the beginning,
rules and laws which were aimed at
regulating the economic activities
became major hindrances in growth
and development. Liberalisation was
introduced to put an end to these
restrictions and open up various
sectors of the economy. Though a few
liberalisation measures were
introduced in 1980s in areas of
industrial licensing, export-import
policy, technology upgradation,
fiscal policy and foreign investment,
reform policies initiated in 1991 were
more comprehensive. Let us study
some important areas such as the
industrial sector, financial sector, tax
reforms, foreign exchange markets
and trade and investment sectors
which received greater attention in
and after 1991.
Deregulation of Industrial Sector: In
India, regulatory mechanisms were
enforced in various ways (i) industrial
licensing under which every entrepreneur
had to get permission from government
officials to start a firm, close a firm
or to decide the amount of goods
that could be produced (ii) private
sector was not allowed in many
industries (iii) some goods could be
produced only in small scale industries
and (iv) controls on price fixation and
distribution of selected industrial
products.
The reform policies introduced in
and after 1991 removed many of
these restrictions. Industrial
licensing was abolished for almost all
but product categories — alcohol,
cigarettes, hazardous chemicals,
industrial explosives, electronics,
aerospace and drugs  and pharma-
ceuticals. The only industries which
are now reserved for the public sector
are defence equipments, atomic
energy generation and railway
transport. Many goods produced by
small scale industries have now been
dereserved. In many industries, the
market has been allowed to
determine the prices.
Financial
Sector
Reforms:
Financial sector includes financial
institutions such as commercial
banks, investment banks, stock
exchange operations and foreign
exchange market. The financial
sector in India is regulated by the
Reserve Bank of India (RBI). You may
be aware that all the banks and other
financial institutions in India are
regulated through various norms and
regulations of the RBI. The RBI
decides the amount of money that
the banks can keep with themselves,
fixes interest rates, nature of lending
to various sectors etc. One of the
major aims of financial sector reforms
is to reduce the role of RBI from
regulator to facilitator of financial
sector.  This means that the financial
sector may be allowed to take
decisions on many matters without
consulting the RBI.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
The reform policies led to the
establishment of private sector
banks, Indian as well as foreign.
Foreign investment limit in banks
was raised to around 50 per cent.
Those banks which fulfil certain
conditions have been given freedom
to set up new branches without the
approval of the RBI and rationalise
their existing branch networks.
Though banks have been given
permission to generate resources
from India and abroad, certain
managerial aspects  have been
retained with the RBI to safeguard
the interests of the account-
holders and the nation. Foreign
Institutional Investors (FII) such
as merchant bankers, mutual funds
and pension funds are now allowed
to invest in Indian financial markets.
Tax Reforms: Tax reforms are
concerned with the reforms in
government’s taxation and public
expenditure policies which are
collectively known as its fiscal
policy.  There are two types of taxes:
direct and indirect. Direct taxes
consist of taxes on incomes of
individuals as well as profits of
business enterprises. Since 1991,
there has been a continuous
reduction in the taxes on individual
incomes as it was felt that high rates
of income tax were an important
reason for tax evasion. It is now
widely accepted that moderate rates
of income tax encourage savings and
voluntary disclosure of income. The
rate of corporation tax, which was
very high earlier, has been gradually
reduced. Efforts have also been made
to reform the indirect taxes, taxes
levied on commodities, in order to
facilitate the establishment of a
common national market for
goods and commodities. Another
component of reforms in this area is
simplification. In order to encourage
better compliance on the part of
taxpayers many procedures have
been simplified and the rates also
substantially lowered.
Foreign Exchange Reforms: The
first important reform in the external
sector was made in the foreign
exchange market. In 1991, as an
immediate measure to resolve the
balance of payments crisis, the rupee
was devalued against foreign
currencies. This led to an increase in
the inflow of foreign exchange. It also
set the tone to free the determination
of rupee value in the foreign
exchange market from government
control. Now, more often than not,
markets  determine exchange rates
based on the  demand and supply of
foreign exchange.
Trade and Investment Policy
Reforms: Liberalisation of trade and
investment regime was initiated to
increase international competitiveness
of industrial production and also
foreign investments and technology
into the economy. The aim was also
to promote the efficiency of the local
industries and the adoption of
modern technologies.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL
Work These Out
Ø Give an example each of nationalised bank, private bank, private foreign
bank, FII and a mutual fund.
Ø Visit a bank in your locality with your parents. Observe and find out the
functions it performs. Discuss the same with your classmates and prepare
a chart on it.
Ø Classify the following as direct and indirect taxes: sales tax, custom duties,
property tax, death duties, VAT, income tax.
Ø Find out from your parents if they pay taxes. If yes, why do they do so and
Ø Do you know that for a very long time  countries used to keep silver and gold
as reserves to make payments abroad? Find out in what form do we keep
our foreign exchange reserves and find out from newspapers, magazines
and the Economic Survey how much foreign exchange reserves we have
today. Also  find the foreign currency of the following countries and its rupee
exchange rate
Country
Currency
Value of 1(one) unit of foreign
currency in Indian rupee
U.S.A.
Japan
China
Korea
Singapore
Germany
In order to protect domestic
industries, India was following a
regime of quantitative restrictions
on imports. This was encouraged
through tight control over imports
and by keeping the tariffs very high.
These policies reduced efficiency and
competitiveness which led to slow
growth of the manufacturing sector.
The trade policy reforms aimed at (i)
dismantling of  quantitative restrictions
on imports and exports (ii) reduction
of tariff rates and (iii) removal of
licensing procedures for imports.
Import licensing was abolished
except in case of hazardous and
environmentally sensitive industries.
Quantitative restrictions on imports of
manufactured consumer goods and
agricultural products were also fully
removed from April 2001. Export
duties have been removed to increase
the competitive position of Indian
goods in the international markets.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
3.4 PRIVATISATION
It implies shedding of the ownership
or management of a government
owned enterprise. Government
companies are converted into private
companies in two ways (i) by
withdrawal of the government from
ownership and management of
public sector companies and or (ii) by
outright sale of public sector
companies.
Privatisation of the public sector
enterprises by selling off part of the
equity of PSEs to the public is known
as disinvestment. The purpose of the
sale, according to the government,
was mainly to improve financial
discipline and facilitate modernisation.
It was also envisaged that private
capital and managerial capabilities
could be effectively utilised to
improve the performance of the PSUs.
Box 3.1: Navratnas and Public Enterprise Policies
You must have read in your childhood about the famous Navratnas or Nine
Jewels in the Imperial Court of King Vikramaditya who were eminent persons
of excellence in the fields of art, literature and knowledge. In order to improve
efficiency, infuse professionalism and enable them to compete more effectively
in the liberalised global environment, the government identifies PSEs and
declare them as maharatnas, navratnas and miniratnas. They were given greater
managerial and operational autonomy, in taking various decisions to run the
company efficiently and thus increase their profits. Greater operational,
financial and managerial autonomy has also been granted to profit-making
enterprises referred to as miniratnas.
The Central Public Sector Enterprises are designated with different status.
A few examples of public enterprises with their status are as follows:
(i) Maharatnas – (a) Indian Oil Corporation Limited, and (b) Steel Authority of
India Limited, (ii) Navratnas – (a) Hindustan Aeronautics Limited,
(b) Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited; and (iii) Miniratnas – (a) Bharat
Sanchar Nigam Limited; (b) Airport Authority of India and (c) Indian Railway
Catering and Tourism Corporation Limited.
Many of these profitable PSEs were originally formed during the 1950s
and 1960s when self-reliance was an important element of public policy. They
were set up with the intention of providing infrastructure and direct employment
to the public so that quality end-product reaches the masses at a nominal
cost and the companies themselves were made accountable to all stakeholders.
The granting of status resulted in better performance of these companies.
Scholars allege that instead of facilitating public enterprises in their expansion
and enabling them to become global players, the government partly privatised
them through disinvesment. Of late, the government has decided to retain
them in the public sector and enable them to expand themselves in the global
markets and raise resources by themselves from financial markets.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL
The government envisaged that
privatisation could provide strong
impetus to the inflow of FDI.
The government has also made
attempts to improve the efficiency of
PSUs by giving them autonomy
in taking managerial decisions. For
instance, some PSUs have been
granted special status as maharatnas,
navratnas and miniratnas (see
Box 3.1).
3.5 GLOBALISATION
Although globalisation is generally
understood to mean integration of the
economy of the country with the world
economy, it is a complex phenomenon.
It is an outcome of the set of various
policies that are aimed at transforming
world
towards
greater
interdependence and integration. It
involves creation of networks and
activities transcending economic, social
geographical
boundaries.
Globalisation attempts to establish
links in such a way that the happenings
in India can be influenced by events
happening miles away. It is turning the
world into one whole or creating a
borderless world.
Outsourcing: This is one of the
important
outcomes
globalisation process. In outsourcing,
a company hires regular service from
external sources, mostly from other
countries, which was previously
provided internally or from within the
country (like legal advice, computer
service, advertisement, security —
provided
respective
departments of the company). As a
form of economic activity, outsourcing
has intensified, in recent times,
because of the growth of fast modes
of communication,  particularly  the
growth of  Information Technology
(IT). Many of the services such as
voice-based business processes
(popularly known as BPO or
call centres), record keeping,
Work These Out
Ø Some scholars refer to disinvestment as the wave of privatisation spreading
all over the world to improve the performance of public sector enterprises
whereas others call it as outright sale of public property to the vested
interests. What do you think?
Ø Prepare a poster which contains 10-15 news clippings which you consider
as important and relating to navaratnas from newspapers. Also collect the
logos and advertisements of these PSEs. Put these on the notice board and
discuss them in the classroom.
Ø Do you think only loss making companies should be privatised? Why?
Ø Losses incurred by public sector enterprises are to be met out of the public
budget. Do you agree with this statement? Discuss.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
accountancy, banking services, music
recording,
editing,
transcription, clinical advice or even
teaching are being outsourced by
companies in developed countries to
India. With the help of modern
telecommunication links including the
Internet, the text, voice and visual data
in respect of these services is digitised
and transmitted in real time over
continents and national boundaries.
Most multinational corporations, and
even small companies, are outsourcing
their services to India where they can
be availed at a cheaper cost with
reasonable degree of skill and
accuracy. The low wage rates and
availability of skilled manpower in
India have made it a destination for
global outsourcing in the post-reform
period.
World Trade Organisation (WTO):
The WTO was founded in 1995 as
the successor organisation to the
General Agreement on Trade and
Tariff (GATT). GATT was established
in 1948 with 23 countries as the
Box 3.2: Global Footprint!
Owing to globalisation, you might find many Indian companies have expanded
their wings to many other countries. For example, ONGC Videsh, a subsidiary of
the Indian public sector enterprise, Oil and Natural Gas Corporation engaged in
oil and gas exploration and production has projects in 16 countries. Tata Steel, a
private company established in 1907, is one of the top ten global steel companies
in the world which have operations in 26 countries and sell its products in 50
countries. It employs nearly 50,000 persons in other countries. HCL Technologies,
one of the top five IT companies in India has offices in 31 countries and employs
about 15,000 persons abroad. Dr Reddy's Laboratories, initially was a small
company supplying pharmaceutical goods to big Indian companies, today has
manufacturing plants and research centres across the world.
Source: www.rediff.com accessed on 14.10.2014.
global trade organisation
administer
multilateral
trade
agreements by providing
equal opportunities to
all countries in the
international market for
trading purposes. WTO is
expected to establish a
rule-based trading regime
in which nations cannot
place arbitrary restrictions
on trade. In addition, its
purpose is also to enlarge
Fig. 3.1 Outsourcing: a new employment opportunity in big cities
2015-16(20/01/2015)
LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL
production and trade of services, to
ensure optimum utilisation of world
resources  and to protect the
environment. The WTO agreements
cover trade in goods as well as services
to facilitate international trade
(bilateral and multilateral) through
removal of tariff as well as non-tariff
barriers and providing greater market
access to all member countries.
As an important member of WTO,
India has been in the forefront of
framing fair global rules, regulations
and safeguards and advocating the
interests of the developing world.
India has kept its commitments
towards liberalisation of trade, made
in the WTO, by removing quantitative
restrictions on imports and reducing
tariff rates.
Work These Out
Ø Many scholars argue that globalisation is a threat as it reduces the role of
the state in many sectors. Some counter argue that it is an opportunity as
it opens up markets to compete in and capture. Debate in the classroom.
Ø Prepare a chart consisting of a list of five companies that have BPO services
in India, along with their turnover.
Ø Read this excerpt of a news item from a daily newspaper describing
something that is now becoming increasingly common.
“On a morning, a few minutes before 7 A.M., Greeshma sat in front of
her computer with her headset on and said in accented English ‘Hello,
Daniella’. Seconds later, she gets the reply, ‘Hello, Greeshma’. The two chatted
excitedly before Greeshma said that ‘we will work on pronouns today’.
Nothing unusual about this chat except that Greeshma, 22, was in Kochi
and her student Daniella, 13, was at her home in Malibu, California. Using
a simulated whiteboard on their computers, connected by the Internet, and
a copy of Daniella’s textbook in front of Greeshma, she guides the teenager
through the intricacies of nouns, adjectives and verbs. Greeshma, who grew
up speaking Malayalam, was teaching Daniella English grammar,
comprehension and writing.”
ü How has this become possible? Why can’t Daniella get lessons in her
own country? Why is she getting English lessons from India, where
English is not the mother tongue?
ü India is benefiting from liberalisation and integration of world markets.
Do you agree?
Ø Is employment in call centres sustainable? What kinds of skills should people
working in call centres acquire to get a regular income?
Ø If the multinational companies outsource many services to countries like
India because of cheap manpower, what will happen to people living in the
countries where the companies are located? Discuss.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Some scholars question the
usefulness of India being a member of
the WTO as a major volume of
international trade occurs among the
developed nations. They also  say that
while developed countries file
complaints over agricultural subsidies
given in their countries, developing
countries feel cheated as they are forced
to open up their markets for developed
countries but are not allowed access to
the  markets of developed countries.
What do you think?
introduction. Let us now look at the
performance of  the Indian economy
during this period. In economics,
growth of an economy is measured by
the Gross Domestic Product. Look at
Table 3.1. The growth of GDP
increased from 5.6 per cent during
1980-91 to 8.2 per cent during
2007-1012. During the reform
period, the growth of agriculture has
declined. While the industrial sectors
reported fluctuation, the growth of
service sector has gone up. This
indicates that the growth is mainly
driven by the growth in the service
sector. The Twelfth Plan (2012-2017)
envisages the GDP growth rate at
9 or 9.5 per cent. In order to achieve
such a high growth rate, the
agriculture, industrial and service
sectors have to grow at the rates of
4 to 4.2, 9.6 to 10.9 and 10
percentage points,  respectively.
However, some scholars raise
apprehensions over the projection of
such high rates of growth as
unsustainable.
The opening up of the economy has
led to rapid increase in foreign direct
investment and foreign exchange
reserves. The foreign investment,
Fig. 3.2 IT  Industry is seen as a major contributor
to India’s exports
TABLE 3.1
Growth of GDP and Major Sectors (in %)
Sector
1980-1991
1992-2001
2002-2007
2007-2012
2012-2017 XII Plan
Target I
Target II
Agriculture
Industry
Services
Total
Sources: Tenth Five Year Plan; Faster, sustainable and more inclusive growth: An Approach to the 12th
Five Year Plan, Planning Commission, Government of India, 2011.
3.6 IN D I A N EC O N O M Y DU R I N G
REFORMS: AN ASSESSMENT
The reform process has completed
one and a half decades since its
2015-16(20/01/2015)
LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL
which includes foreign direct
investment(FDI) and foreign
institutional investment(FII), has
increased from about US $ 100 million
in 1990-91 to US $ 467 billion in
2012-13. There has been an increase
in the foreign exchange reserves from
about US $ 6 billion in 1990-91 to
about US $ 304 billion in 2013-14.
India is one of the largest foreign
exchange reserve holders in the world.
India is seen as a successful
exporter of auto parts, engineering
goods, IT software and textiles in the
reform period. Rising prices have
also been kept under control.
On the other hand, the reform
process has been widely criticised
for not being able to address some
of the basic problems facing our
economy esepecially in the areas of
employment, agriculture, industry,
infrastructure development and fiscal
management.
Growth and Employment: Though the
GDP growth rate has increased in the
reform period, scholars point out that the
Work These Out
Ø In the previous chapter, you might have studied about subsidies in various
sectors including agriculture. Some scholars argue that subsidy in agriculture
should be removed to make the sector internationally competitive. Do you
agree? If so, how can it be done? Discuss in class.
Ø Read the following passage and discuss in class.
Groundnut is a major oilseed crop in Andhra Pradesh. Mahadeva, who
was a farmer in Anantpur district of Andhra Pradesh, used to spend Rs 1,500
for growing groundnut on his plot of half an acre. The cost included expenditure
on raw materials (seeds, fertilisers etc.), labour, bullock power and machinery
used. On an average, Mahadeva used to get two quintals of groundnut, and
each quintal was sold for Rs 1,000. Mahadeva, thus, was spending Rs 1,500
and getting an income of Rs 2,000. Anantpur district is a drought-prone area.
As a result of economic reforms, the government did not undertake any major
irrigation project. Recently, groundnut crop in Anantpur is facing problems
due to crop disease. Research and extension work has gone down due to lower
government expenditure. Mahadeva and his friends brought this matter
repeatedly to the notice of the government officials entrusted with this
responsibility, but failed. Subsidy was reduced on materials (seeds, fertilisers)
which increased Mahadeva’s cost of cultivation. Moreover, the local markets
were flooded with cheap imported edible oils, which was a result of removal of
restriction on imports. Mahadeva was not able to sell his groundnut in the
market as he was not getting the price to cover his cost.
What could be done to farmers like Mahadeva from incurring losses?
Discuss in the class.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
reform-led growth has not  generated
sufficient employment opportunities in
the country. You will study the link
between different aspects of employment
and growth in the next unit.
Reforms in Agriculture: Reforms have
not been able to benefit agriculture,
where the growth rate has been
decelerating.
Public investment in agriculture
sector especially in infrastructure,
which includes irrigation, power, roads,
market linkages and research and
extension (which played a crucial role
in the Green Revolution), has fallen in
the reform period. Further, the removal
of fertiliser subsidy has led to increase
in the cost of production, which has
severely affected the small and marginal
farmers. This sector has been
experiencing a number of policy
changes such as reduction in import
duties on agricultural products,
removal of minimum support price and
lifting of quantitative restrictions on
agricultural products; these have
adversely affected Indian farmers as
they now have to face increased
international competition.
Moreover, because of  export-
oriented policy strategies in agriculture,
there has been a shift from production
for the domestic market towards
production for the export market
focusing on cash crops in lieu of
production of food grains. This puts
pressure on prices of food grains.
Reforms in Industry: Industrial
growth has also recorded a slowdown.
This is because of decreasing demand
of industrial products due to
various reasons such as cheaper
imports, inadequate investment in
infrastructure etc. In a globalised
world, developing countries are
compelled to open up their economies
to greater flow of goods and capital
from developed countries and
rendering their industries vulnerable
to imported goods.  Cheaper imports
have, thus, replaced the demand
for domestic goods. Domestic
manufacturers are facing competition
from imports. The infrastructure
facilities, including power supply, have
remained inadequate due to lack of
investment. Globalisation is, thus,
often seen as creating conditions for
the free movement of goods and
services from foreign countries that
adversely affect the local industries
and employment opportunities in
developing countries.
Moreover, a developing country
like India still does not have the access
to developed countries’ markets
because of high non-tariff barriers. For
example,
although
quota
restrictions on exports of textiles and
clothing have been removed in India,
U.S.A. has not removed their quota
restriction on import of textiles from
India and China.
Disinvestment: Every year, the
government fixes a target for
disinvestment of PSEs. For instance,
in 1991-92, it was targeted to mobilise
Rs 2,500 crore through disinvestment.
The government was able to mobilise
Rs 3,040 crore more than the target.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL
In 2013-14, the target was about
Rs 56,000 crore whereas the
achievement was about Rs 26,000
crore. Critics point out that the assets
of PSEs have been undervalued and
sold to the private sector. This means
that there has been a substantial loss
to the government. Moreover, the
proceeds from disinvestment were
used to offset the shortage of
government revenues rather than
using it for  the development of PSEs
and building  social infrastructure in
the country. Do you think selling a part
of the properties of government
companies is the best way to improve
their efficiency?
Reforms and Fiscal Policies:
Economic reforms have placed limits on
the growth of public expenditure
especially in social sectors. The tax
reductions in the reform period, aimed
at yielding larger revenue and to curb
tax evasion, have not resulted in
increase in tax revenue for the
government. Also, the reform  policies
involving tariff reduction have curtailed
the scope for raising revenue through
customs duties. In order to attract
foreign investment, tax incentives were
provided to foreign investors which
further reduced the scope for raising
tax revenues. This has a negative impact
on developmental and welfare
expenditures.
3.7 CONCLUSION
The process of globalisation through
liberalisation and privatisation policies
has produced positive as well as
negative results both for India and
other countries.  Some scholars argue
that globalisation should be seen as
an opportunity in terms of greater
access to global markets, high
technology and increased possibility of
large industries of developing
countries to become important players
in the international arena.
Box 3.3: Siricilla Tragedy!
Power Sector reforms in many Indian states led to do away with the supply of
electricity at subsidised rates and steep rise in power tariff. This has affected
workers engaged in small industries. Powerloom textile industry in Andhra
Pradesh is an example. Since the wages of the powerloom workers are linked
to the production of cloth, power-cut means cut in wages of weavers who
were already suffering from hike in tariff. This led to a crisis in the livelihood
of the weavers and fifty powerloom workers committed suicide in a small
town called ‘Siricilla’ in Andhra Pradesh.
Do you think the power tariff should not be raised?
What would be your suggestions to revive small industries affected  by
reforms?
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
On the contrary, the critics argue
that globalisation is a strategy of the
developed countries to expand their
markets in other countries. According
to them, it has compromised the
welfare and identity of people
belonging to poor countries. It has
further been pointed out that
market-driven globalisation has
widened the economic disparities
among nations and people.
Viewed from the Indian context,
some studies have stated that the
crisis that erupted in the early 1990s
was basically an outcome of the
deep-rooted inequalities in Indian
society and the economic reform
policies initiated as a response to the
crisis by the government, with
externally advised policy package,
further aggravated the inequalities.
Further, it has increased the income
and quality of consumption of only
high-income groups and the growth
has been concentrated only in
some select areas in the services
sector such as telecommunication,
information technology, finance,
entertainment, travel and hospitality
services, real estate and trade,
rather than vital sectors such as
agriculture and industry which
provide livelihoods to millions of
people in the country.
Recap
Ø The economy was facing problems of declining foreign exchange, growing
imports without matching rise in exports and high inflation. India changed
its economic policies in 1991 due to a financial crisis and pressure from
international organisations like the World Bank and IMF.
Ø In the domestic economy, major reforms were undertaken in the industrial
and financial sectors. Major external sector reforms included foreign
exchange deregulations and import liberalisation.
Ø With a view to improving the performance of the public sector, there was a
consensus on reducing its role and opening it up to the private sector. This
was done through disinvestment and liberalisation measures.
Ø Globalisation is the outcome of the policies of liberalisation and privatisation.
It means an integration of the economy of the country with the world
economy.
Ø Outsourcing is an emerging business activity.
Ø The objective of the WTO is to establish a rule based trade regime to ensure
optimum utilisation of world resources.
Ø During the reforms, growth of agriculture and industry has gone down but
the service sector has registered growth.
Ø Reforms have not benefited the agriculture sector. There has also been a
decline in public investment in this sector.
Ø Industrial sector growth has slowed down due to availability of cheaper
imports and lower investment.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL
Why were reforms introduced in India?
Why is it necessary to became a member of WTO?
Why did RBI have to change its role from controller to facilitator of
financial sector in India?
How is RBI controlling the commercial banks?
What do you understand by devaluation of rupee?
Distinguish between the following
Strategic and Minority sale
Bilateral and Multi-lateral trade
(iii)
Tariff and Non-tariff barriers.
Why are tariffs imposed?
What is the meaning of quantitative restrictions?
Those public sector undertakings which are making profits
should  be privatised. Do you agree with this view? Why?
Do you think outsourcing is good for India? Why are developed
countries opposing it?
India has certain advantages which makes it a favourite  outsourcing
destination. What are these advantages?
Do you think the navaratna policy of the government helps in
improving the performance of public sector undertakings in India?
What are the major factors responsible for the high growth of the
service sector?
Agriculture sector appears to be adversely affected by the reform
process. Why?
Why has the industrial sector performed poorly in the reform
period?
Discuss economic reforms in India in the light of social justice
and welfare.
EXERCISES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
The table given below shows the GDP growth rate at 2004-05
prices. You have studied about the techniques of presentation
of data in your Statistics for Economics course. Draw a time
series line graph based on the data given in the table and inter-
pret the same.
GDP Growth Rate (%)
2000-01
2001-02
2002-03
2003-04
2004-05
2005-06
2006-07
2007-08
2008-09
2009-10
2010-11
2011-12
2012-13
Observe around you — you will find State Electricity Boards
(SEBs), BSES and many public and private organisations sup-
plying electricity in a city and states. There are private buses on
roads along side the goverment bus services and so on
What do you think about this dual system of the co-existence
of public and private sectors?
What are the merits and demerits of such a dual system?
Discuss.
With the help of your parents and grandparents prepare a list of
multinational companies that existed in India at the time of
independence. Now put a (ü) mark against those which are still
growing and a (×) against those which do not exist any more. Are
there any companies whose names have changed? Find out the
new names, the country of origin, nature of product, logo and
prepare a chart for your class.
SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL
Give appropriate examples for the following
Nature of Product
Name of a Foreign Company
Biscuits
Shoes
Computers
TV and Refrigerators
Stationery
Now find out if these companies which are mentioned above existed
in India before 1991 or came after the New Economic Policy. For this,
take the help of your teacher, parents, grandparents and shopkeepers.
Collect a few relevant newspaper cuttings on meetings organised
by WTO. Discuss the issues debated in these meetings and find
out how the organisation facilitates world trade.
Was it necessary for India to introduce economic reforms at the
behest of World Bank and International Monetary Fund? Was there
no alternative for the government to solve the balance of pay-
ments crisis? Discuss in the classroom.
Books
ACHARYA, S. 2003. India’s Economy: Some Issues and Answers. Academic
Foundation, New Delhi.
ALTERNATIVE SURVEY GROUP. 2005. Alternative Economic Survey, India 2004–05,
Disequalising Growth. Daanish Books, Delhi.
AHLUWALIA, I.J. and I.M.D. LITTLE. 1998. India’s Economic Refor ms and
Development. Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
BARDHAN, PRANAB. 1998. The Political Economy of Development in India.
Oxford University Press, Delhi.
BHADURI, AMIT  and DEEPAK NAYYAR. 1996. The Intelligent Person’s Guide to
Liberalisation. Penguin, Delhi.
BHAGWATI, JAGDISH. 1992. India in Transition: Freeing the Economy. Oxford
University Press, Delhi.
REFERENCES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
BYRES, TERENCE J. 1997. The State, Development Planning and Liberalisation
in India. Oxford University Press, Delhi.
CHADHA, G.K. 1994. Policy Perspectives in Indian Economic Development.
Har-Anand, Delhi.
CHELLIAH, R AJA J. 1996. Towards Sustainable Growth: Essays in Fiscal and
Financial Sector Reforms in India. Oxford University Press, Delhi.
DEBROY, B. and RAHUL MUKHERJI (Eds.). 2004. The Political Economy of
Reforms.  Bookwell Publication, New Delhi.
DREZE, JEAN and AMARTYA SEN. 1996. India: Economic Development and Social
Opportunity. Oxford University Press, Delhi.
DUTT, RUDDAR AND K.P.M. SUNDARAM. 2005. Indian Economy.  S. Chand and
Company, New Delhi.
GUHA, ASHOK  (Ed.) 1990. Economic Liberalisation, Industrial Structure and
Growth in India. Oxford University Press, Delhi.
JALAN, BIMAL. 1993. India’s Economic Crisis:  The Way Ahead. Oxford
University Press, Delhi.
JALAN, BIMAL. 1996. India’s Economic Policy: Preparing for the Twenty First
Century. Viking, Delhi.
JOSHI,VIJAY and I.M.D. LITTLE. 1996. India’s Economic Reforms 1991-2001.
Oxford University Press, Delhi,
KAPILA, Uma. 2005. Understanding the Problems of Indian Economy.
Academic Foundation, New Delhi.
MAHAJAN, V.S. 1994. Indian Economy Towards 2000 A.D. Deep & Deep,
Delhi.
PAREKH, KIRIT and RADHAKRISHNA, 2002, India Development Report 2001-02.
Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
RAO, C.H. HANUMANTHA. and HANS LINNEMANN. 1996. Economic Reforms and
Poverty Alleviation in India, Sage Publication, Delhi.
SACHS, JEFFREY D., ASHUTOSH VARSHNEY and NIRUPAM BAJPAI.1999. India in the
Era of Economic Reforms. Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
Government Reports
Economic Survey 2013-14. Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
Published by Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
Tenth Five Year Plan 1997-2002. Vol. 1. Government of India, Planning
Commission, New Delhi.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
CURRENT CHALLENGES FACING THE
INDIAN ECONOMY
2015-16(20/01/2015)
Some of the most challenging issues facing India
today are poverty, development of rural India and
building infrastructure. We are a billion-strong
country today and our human capital is the biggest
asset; it needs investment in health and education.
We also need to understand the concept of
employment and the need for  creating more
employment in our country. We will also look at
the implications of development on our environment
and call for sustainable development. There is a
need to critically assess government initiatives in
tackling all  these issues each of which has been
taken up separately in this unit.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
After studying this chapter, the learners will
understand the various attributes of poverty
comprehend the diverse dimensions relating to the concept of poverty
critically appreciate the way poverty is estimated
appreciate and be able to assess existing poverty alleviation programmes.
POVERTY
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
4.1 INTRODUCTION
In previous chapters, you have
studied the economic policies that
India has taken in the last six and a
half decades and the outcome of
these policies with relation to the
various developmental indicators.
Providing minimum basic needs to
the people and reduction of poverty
have been the major aims of
independent India. The pattern of
development that the successive five
year plans envisaged laid emphasis
on the upliftment of the poorest of
the poor (Antyodaya), integrating the
poor into the mainstream and
achieving a minimum standard of
living for all.
While addressing the Constituent
Assembly in 1947,  Jawaharlal Nehru
had said, “This achievement
(Independence) is but a step, an
opening of opportunity, to the great
triumphs and achievements that
await us… the ending of poverty and
ignorance and disease and inequality
of opportunity.”
However we need to know where
we stand today. Poverty is not only a
challenge for India, as more than one-
fifth of the world’s poor live in India
alone; but also for the world, where
about 300 million people are not able
to meet their basic needs.
Poverty has many faces, which
have been changing from place to
place and across time, and has been
described in many ways. Most often,
poverty is a situation that people
want to escape. So poverty is a call
to action — for the poor and the
wealthy alike — a call to change the
world so that many more may have
enough to eat, adequate shelter,
access to education and health,
protection from violence, and a voice
happens
their
communities.
To know what helps to reduce
poverty, what works and what does
not, what changes over time, poverty
has to be defined, measured and
studied — and even experienced. As
poverty has many dimensions, it has
to be looked at through a variety of
indicators — levels of income and
consumption, social indicators, and
indicators of vulnerability to risks
and of socio/political access.
4.2 WHO ARE THE POOR?
You would have noticed that in all
localities and neighbourhoods, both
in rural and urban areas, there are
some of us who are poor and some
who are rich. Read the story of Anu
and Sudha.  Their lives are examples
of the two extremes (see Box 4.1).
There are also people who belong to
the many stages in between.
Push cart vendors, street
cobblers, women who string flowers,
No society can surely be flourishing and happy, of which the far greater
part of the members are poor and miserable.
Adam Smith
2015-16(20/01/2015)
POVERTY
Box 4.1: Anu and Sudha
Anu and Sudha were both born on the same day. Anu’s mother and father
were construction labourers and Sudha’s father was a businessman and her
mother a designer.
Anu’s mother worked by carrying head loads of bricks until she went into
labour. She then went behind the tool shed on the construction site and
delivered her baby alone. She fed her child and then wrapped her in an old
sari, made a cradle with a gunny sack, put little Anu in it and hung it from a
tree. She hurried back to work as she was afraid she would lose her job. She
hoped that Anu would sleep until evening.
Sudha was born in one of the best nursing homes in the city. She was
thoroughly checked by doctors, she was bathed and dressed in clean soft
clothes and placed in a crib next to her mother.  Her mother fed her whenever
she was hungry, hugged and kissed her and sang her to sleep. Her family
and friends celebrated her arrival.
Anu and Sudha had very different childhoods. Anu learnt to look after
herself at a very early age. She knew what hunger and deprivation were. She
discovered how to pick food from the dustbin, how to keep warm during the
winter, to find shelter in the monsoon and how to play with a piece of string,
stones and twigs. Anu could not go to school as her parents were migrant
workers who kept moving from city to city in search of work.
Anu loved to dance. Whenever she heard music she would improvise. She
was very beautiful and her movements were graceful and evocative. Her dream
was to dance on a stage some day. Anu could have become a great dancer
but she had to begin work at the age of 12. She had to earn a living with her
mother and father, building houses for the rich. Houses, she would never live in.
Sudha went to a very good play school where she learnt how to read,
write and count. She went on excursions to the planetarium, museum and
national parks. She later went to a very good school. She loved painting and
started getting private lessons from a famous artist. She later joined a design
school and became a well known painter.
rag pickers, vendors and beggars are
some examples of poor and
vulnerable groups in urban areas.
The poor people possess few assets
and reside in kutcha hutments with
walls made of baked mud and roofs
made of grass, thatch, bamboo and
wood. The poorest of them do not
even have such dwellings. In rural
areas many of them are landless.
Even if some of them possess land, it
is only dry or waste land.  Many do
not get to have even two meals a day.
Starvation and hunger are the key
features of the poorest households.
The poor lack basic literacy and skills
and hence have very limited
economic opportunities. Poor people
also face unstable employment.
Malnutrition is alarmingly high
among the poor. Ill health, disability
or serious illness makes them
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
physically weak. They
borrow from money
lenders who charge high
rates of interest that
lead them into chronic
indebtedness. The poor
are highly vulnerable.
They are not able to
negotiate their legal
wages from employers
and are exploited. Most
poor households have
no access to electricity.
Their primary cooking
fuel is firewood and cow
dung cake. A large
section of poor people
do not even have access to safe
drinking water. There is evidence of
extreme gender inequality in the
participation of gainful employment,
education and in decision-making
within the family. Poor women receive
their
motherhood. Their children are less
likely to survive or be born healthy.
Economists identify the poor on
the basis of their occupation and
ownership of assets. They state that
the rural poor work mainly as
landless agricultural labourers,
cultivators with very  small
landholdings, landless labourers
who are engaged in a variety of
non-agricultural jobs and tenant
cultivators with small land holdings.
The urban poor are
largely the overflow
of the rural poor
who  had migrated
to urban areas in
search of alternative
employment
livelihood, labourers
who do a variety of
casual jobs and the
self-emloyed who sell
a variety of things on
roadsides and are
engaged in various
activities.
Fig. 4.2 Many poor families live in kutcha houses
Fig. 4.1 Majority of agricultural labourers are poor
2015-16(20/01/2015)
POVERTY
4.3 HOW ARE POOR PEOPLE IDENTIFIED?
If India is to solve the problem of
poverty, it has to find viable and
sustainable strategies to address the
causes of poverty and design schemes
to help the poor out of their situation.
However, for these schemes to be
implemented, the government needs
to be able to identify who the poor are.
For this there is need to develop a
scale to measure poverty, and the
factors that make up the criteria for
this measurement or mechanism need
to be carefully chosen.
pre-independent
India,
Dadabhai Naoroji was the first to
discuss the concept of a Poverty Line.
He used the menu for a prisoner and
used appropriate prevailing prices to
arrive at what may be called ‘jail cost
of living’. However, only adults stay
in jail whereas, in an actual society,
there are children too. He, therefore,
appropriately adjusted this cost of
living to arrive at the poverty line.
For this adjustment, he assumed
that one-third population consisted
of children and half of them
consumed very little while the other
half  consumed half of the adult
diet. This is how he arrived at the
factor of three-fourths;  (1/6)(Nil) +
(1/6)(Half) + (2/3)(Full) = (3/4)
(Full).  The weighted average of
consumption of the three segments
gives the average poverty line,
which comes out to be three-fourth
of the adult jail cost of living.
In post-independent India, there
have been several attempts to work
out a mechanism to identify the
number of poor in the country. For
instance, in 1962, the Planning
Commission formed a Study Group.
In 1979, another body called the
‘Task Force on Projections of
Minimum Needs and Effective
Consumption Demand’ was formed.
In 1989 and 2005, ‘Expert Groups’
were constituted for the same purpose.
Box 4.2 : What is Poverty?
Two scholars, Shaheen Rafi Khan and Damian Killen, put the conditions of
the poor in a nutshell: Poverty is hunger. Poverty is being sick and not being
able to see a doctor. Poverty is not being able to go to school and not knowing
how to read. Poverty is not having a job. Poverty is fear for the future, having
food once in a day. Poverty is losing a child to illness, brought about by unclear
water. Poverty is powerlessness, lack of representation and freedom.
What do you think?
Chart 4.1: Poverty Line
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Besides Planning Commission, many
individual economists have also
attempted to develop such a
mechanism.
For the purpose of defining
poverty we divide people into two
categories; the poor and the non-poor
and the poverty line separates the
two. However, there are many kinds
of poor; the absolutely poor, the very
poor and the poor. Similarly there are
various kinds of non-poor; the
middle class, the upper middle class,
the rich, the very rich and the
absolutely rich. Think of this as a line
or continuum from the very poor to
the absolutely rich with the poverty
line dividing the poor from the non-
poor.
Categorising Poverty: There are many
ways to categorise poverty. In one such
way people who are always poor and
those who are usually poor but who
may sometimes have a little more
money (example: casual workers) are
grouped together as the chronic poor.
Another group are the churning poor
who regularly move in and out of
poverty (example: small farmers
and seasonal workers) and the
occasionally poor who are rich most
of the time but may sometimes  have a
patch of bad luck. They are called the
transient poor.  And then there are
those who are never poor and they are
the non-poor (Chart 4.2).
The Poverty Line: Now let us
examine how to determine the
poverty line. There are many ways of
measuring poverty. One way is to
determine it by the monetary value
(per capita expenditure) of the
minimum calorie intake that was
estimated at 2,400 calories for a rural
person and 2,100 for a person in
the urban area. Based on this, in
2009-10, the poverty line was defined
for rural areas as consumption worth
Rs 673 per person a month and for
urban areas it was Rs 860.
Though the government uses
Monthly Per Capita Expenditure (MPCE)
as proxy for income of households to
identify the poor, do you think this
mechanism satisfactorily identifies the
poor households in our country?
Chart 4.2: The Chronic Poor, Transient Poor and Non-Poor
2015-16(20/01/2015)
POVERTY
Economists state that a major
problem with this mechanism is that it
groups all the poor together and does
not differentiate between the very poor
and the other poor (See chart 4.2). Also
this mechanism takes into account
expenditure on food and a few select
items as proxy for income, economists
question its basis. This mechanism is
helpful in identifying the poor as a
group to be taken care of by the
government, but it would be difficult to
identify who among the poor need help
the most.
There are many factors, other than
income and assets, which are associated
with poverty; for instance, the
accessibility to basic education, health
care, drinking water and sanitation.
They need to be considered to develop
Poverty Line. The existing mechanism
for determining the Poverty Line also
does not take into consideration social
factors that trigger and perpetuate
poverty such as illiteracy, ill health,
lack of access to resources,
discrimination or lack of civil and
political freedoms.  The aim of poverty
alleviation schemes should be to
improve human lives by expanding the
range of things that a person could be
and could do, such as to be healthy and
well-nourished, to be knowledgeable
and participate in the life of a
community. From this point of view,
development is about removing the
obstacles to the things that a person
can do in life, such as illiteracy, ill
health, lack of access to resources,
or lack of civil and political
freedoms.
Though the government claims that
higher rate of growth, increase in
agricultural production, providing
employment in rural areas and
economic reform packages introduced
in the 1990s have resulted in a decline
in poverty levels, economists raise
doubts about the government’s claim.
They point out that the way the data
are collected, items that are included
consumption
basket,
methodology followed to estimate the
poverty line and the number of poor
are manipulated to arrive at the
reduced figures of the number of poor
in India.
Due to various limitations in the
official estimation of poverty, scholars
have attempted to find alternative
methods. For instance, Amartya Sen,
noted Nobel Laureate, has developed
an index known as Sen Index. There
are other tools such as Poverty Gap
Index and Squared Poverty Gap. You
will learn about these tools in higher
classes.
4.4 THE NUMBER OF POOR IN INDIA
When the number of poor is
estimated as the proportion of
people below the poverty line, it is
known as ‘Head Count Ratio’.
You might be interested in
knowing the total number of poor
persons residing in India. Where  do
they reside and has their number or
proportion declined over the years or
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
not? When such a comparative
analysis of poor people is made
in terms of ratios and percentages,
we will have an idea of different
levels of poverty of people and
their distribution; between states and
over time.
The official data on poverty is
made available to the public by the
Planning Commission. It is
estimated on the basis of consumption
expenditure data  collected by the
National Sample Survey Organisation
(NSSO). Chart 4.3 shows the number
of poor and their proportion to the
population in India for the years 1973-
2012. In 1973-74, more than 320
million people were below the poverty
line. In 2011-12, this number has
come down to about 270 million.
Chart 4.3: Trends in Poverty in India, 1973–2012
Work These Out
Ø In Sections 4.2 and 4.3, you will notice that the poor are identified not only
with income and expenditure related indicators but also with many other
items such as  access to land, housing, education, health, sanitation. Also
to be considered is discriminatory practices. Discuss how an alternative
poverty line could be constructed in such a way that it includes all the
other indicators.
Ø On the basis of the given definition for poverty line, find out whether people
who work as domestic help, dhobies and  newspaper vendors etc. in your
locality/neighbourhood are above the poverty line or not.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
POVERTY
In terms of proportion, in 1973-74,
about 55 per cent of the total
population was below the poverty line.
In 2011-12, it has fallen to 22 per cent.
In 1973-74, more than 80 per cent
of the poor resided in rural areas and
this situation has not changed even in
2011-12. This means that more than
three-fourth of the poor in  India still
reside in villages. Why do you think this
is the case?
In the 1990s, the absolute
number of poor in rural areas had
declined whereas the number of their
urban counterparts increased
marginally. The poverty ratio declined
continuously for both urban and
rural areas. From  Chart 4.3, you will
notice that during 1973-2012, there
has been a decline in the number of
poor and their proportion but the
nature of decline in the two
parameters  is not encouraging. The
ratio is declining much slower than
the absolute number of poor in the
country. You will also notice that
the gap between the absolute
number of poor in rural and urban
areas got reduced whereas in the
case of ratio the gap has remained
the same until 1999-2000 and has
widened in 2011-12.
Chart 4.4: Population Below Poverty Line in Some Large States, 1973-2012 (%)
Note: For the year 1973, Uttar Pradesh includes the present Uttarakhand;
Madhya Pradesh includes Chhattisgarh and Bihar includes Jharkhand.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Aggregate poverty is just the sum of
individual poverty. Poverty is also
explained by general, economy-wide
problems, such as (i) low capital
formation (ii) lack of infrastructure
(iii) lack of demand (iv) pressure
of population (v) lack of social/
welfare nets.
In Chapter 1 you have read
about the British rule in India.
Although  the final impact of the
British rule on Indian living
standards is still being debated, there
is no doubt that there was a
substantial negative impact on the
Indian economy and standard of
living of the people. There was
substantial de-industrialisation in
India under the British rule. Imports
of manufactured cotton cloth from
Lancashire in England displaced
much local production, and India
reverted to being an exporter of
cotton yarn, not cloth.
As over 70 per cent of Indians
were engaged in agriculture
throughout the British Raj period,
the impact on that sector was more
important on living standards than
anything else. British policies
involved sharply raising rural taxes
that enabled merchants and
moneylenders to become large
landowners. Under the British,
India began to export food grains
and, as a result, as many as 26
million people died in famines
between 1875 and 1900.
Britain’s main goals from the Raj
were to provide a market for British
exports, to have India service its
The state level trends in poverty are
shown in Chart 4.4. The two lines in
the chart indicate the national poverty
level. The first line from below indicates
poverty level during 2011-12 and the
other line indicates the same for the
year 1973-74. This means, the
proportion of poor in India during
1973-2012 has come down from 55 to
22 per cent. The chart also reveals that
six states - Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal
and Orissa - contained a large section
of poor in 1973-74. During 1973-
2012, many Indian states reduced the
poverty levels to a considerable extent.
Yet, the poverty levels in four states -
Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar and
Uttar Pradesh are still far above the
national poverty level. You may notice
West Bengal and Tamil Nadu reduced
poverty level much better than other
states. How come they were able to do
much better than other states?
4.5 WHAT CAUSES POVERTY?
The causes of poverty lie in the
institutional and social factors that
mark the life of the poor. The poor are
deprived of quality education and
unable to acquire skills which
fetch better incomes. Also access to
health care is denied to the poor. The
main victims of caste, religious and
other discriminatory practices are
poor.  These can be caused as a result
of (i) social, economic and political
inequality (ii) social exclusion (iii)
unemployment (iv) indebtedness (v)
unequal distribution of wealth.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
POVERTY
debt payments to Britain,
and for India to provide
manpower for the British
imperial armies.
The British Raj impoverished
millions of people in India. Our
natural
resources
plundered, our industries
worked to produce goods at
low prices for the British and
our food grains were exported.
Many died due to famine and
hunger. In 1857-58, anger at
the overthrow of many local
leaders, extremely high taxes
imposed on peasants, and
other resentments boiled over
in a revolt against British rule
by the sepoys, Indian troops
commanded by the British.
Even today agriculture is the
principal means of livelihood and
land is the primary asset of rural
people; ownership of land is an
important determinant of material
well-being and those who own some
land have a better chance to improve
their living conditions.
Since independence,  the government
has attempted to redistribute land and
has taken land from those who have
large amounts to distribute it to those
who do not have any land, but work
on the land as wage labourers.
However, this move was successful
only to a limited extent as large
sections of agricultural workers were
not able to farm the small holdings
that they now possessed as they did
not have either money (assets) or
skills to make the land productive
and the land holdings were too small
to be viable. Also most of the Indian
states failed to implement land
redistribution policies.
A large section of the rural poor
in India are the small farmers. The
land that they have is, in general,
less fertile and dependent on
rains. Their survival depends on
subsistence crops and sometimes
on livestock. With the rapid growth
population
without
alternative sources of employment,
the per-head availability of land for
cultivation has steadily declined
leading to fragmentation of land
holdings. The income from these
small land holdings is not sufficient
family’s
basic
requirements.
You must have heard about
farmers committing suicide due to
their inability to pay back the loans
that they have taken for cultivation
Fig. 4.4 Low quality self-employment sustains poverty
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
and other domestic needs as their
crops have failed due to drought or
other natural calamities (see Box 4.3).
Most members of scheduled castes
and scheduled tribes are not able to
participate in the emerging employment
opportunities in different sectors of the
urban and rural economy as they do not
have the necessary knowledge and skills
to do so.
A large section of urban poor
in India are largely the overflow
of the rural poor who migrate
to urban areas in search
of employment and a livelihood.
Industrialisation has not been
able to absorb all these people.
The urban poor are either
unemployed or intermittently
employed as casual labourers.
Casual labourers are among the
most vulnerable in  society as
they have no job security, no
assets, limited skills, sparse
opportunities and no surplus to
sustain them.
Poverty is, therefore, also
closely related to nature of
employment. Unemployment or under
employment and the casual and
intermittent nature of work in both
rural and urban areas that compels
indebtedness, in turn, reinforces
poverty. Indebtedness is one of the
significant factors of poverty.
A steep rise in the price of food
grains and other essential goods, at
Fig. 4.5 Quality employment is still a dream for the poor
Work These Out
Ø You may come across washermen and barbers in your neighbourhood. Spare
a few moments and speak to a few of them. Collect details about what made
them to take up this activity, where they live with their family members,
number of meals they are able to consume in a day, whether they possess
any physical assets and why they could not take up a job. Discuss the details
that you have collected in the classroom.
Ø List the activities of people in rural and urban areas separately. You may
also list the activities of the non-poor. Compare the two  and discuss in the
classroom why the poor are unable to take up such activities.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
POVERTY
Box 4.3: Distress Among Cotton Farmers
Many small land owning farmers and farming households and weavers are descending
into poverty due to globalisation related shock and lack of perceived income earning
opportunities in relatively well performing states in India. Where households have
been able to sell assets, or borrow, or generate income from alternative employment
opportunities, the impact of such shocks may
be transient. However, if the household has no
assets to sell or no access to credit, or is able to
borrow only at exploitative rates of interest and
gets into a severe debt trap, the shocks can have
long duration ramification in terms of pushing
households below the poverty line. The worst
form of this crisis is suicides. The count reached
3,000 in Andhra Pradesh alone and is rising. In
December 2005, the Maharashtra government
admitted that over 1,000 farmers have committed
suicides in the state since 2001.
India has the largest area under cotton
cultivation in the world covering 8,300 hectares
in 2002–03. The low yield of 300 kg per hectare
pushes it into third position in production. High
production costs, low and unstable yields,
decline in world prices, global glut in production
due to subsidies by the U.S.A. and other
countries, and opening up of the domestic
market due to globalisation have increased the
exposure of farmers and led to agrarian distress
and suicides especially in the cotton belt of Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra. The
issue is not one of profits and higher returns but that of the livelihood and survival
of millions of small and marginal farmers who are dependent on agriculture.
Scholars cite several factors that have led farmers to commit suicides  (i) the
shift from traditional farming to the farming of high yielding commercial crops without
adequate technical support combined with withdrawal of the state in the area of
agricultural extension services in providing counselling on farm technologies,
problems faced, immediate remedial steps and lack of timely advice to farmers (ii)
decline in public investment in agriculture in the last two decades (iii) low rates of
germination of seeds provided by large global firms, spurious seeds and pesticides by
private agents (iv) crop failure, pest attack and drought (v) debt at very high interest
rate of 36 per cent to 120 per cent from private money lenders  (vi) cheap imports
leading to decline in pricing and profits (vii) lack of access to water for crops which
forced the farmers to borrow  money at exorbitant rates of interest to sink borewells
that failed.
Sources: Excerpted from A.K. Mehta and Sourabh Ghosh assited by Ritu Elwadhi,
“Globalisation, Loss of Livelihoods and Entry into Poverty,” Alternative Economic
Survey, India 2004-2005, Alternative Survey Group, Daanish Books, Delhi 2005
and P. Sainath, The swelling ‘Register of Deaths’, The Hindu, 29 December 2005.
Shantabai, wife of Neelakanta
Sitaram Khoke who committed
suicide in Yavatma, Maharashtra
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
a rate higher than the price of luxury
goods, further intensifies the
hardship and deprivation of lower
income groups. The unequal
distribution of income and assets has
also led to the persistence of poverty
in India.
All this has created two distinct
groups in society: those who posses
the means of production and earn
good incomes and those who have
only their labour to trade for survival.
Over the years, the gap between the
rich and the poor in India has widened.
Poverty is a multi-dimensional
challenge for India that needs to be
addressed on a war footing.
4.6 POLICIES AND PROGRAMMES
TOWARDS POVERTY ALLEVIATION
The Indian Constitution and five
year plans state social justice as
the primary objective of the
developmental strategies of the
government. To quote the First Five
Year Plan (1951-56), “the urge to
bring economic and social change
under present conditions comes from
the fact of poverty and inequalities in
income, wealth and opportunity”.
The Second Five Year Plan (1956-61)
also pointed out that “the benefits of
economic development must accrue
more and more to the relatively less
privileged classes of society”. One can
find, in all policy documents,
emphasis being laid on poverty
alleviation and that various
strategies need to be adopted by the
government for the same.
The government’s approach to
poverty reduction was of three
dimensions. The first one is growth-
oriented approach. It is based on the
expectation that the effects of
economic growth — rapid increase in
gross domestic product and per
capita income — would spread to all
sections of society and will trickle
down to the poor sections also. This
was the major focus of planning
in the 1950s and early 1960s.
It was felt that rapid industrial
development and transformation
of agriculture through green
revolution in select regions would
benefit the underdeveloped regions
and the more backward sections of
the community. You must have read
in Chapters 2 and 3 that the overall
growth and growth of agriculture
and industry have not been
impressive. Population growth has
resulted in a very low growth in per
capita incomes. The gap between
poor and rich has actually widened.
The Green Revolution exacerbated the
disparities regionally and between
large and small farmers. There was
unwillingness and inability to
redistribute land. Economists state
that the benefits of economic growth
have not trickled down to the poor.
While looking for alternatives to
specifically address the poor, policy
makers started thinking that
incomes and employment for the
poor could be raised through the
creation of additional assets and by
means of work generation. This
could be achieved through specific
2015-16(20/01/2015)
POVERTY
poverty alleviation programmes.
This second approach has been
initiated from the Third Five Year
Plan (1961-66) and progressively
enlarged since then. One of the noted
programmes initiated in the 1970s
was Food for Work.
poverty
alleviation
programmes implemented are based
on the perspective of the Five Year
Plans. Expanding self-employment
programmes and wage employment
programmes are being considered as
the major ways of addressing poverty.
Examples
self-employment
programmes are Rural Employment
Generation Programme (REGP), Prime
Minister’s Rozgar Yojana (PMRY) and
Swar na Jayanti Shahari Rozgar
Yojana (SJSRY). The first programme
aims at creating self-employment
opportunities in urban    areas. The Khadi
and Village Industries Commission is
implementing it. Under this programme,
one can get financial assistance in the
form of bank loans to set up small
industries. The educated unemployed
from low-income families in rural and
urban areas can get financial help to
set up any kind of enterprise that
generates employment under PMRY.
SJSRY mainly aims at creating
employment opportunities—both self-
employment and wage employment—in
urban areas.
Earlier, under self-employment
programmes, financial assistance was
given to families or individuals. Since
Fig. 4.6 Wage employment under ‘Food for Work’ programme
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
the 1990s, this approach has been
changed. Now those who wish to
benefit from these programmes are
encouraged to form self-help groups.
Initially they are encouraged to save
some money and lend among
themselves as small loans. Later,
through banks, the government
provides partial financial assistance
to SHGs which then decide whom
the loan is to be given to for self-
employment activities. Swarnajayanti
Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY) is one
such programme. This has now been
restructured as National Rural
Livelihoods Mission (NRLM). A similar
programme called National Urban
Livelihoods Mission has also been in
place for urban poor.
The government has a variety of
programmes to generate wage
employment for the poor unskilled
people living in rural areas. In August
2005, the Parliament passed a new Act
to provide guaranteed wage employment
to every rural household whose adult
volunteer is to do unskilled manual
work for a minimum of 100 days in a
year. This Act is known as Mahatma
Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act. Under this Act all those
among the poor who are ready to work
at the minimum wage can report for
work in areas where this programme is
implemented. In 2013-14, nearly five
crore households got employment
opportunities under this law.
The third approach to addressing
poverty is to provide minimum basic
amenities to the people. India was
among the pioneers in the world to
envisage that through public
expenditure on social consumption
needs — provision of food grains at
subsidised rates, education, health,
water supply and sanitation—people’s
living standard could be improved.
Programmes under this approach are
expected to supplement the consumption
of the poor, create employment
opportunities and bring about
improvements in health and education.
One can trace this approach from the
Fifth Five Year Plan, “even with expanded
employment opportunities, the poor will
not be able to buy for themselves all the
essential goods and services. They have
to be supplemented up to at least certain
minimum standards by social
consumption and investment in the
form of essential food grains,
education, health, nutrition, drinking
water, housing, communications and
electricity.” Three major programmes
that aim at improving the food and
nutritional status of the poor are Public
Distribution System, Integrated Child
Development Scheme and Midday Meal
Scheme. Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak
Yojana, Pradhan Mantri Gramodaya
Yojana, Valmiki Ambedkar Awas
Yojana are also attempts in the same
direction. It may be essential to briefly
state that India has achieved
satisfactory progress in many aspects.
The government also has a variety
of other social security programmes
to help a few specific groups. National
Social Assistance Programme is one
such programme initiated by the
central government. Under this
programme, elderly people who do
not have anyone to take care of them
are given pension to sustain
2015-16(20/01/2015)
POVERTY
themselves. Poor women who are
destitute and widows are also
covered under this scheme. The
government has also introduced a few
schemes to provide health insurance to
poor people.
4.7 POVERTY ALLEVIATION
P ROGRAMMES — A CRITICAL
ASSESSMENT
Efforts at poverty alleviation have borne
fruit in that for the first time since
independence, the percentage of
absolute poor in some states is now
well below the national average.
Despite various strategies to alleviate
poverty, hunger, malnourishment,
illiteracy and lack of basic amenities
continue to be a common feature
in many parts of India. Though  the
policy towards poverty alleviation
has evolved in a progressive manner,
over the last five and a half decades,
it has not undergone any radical
transformation. You can find
change in nomenclature, integration
or mutations of programmes.
However, none resulted in any
radical change in the ownership of
assets, process of production and
improvement of basic amenities
to the needy. Scholars, while
assessing these programmes, state
three major areas of concern which
prevent
their
successful
implementation. Due to unequal
distribution of land and other assets,
the benefits from direct poverty
alleviation programmes have been
appropriated by the non-poor.
Compared to the magnitude of
poverty, the amount of resources
Work These Out
Ø Discuss and then develop a list of three employment opportunities each
that can arise in  coastal areas, deserts, hilly tribal areas, tribal areas
under : (i) Food for Work Programme and (ii) self-employment.
Ø Many policy documents, five year plan documents, economic
surveys are available in the website of Planning Commission
(www.planningcommission.nic.in). Some of them could be available in
your school or public library also. In these documents, the initiatives
taken by the government and their evaluation are available. Read a
few of them and discuss in the classroom.
Ø In your area or neighbourhood, you will find developmental works such
as laying of roads, construction of buildings in government hospitals,
government schools etc. Visit such sites and prepare a two-three page
report on the nature of work, how many people are getting employed,
wages paid to the labourers etc.
Ø Based on the report of the developmental work (NREGA for example),
critically review the government policy document associated with it.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Box 4.4: Ramdas Korwa’s Road to Nowhere
Somehow, Ramdas Korwa of Rachketha village was not overjoyed to learn
that he was worth Rs l7.44 lakh to the government. Late in 1993, the
authorities decided to lay a three km road leading to Rachketha village in the
name of tribal development by allocating Rs 17.44 lakh towards the project.
Tribals constitute a 55 per cent majority in Surguja, one of India’s poorest
districts. And the Pahadi or Hill Korwas, who have been listed as a primitive
tribe by the government, fall in the bottom 5 per cent. Special efforts are
underway for their development which often involves large sums of money.
Just one centrally funded scheme, the Pahadi Korwa project, is worth Rs 42
crores over a five-year period.
There are around 15,000 Pahadi Korwas, the largest number of these in
Surguja. However, for political reasons, the main base of the project is in
Raigad district. There was just one small problem about building the Pahadi
Korwa Marg in Rachketha—the village is almost completely devoid of Pahadi
Korwas. Ramdas’s family is the only real exception.
‘It doesn’t matter if these don’t benefit the Pahadi Korwas in the least and
are completely useless. Out here, even if you put up a swimming pool and a
bungalow, you do it in the name of tribal development,’ says an NGO activist.
‘Nobody bothered to check whether there were really any Pahadi Korwas living
in Rachketha village’ and ‘there was already a kutcha road here,’ says
Ramavatar Korwa, son of Ramdas. ‘They just added lal mitti (red earth) to it.
Even today, after spending Rs 17.44 lakh, it is not a pucca road.’
Ramdas’s own demands are touchingly simple. ‘All I want is a little water,’
he says. ‘How can we have agriculture without water?’ When repeatedly
pressed, he adds: ‘Instead of spending Rs 17.44 lakh on that road, if they had
spent a few thousand on improving that damaged well on my land, wouldn’t
that have been better? Some improvement in the land is also necessary, but
let them start by giving us a little water.’
Ramdas’s problems were ignored. The government’s problem was ‘fulfilling
a target’. ‘If the money were simply put into bank fixed deposits, none of these
Pahadi Korwa families would ever have to work again. The interest alone would
make them very well off by Surguja’s standards’, says an official mockingly.
Nobody thought of asking Ramdas what he really needed, what his
problems were, or involving him in their solution. Instead, in his name, they
built a road he does not use, at a cost of Rs17.44 lakh. ‘Please do something
about my water problem, sir,’ says Ramdas Korwa as we set off across the
plain, journeying two km to reach his road to nowhere.
Source: Excerpted from P. Sainath,  1996, Everybody Loves a Good Drought:
Stories from India’s Poorest Districts, Penguin Books, New Delhi.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
POVERTY
allocated for these programmes is not
sufficient. Moreover, these programmes
depend mainly on government and
bank officials for their implementation.
Since such officials are ill motivated,
inadequately trained, corruption prone
and vulnerable to pressure from a
variety of local elites, the resources
are inefficiently used and wasted.
There is also non-participation of local
level institutions in programme
implementation.
Government policies  have also
failed to address the vast majority of
vulnerable people who are living on or
just above the poverty line. It also
reveals that high growth alone is not
sufficient to reduce poverty. Without
the active participation of the poor,
successful implementation of any
programme is not possible.
Poverty can effectively be eradicated
only when the poor start contributing
to growth by their active involvement
in the growth process. This is
possible through a process of social
mobilisation, encouraging poor people
to participate and get them empowered.
This will also help create employment
opportunities which may lead to
increase in levels of income, skill
development, health and literacy.
Moreover, it is necessary to identify
poverty stricken areas and provide
infrastructure such as schools, roads,
power, telecom, IT services, training
institutions etc.
4.8 CONCLUSION
We have travelled about six decades
since independence. The objective of
all our policies had been stated as
promoting rapid and balanced
economic development with equality
and social justice. Poverty alleviation
has always been accepted as one of
India’s main challenges by the
policy makers, regardless of which
gover nment was in power. The
absolute number of poor in the country
has gone down and some states have
less proportion of poor than even the
national average. Yet, critics point out
that even though vast resources
have been allocated and spent, we
are still far from reaching the goal.
Fig. 4.7 Scrap collector: mismangament of
employment planning forces people to
take up very low paying  jobs
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
There is improvement in terms of per
capita income and average standard
of living; some progress towards
meeting the basic needs has been
made. But when compared to the
progress made by many other
countries, our performance has not
been impressive. Moreover, the fruits
of development have not reached all
sections of the population. Some
sections of people, some sectors of
the economy, some regions of the
country can compete even with
developed countries in terms of
social and economic development,
yet, there are many others who have
not been able to come out of the
vicious circle of poverty.
Recap
Ø Reducing  poverty has been one of the major objectives of India’s
developmental strategies.
Ø The per capita consumption expenditure level which meets the average
per capita daily requirement of 2,400 calories in rural areas and 2,100
calories in urban areas, along with a minimum of non-food expenditure,
is called poverty line or absolute poverty.
Ø When the number of poor and their proportion is compared, we will have
an idea of different levels of poverty of people and their distribution between
states and over time.
Ø The number of poor in India and their proportion to total population has
declined substantially. For the first time in the 1990s, the absolute
number of poor has declined.
Ø Majority of poor are residing in rural areas and engage themselves in
casual and unskilled jobs.
Ø Income and expenditure oriented approaches do not take into account
many other attributes of the poor people.
Ø Over the years, the government has been following three approaches to
reduce poverty in India: growth oriented development, specific poverty
alleviation programmes and meeting the minimum needs of the poor.
Ø Government initiatives are yet to  transform the ownership of assets,
processes of production and meet the basic amenities of the poor.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
POVERTY
Why calorie - based norm is not adequate to identify the poor?
What is meant by ‘Food for Work’ programme?
Why are employment generation programmes important in poverty
alleviation in India?
How can creation of income earning assets address the problem
of poverty?
The three dimensional attack on poverty adopted by the govern-
ment has not succeded in poverty alleviation in India. Comment.
What programmes has the government adopted to help the
elderly people and poor and destitute women?
Is there any relationship between unemployment and poverty?
Explain.
Suppose you are from a poor family and you wish to get help from
the government to set up a petty shop. Under which scheme will
you apply for assistance and why?
Illustrate the difference between rural and urban poverty. Is it
correct to say that poverty has shifted from rural to urban areas?
Use the trends in poverty ratio to support your answer.
Suppose you are a resident of a village, suggest a few measures
to tackle the problem of poverty.
Collect data from 30 persons of your locality regarding their daily
consumption of various commodities. Then rank the persons on
the basis of relatively better off and worse, to get the degree of
relative poverty.
EXERCISES
SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Collect information and fill in the following table with the amount of
money spent in terms of rupees by four low income families on
various commodities. Analyse the research and find out which
family is relatively poor in comparison to the other families.  Also
find out who are absolutely poor if the poverty line is fixed at an
expenditure of Rs 500 per month per person.
Commodities
Family A
Family B
Family C
Family D
Wheat/Rice
Vegetable Oil
Sugar
Electricity/
Lighting
Clothes
House Rent
The following table shows the average monthly expenditure per
person on items of consumption in India and Delhi slums in terms
of percentage. ‘Rice and wheat’ in rural areas at 25 per cent
means that for every 100 rupees spent, Rs 25 goes towards the
purchase of rice and wheat alone. Read the table further and
answer the questions that follow.
Items
Rural
Urban
Delhi Slums
Rice and wheat
Pulses and their products
Milk and milk products
Vegetables and fruits
Meat, fish and eggs
Sugar
Salt and spices
Other food items
Total: All food
Expenditure on food
items as a % of all items
• Compare the percentage of expenditure on food items among
different groups and their priorities.
• Do you think households in slums are depending more on cereals
and pulses?
• On which item do people living in different areas spend the least?
Compare them.
• Do you think that slum dwellers have given more emphasis to
meat, fish and eggs?
2015-16(20/01/2015)
POVERTY
Books
DANDEKAR, V.M. and NILAKANTHA RATH. 1971. Poverty in India, Indian School
of Political Economy, Pune.
DREZE, JEAN. AMARTYA SEN & AKTHAR HUSAIN (Eds.). 1995. The Political Economy
of Hunger. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
NAOROJI, DADABHAI. 1996. Poverty and Un-British Rule in India, Publications
Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of
India, Second Edition, New Delhi.
SAINATH, P. 1996. Everybody Loves a Good Drought: Stories from India’s
Poorest Districts. Penguin Books, New Delhi.
SEN, AMARTYA. 1999. Poverty and Famines: An Essay on Entitlement and
Deprivation. Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
SUBRAMANIAM, S. (Ed.). 2001. India’s Development Experience: Selected
Writings of S. Guhan. Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
Articles
KUMAR, NAVEEN and S.C. AGGARWAL. 2003. ‘Pattern of Consumption and
Poverty in Delhi Slums.’ Economic and Political Weekly, December
13, pp. 5294-5300.
MINHAS, B.S., L.R. JAIN and S.D. TENDULKAR. 1991. ‘Declining Incidence of
Poverty in the 1980s — Evidence versus Artefacts,’ Economic and
Political Weekly, July 6-13.
Government Reports
Report of the Expert Group of the Estimation of Proportion and Number of
Poor, Perspective Planning Division, Planning Commission Government
of India, New Delhi, 1993.
Economic Survey 2013-14. Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
Tenth Five Year Plan 2002-2007, Vol. II: Sectoral Policies and Programmes,
Planning Commission, Government of India, New Delhi.
Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-17), Vols. I, II and III. Sage Publications Pvt.
Ltd., New Delhi (for Planning Commission, Government of India).
REFERENCES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
After studying this chapter, the learners will understand
the concepts of Human Resource, Human Capital Formation and Human
Development
the links between investment in human capital, economic growth and
human development
the need for government spending on education and health
the state of India’s educational attainment.
HUMAN CAPITAL
FORMATION IN INDIA
2015-16(20/01/2015)
HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA
5.1 INTRODUCTION
Think of one factor that has made a
great difference in the evolution of
mankind. Perhaps it is man’s capacity
to store and transmit knowledge
which he has been doing through
conversation, through songs and
through elaborate lectures. But man
soon found out that we need a good
deal of training and skill to do things
efficiently. We know that the labour
skill of an educated person is more
than that of an uneducated person
and hence the former is able to generate
more income than the latter and his
contribution to economic growth is,
consequently, more.
Education is sought not only as it
confers higher earning capacity on
people but also for its other highly
valued benefits: it gives one a better
social standing and pride; it enables
one to make better choices in life; it
provides knowledge to understand the
changes taking place in society; it also
stimulates innovations. Moreover,
the availability of educated labour
force facilitates adaptation of new
“... the wisdom of expending public and private funds on education is not to be
measured by its direct fruits alone. It will be profitable as a mere investment,
to give the masses of  people much greater opportunities than they can generally
avail themselves of. For by this means many, who would have died unknown,
are enabled to get the start needed for bringing out their latent abilities”.
Alfred Marshall
Fig. 5.1 Adequate education and training to  farmers can raise productivity in farms
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
technologies. Economists have stressed
the need for expanding educational
opportunities in a nation as it
accelerates the development process.
5.2 WHAT IS HUMAN CAPITAL?
Just as a country can turn physical
resources like land into physical
capital like factories, similarly, it can
also turn human resources like
students into human capital like
engineers and doctors. Societies need
sufficient human capital in the first
place— in the form of competent
people who have themselves been
educated and trained as professors
and other professionals. In other
words, we need good human capital
to produce other human capital (say,
doctors, engineers...). This means that
we need investment in human capital
to produce more human capital out of
human resources.
Let us understand a little more of
what human capital means by posing
the following questions :
(i) What are the sources of human
capital?
(ii) Is there any relation between
human capital and economic
growth of a country?
(iii) Is the formation of human
capital linked to man’s all-round
development or, as it is now called,
human development?
(iv) What role can the  government
play in human capital formation
in India?
5.3 SOURCES OF HUMAN CAPITAL
Investment in education is considered
as one of the main sources of human
capital. There are several other sources
as well. Investments in health, on- the-
job training, migration and information
are the other sources of human capital
formation.
Why do your parents spend money
on education? Spending on education
by individuals is similar to spending
on capital goods by companies with
the objective of increasing future
profits over a period of time. Likewise,
individuals invest in education with the
objective of increasing their future
income.
Like education, health is also
considered as an important input for
the development of a nation as much
as it is important for the development
of an individual.
Who can work better —a sick
person or a person with sound health?
A sick labourer without access to
medical facilities is compelled to
abstain from work and there is loss of
productivity. Hence, expenditure on
health is an important source of
human capital formation.
Work This Out
Ø Take three families from
different strata (i) very poor
(ii) middle class and (iii)
affluent.
Study
expenditure pattern of the
families on education of
male and female children.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA
Preventive medicine
(vaccination), curative
medicine (medical
intervention during
illness), social medi-
cine (spread of health
literacy) and provision
of clean drinking water
and good sanitation
are the various forms of health
expenditures. Health expenditure
directly increases the supply of healthy
labour force and is, thus, a source of
human capital formation.
Firms spend on
giving on-the-
job-training to
their workers.
This may take
different forms:
one, the workers
may be trained
in the firm itself under the supervision
of a skilled worker; two, the workers
may be sent for off-campus training.
In both these cases firms incur some
expenses. Firms will, thus, insist that
the workers should work for a specific
period of time, after their on-the-job
training, during which it can recover
the benefits of the enhanced
productivity owing to the training.
Expenditure regarding on-the-job
training is a source of human capital
formation as the return of such
expenditure in the form of enhanced
labour productivity is more than the
cost of it.
People migrate in search of jobs
that fetch them higher salaries than
what they may get in their native
places. Unemployment is the reason
for the rural-urban migration in India.
Technically qualified persons, like
engineers and doctors, migrate to other
countries because of higher salaries
that they may get in such countries.
Migration in both these cases involves
cost of transport, higher cost of living
in the migrated places and psychic
costs of living in a strange socio-
cultural setup. The enhanced earnings
in the new place outweigh the costs of
migration; hence, expenditure on
migration is also a source of human
capital formation.
People
spend
acquire
information relating to the labour
market and other markets like
education and health. For example,
people want to know the level of salaries
associated with various types of jobs,
whether the educational institutions
provide the right type of employable
skills and at what cost. This information
is necessary to make decisions
regarding investments in human capital
as well as for efficient utilisation of the
acquired human capital stock.
Expenditure incurred for acquiring
information relating to the labour
market and other markets is also a
source of human capital formation.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Box 5.1: Physical and Human Capital
Both the forms of capital formation are outcomes of conscious investment decisions.
Decision regarding investment in physical capital is taken on the basis of one’s knowledge
in this regard. The entrepreneur possesses knowledge to calculate the expected rates of
return to a range of investments and then rationally decides which one of the
investments should be made. The ownership of physical capital is the outcome of the
conscious decision of the owner —  the physical capital formation is mainly an economic
and technical process. A substantial part of the human capital formation takes place
in one’s life when she/he is unable to decide whether it would maximise her/his earnings.
Children are given different types of school education and health care facilities by their
parents and the society. The peers, educators and society influence the decisions
regarding human capital investments even at the tertiary level, that is, at the college
level. Moreover, the human capital formation at this stage is dependent upon the already
formed human capital at the school level. Human capital formation is partly a social
process and partly a conscious decision of the possessor of the human capital.
You know that the owner of a physical capital, say a bus, need not be present in
the place where it is used; whereas, a bus-driver, who possesses the knowledge and
ability to drive the bus, should be present when the bus is used for transportation of
people and materials. Physical capital is tangible and can be easily sold in the market
like any other commodity. Human capital is intangible; it is endogenously built in the
body and mind of its owner. Human capital is not sold in the market; only the services
of the human capital are sold and, hence, there arises the necessity of the owner of the
human capital to be present in the place of production. The physical capital is
separable from its owner, whereas, human capital is inseparable from its owner.
The two forms of capital differ in terms of mobility across space. Physical capital is
completely mobile between countries except for some artificial trade restrictions. Human
capital is not perfectly mobile between countries as movement is restricted by nationality
and culture. Therefore, physical capital formation can be built even through imports,
whereas human capital formation is to be done through conscious policy formulations
in consonance with the nature of the society and economy and expenditure by the
state and the individuals.
Both forms of capital depreciate with time but the nature of depreciation differs
between the two. Continuous use of machine leads to depreciation and change of
technology makes a machine obsolete. In the case of human capital, depreciation takes
place with ageing but can be reduced, to a large extent, through continuous investment
in education, health, etc. This investment also facilitates the human capital to cope
with change in technology which is not the case with physical capital.
Nature of benefits flowing from human capital are  different from that of physical
capital. Human capital benefits not only the owner but also the society in general. This
is called external benefit. An educated person can effectively take part in a democratic
process and contribute to the socio-economic progress of a nation. A healthy person,
by maintaining personal hygiene and sanitation, stops the spread of contagious diseases
and epidemics. Human capital creates both private and social benefits, whereas physical
capital creates only private benefit. That is, benefits from a capital good flow to those
who pay the price for the product and services produced by it.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA
The concept of physical capital is
the base for conceptualising human
capital. There are some similarities
between the two forms of capital; there
are some striking dissimilarities as
well. See Box 5.1.
Human Capital and Economic
Growth: Who contributes more to
national income —  a worker in a factory
or a software professional? We know
that the labour skill of an educated
person is more than that of an
uneducated person and that the former
generates more income than the latter.
Economic growth means the increase
in real national income of a country;
naturally, the contribution of the
educated person to economic growth is
more than that of an illiterate person. If
a healthy person could provide
uninterrupted labour supply for a
longer period of time, then health is also
an important factor for economic
growth. Thus, both education and
health, along with many other factors
like on-the-job training, job market
information and migration, increase an
Fig. 5.2 Creating human capital: a school being run in make shift premises in Delhi
Look at Fig. 5.2
and discuss.
What are the advantages of
having proper ‘classroom’?
Do you think the children
going to this schol are
receiving quality education?
Why these schools do not
have buildings?
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
individual’s income generating
capacity.
This enhanced productivity of
human beings or human capital
contributes substantially not only
towards increasing labour productivity
but also stimulates innovations
and creates ability to absorb new
technologies. Education provides
knowledge to understand changes in
society and scientific advancements,
thus, facilitate inventions and
innovations. Similarly, the availability
of educated labour force facilitates
adaptation to new technologies.
Empirical evidence to prove that
increase in human capital causes
economic growth is rather nebulous.
This may be because of measurement
problems. For example, education
measured in terms of years of
schooling, teacher-pupil ratio and
enrolment rates may not reflect the
quality of education; health services
measured in monetary terms, life
expectancy and mortality rates may
not reflect the true health status of the
people in a country. Using the
indicators mentioned above, an
analysis of improvement in education
and health sectors and growth in real
per capita income in both developing
and developed countries shows that
there is convergence in the measures
of human capital but no sign of
convergence of per capita real income.
In other words, the human capital
growth in developing countries has
been faster but the growth of per capita
real income has not been that fast.
There are reasons to believe that the
causality between human capital and
economic growth flows in either
directions. That is, higher income
causes building of high level of human
capital and vice versa, that is, high level
of human capital causes growth of
income.
India recognised the importance of
human capital in economic growth
long ago. The Seventh Five Year Plan
says, “Human resources development
(read human capital) has necessarily
to be assigned a key role in any
development strategy, particularly in
a country with a large population.
Trained and educated on sound lines,
a large population can itself become
an asset in accelerating economic
growth and in ensuring social change
in desired directions.”
It is difficult to establish a relation
of cause and effect from the growth of
human capital (education and health)
to economic growth but we can see in
Fig. 5.3 Scientific and technical manpower: a rich
ingredient of human capital
2015-16(20/01/2015)
HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA
Table 5.1 that these sectors have grown
simultaneously. Growth in each sector
probably has reinforced the growth of
every other sector.
Two independent reports on the
Indian economy, in recent times, have
identified that India would grow faster
due to its strength in human capital
formation. Deutsche Bank, a German
bank, in its report on ‘Global Growth
Centres’ (published on 1.7.05)
identified that India will emerge as one
among four major growth centres in
the world by the year 2020. It further
states, “Our empirical investigation
supports the view that human capital
is the most important factor of
production in today’s economies.
Increases in human capital are crucial
to achieving increases in GDP.” With
reference to India it states, “Between
2005 and 2020 we expect a 40 per cent
rise in the average years of education
in India, to just above 7 years...”
World Bank, in its recent
report, ‘India and the
Knowledge Economy —
Leveraging Strengths and
Opportunities’, states that
India should make a
transition to the knowledge
economy and if it uses its
knowledge as much as
Ireland does (it is judged that
Ireland uses its knowledge
economy very effectively),
then the per capita income of
India will increase from a
little over US $1000 in
TABLE 5.1
Select Indicators of Development in Education and Health Sectors
Particulars
Real Per Capita  Income (in Rs)
5,708
8,594
11,535
16,172
38,037
Crude Death
Rate (Per 1,000 Population)
Infant Mortality Rate
Life Expectancy
at Birth (in Years)
16.67
43.57
52.21
65.20
Female
Literacy Rate (%)
Fig. 5.4 Job on hand: transforming India into a knowledge
economy
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
2002 to US $ 3000 in 2020. It further
states that the Indian economy has all
the key ingredients for making this
transition, such as,  a critical mass of
skilled workers, a well-functioning
democracy and a diversified science
and technology infrastructure. Thus
the two reports point out the fact that
further human capital formation in
India will move its economy to a higher
growth trajectory.
5.4 HUMAN CAPITAL AND HUMAN
DEVELOPMENT
The two terms sound similar but there
is a clear distinction between them.
Human capital considers education and
health as a means to increase labour
productivity. Human development is
based on the idea that education and
health are integral to human well-being
because only when people have the
ability to read and write and the ability
to lead a long and healthy life, they
will be able to make other choices
which they value. Human capital
treats human beings as a means to
an end; the end being the increase
in productivity. In this view, any
investment in education and health is
unproductive if it does not enhance
output of goods and services. In the
human development perspective,
human beings are ends in themselves.
Human welfare should be increased
through investments in education and
health even if such investments do not
result in higher labour productivity.
Therefore, basic education and basic
health are important in themselves,
irrespective of their contribution to
labour productivity. In such a view,
Box 5.2: India as a Knowledge Economy
The Indian software industry has been showing an impressive record over the
past decade. Entrepreneurs, bureaucrats and politicians are now advancing
views about how India can transform itself into a knowledge-based economy
by using information technology (IT). There have been some instances of villagers
using e-mail which are cited as examples of such transformation. Likewise,
e-governance is being projected as the way of the future. The value of IT depends
greatly on the existing level of economic development. Do you think IT - based
services in rural areas will lead to human development? Discuss.
Work This Out
Ø If a construction worker,
maid-servant, dhobi or a
peon in school has absented
herself/himself for long due
to ill health, find out how it
has affected her/his
(i) job security
(ii) wage/salary
What could be the possible
reasons?
2015-16(20/01/2015)
HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA
every individual has a right to get basic
education and basic health care, that
is, every individual has a right to be
literate and lead a healthy life.
5.5 STATE OF HUMAN C APITAL
FORMATION IN INDIA
In this section we are going to analyse
human capital formation in India. We
have already learnt that human
capital formation is the outcome
of investments in education, health,
on-the-job training, migration and
information. Of these education and
health are very important sources of
human capital formation. We know
that ours is a federal country with a
union government, state governments
and local governments (Municipal
Corporations, Municipalities and
Village Panchayats). The Constitution
of India mentions the functions to
be carried out by each level of
government. Accordingly, expendi-
tures on both education and health are
to be carried out simultaneously by all
the three tiers of the government.
Analysis of health sector is taken up
in Chapter 8; hence, we will analyse
only the education sector here.
Do you know who takes care of
education and health in India? Before we
take up the analysis of the education
sector in India, we will look into the need
for government intervention in education
and health sectors. We do understand
that education and health care services
create both private and social benefits and
this is the reason for the existence of both
private and public institutions in the
education and health service markets.
Expenditures on education and health
make substantial long-term impact and
they cannot be easily reversed; hence,
government intervention is essential. For
instance, once a child is admitted to a
school or health care centre where the
required services are not provided, before
the decision is taken to shift the child to
another institution, substantial amount
of damage would have been done.
Moreover, individual consumers of
these services do not have complete
information about the quality of services
and their costs. In this situation, the
providers of education and health
services acquire monopoly power and are
involved in exploitation. The role of
government in this situation is to ensure
that the private providers of these
services adhere to the standards
stipulated by the government and  charge
the correct price.
In India, the ministries of
education at the union and state level,
departments of education and various
organisations like National Council of
Educational Research and Training
(NCERT), University Grants Commission
(UGC) and All India Council of
Technical Education (AICTE) facilitate
institutions which come under the
education sector. Similarly, the
ministries of health at the union and
state level, departments of health and
various organisations like Indian
Council for Medical Research (ICMR)
facilitate institutions which come under
the health sector.
In a developing country like ours,
with a large section of the population
living below the poverty line, many of
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
us cannot afford to access basic
education and health care facilities.
Moreover, a substantial section of our
people cannot afford to reach super
specialty health care and higher
education. Furthermore, when basic
education and health care is
considered as a right of the citizens,
then it is essential that the government
should provide education and health
services free of cost for the deserving
citizens and those from the socially
oppressed classes. Both, the union and
state governments, have been stepping
up expenditures in the education
sector over the years in order to fulfil
the objective of attaining cent per cent
literacy and considerably increase the
average educational attainment of
Indians.
things before the government. The
percentage of ‘education expenditure
of GDP’ expresses how much of
our income is being committed to
the development of education in
the country. During 1952-2012,
education expenditure as percentage
of total government expenditure
increased from 7.92 to 11.7 and as
percentage of GDP increased from
0.64 to 3.31. Throughout this period
the increase in education expenditure
has not been uniform and there has
been irregular rise and fall. To this if
we include the private expenditure
incurred by individuals and by
philanthropic institutions, the total
education expenditure should be
much higher.
Elementary education takes a
major share of total education
expenditure and the share of the
higher/tertiary education (institutions
of higher learning like colleges,
polytechnics and universities) is the
least. Though, on an average, the
government spends less on tertiary
education, ‘expenditure per student’ in
tertiary education is higher than that
of elementary. This does not mean that
financial resources should be
transferred from tertiary education to
elementary education. As we expand
school education, we need more
teachers who are trained in the higher
educational institutions; therefore,
expenditure on all levels of education
should be increased.
In 2009-10, the per capita education
expenditure differs considerably across
states from as high as Rs 12,500 in
5.6 EDUCATION SECTOR IN INDIA
Growth in Government Expenditure
on Education: Do you know how
much the government spends on
education? This expenditure by the
government is expressed in two ways
(i) as a percentage of ‘total government
expenditure’ (ii) as a percentage of
Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
The percentage of ‘education
expenditure of total government
expenditure’ indicates the importance
of education in the scheme of
Work This Out
Ø Identify the objectives and
functions of NCERT, UGC,
AICTE and ICMR.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA
Himachal Pradesh to as low as Rs 2200
in Punjab. This leads to differences in
educational opportunities and
attainments across states.
understand
inadequacy of the expenditure on
education if we compare it with the
desired level of education expenditure
as recommended by the various
commissions. About 50 years ago, the
Education Commission (1964–66) had
recommended that at least 6 per cent
of GDP be spent on education so as to
make a noticeable rate of growth in
educational achievements.
Tapas
Majumdar
Committee, appointed by the
Government of India in 1998,
estimated an expenditure of
around Rs 1.37 lakh crore
over 10 years (1998-99 to
2006-07) to bring all Indian
children in the age group of
6-14 years under the
purview of school education.
Compared to this desired
level of education expenditure
of around 6 per cent of GDP,
the current level of a little over 4 per
cent has been quite inadequate. In
principle,  a goal of 6 per cent needs to
be reached—this has been accepted  as
a must for the coming years. In 2009,
the Government of India enacted the
Right of Education Act to make free
education a fundamental right of all
children in the age group of 6-14 years.
Government of India has  also
started levying a 2 per cent ‘education
cess’ on all Union taxes. The revenues
from education cess has been
earmarked for spending on elementary
Fig. 5.5 Investment in educational infrastructure is inevitable
Work These Out
Ø Prepare case studies of dropouts at different levels of schooling, say
Primary dropouts
Class VIII dropouts
(iii)
Class X dropouts
Find out the causes and discuss in the class.
Ø ‘School dropouts are giving way to child labour’. Discuss how this is a loss
to human capital.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
TABLE 5.2
Educational Attainment in India
Sl.No.
Particulars
2008-12
Adult Literacy Rate (per cent of people aged 15+)
1.1 Male
1.2 Female
Primary completion rate (per cent of relevant age group)
2.1 Male
2.2 Female
Youth literacy rate (per cent of people aged 15+ to 24)
3.1 Male
3.2 Female
education. In addition to this, the
government sanctions a large outlay for
the promotion of higher education and
new loan schemes for students to
pursue higher education.
Educational Achievements in India:
Generally,  educational achievements
in a country are indicated in terms
of adult literacy level, primary
education completion rate and youth
literacy rate. These statistics for the
last two decades are given above in
Table 5.2.
5.7 FUTURE PROSPECTS
Education for All — Still a Distant
Dream: Though literacy rates for both
— adults as  well as  youth — have
increased, still the absolute number of
illiterates in India is as much as India’s
population was at the time of
independence. In 1950, when the
Constitution of India was passed by the
Constituent Assembly, it was noted in
Fig. 5.6 School dropouts give way to child labour: a loss to human capital
2015-16(20/01/2015)
HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA
the Directive Principles of the
Constitution that the government
should provide free and compulsory
education for all children up to the age
of 14 years within 10 years from the
commencement of the Constitution.
Had we achieved this, we would have
cent per cent literacy by now.
Gender Equity — Better than Before:
The differences in literacy rates between
males and females are narrowing
signifying a positive development in
gender equity; still  the need to promote
education for women in India is
imminent for various reasons such as
improving economic independence and
social status of women and also
because women education makes a
favourable impact on fertility rate and
health care of women and children.
Therefore, we cannot be complacent
about the upward movement in the
literacy rates and we have miles to go
in achieving  cent per cent adult literacy.
education level. Moreover, the level of
unemployment among educated youth
is the highest. As per NSSO data, in the
2011-12,
unemployment among youth males who
studied graduation and above in rural
areas was 19 per cent. Their urban
counterparts had relatively less level of
unemployment at 16 per cent. The most
severely affected ones were young rural
female graduates as nearly 30 per cent
of them are unemployed. In contrast to
this, only about 3-6 per cent of primary
level educated youth in rural and urban
areas were unemployed. Therefore, the
government should increase allocation
for higher education and also improve
the standard of higher education
institutions, so that students are
imparted employable skills in such
institutions. When compared to less
educated, a large proportion of educated
persons are unemployed. Why?
5.8 CONCLUSION
The economic and social benefits of
human capital formation and human
development are well known. The
union and state governments in India
have been earmarking substantial
financial outlays for development of
education and health sectors. The
spread of education and health services
across different sectors of society
should be ensured so as to
simultaneously attain economic growth
and equity. India has a  rich stock of
scientific and technical manpower in the
world.  The need of the hour is to better
it qualitatively and provide such
conditions so that they are utilised in
our own country.
Fig. 5.7 Higher Education:  few takers
Higher Education — a Few Takers:
The Indian education pyramid is
steep, indicating lesser and lesser
number of people reaching the higher
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
What are the two major sources of human capital in a country?
What are the indicators of educational achievement in a country?
Why do we observe regional differences in educational attainment
in India?
Bring out the differences between human capital and human
development.
How is human development a broader term as compared to human
capital?
What factors contribute to human capital formation?
Recap
Ø Investments in education convert human beings into human capital; human
capital represents enhanced labour productivity, which is an acquired ability
and an outcome of deliberate investment decisions with an expectation that
it will increase future income sources.
Ø Investments in education, on-the-job training, health, migration and
information are the sources of human capital formation.
Ø The concept of physical capital is the base for conceptualising human capital.
There are some similarities as well as dissimilarities between the two forms
of capital formation.
Ø Investment in human capital formation is considered as efficient and growth
enhancing.
Ø Human development is based on the idea that education and health are
integral to human well-being because only when people have the ability to
read and write and the ability to lead a long and healthy life, will they be
able to make other choices which they value.
Ø The percentage of expenditure on education of the total government
expenditure indicates the importance of education in the scheme of things
for the government.
EXERCISES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA
How government organisations facilitate the functioning of schools
and hospitals in India?
Education is considered to be an important input for the development
of a nation. How?
Discuss the following as a source of human capital formation
(i)  Health infrastructure
(ii)  Expenditure on migration.
Establish the need for acquiring information relating to health and
education expenditure for the effective utilisation of human
resources.
How does investment in human capital contribute to growth?
‘There is a downward trend in inequality world-wide with a rise in
the average education levels’. Comment.
Examine the role of education in the economic development of a
nation.
Explain how investment in education stimulates economic growth.
Bring out the need for on-the-job-training for a person.
Trace the relationship between human capital and economic growth.
Discuss the need for promoting women’s education in India.
Argue in favour of the need for different forms of government
intervention in education and health sectors.
What are the main problems of human capital formation in India?
In your view, is it essential for the government to regulate the fee
structure in education and health care institutions? If so, why?
Identify how Human Development Index is calculated. What is the
position of India in the World Human Development Index?
Is India going to be a knowledge based economy in the near future?
Discuss in the classroom.
Interpret the data given in Table 5.2.
As an educated person, what will be your contribution to the cause
of education? (Example ‘Each one — teach one’).
SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Enlist the various sources that provide information regarding
education, health and labour.
Read the annual reports of Union Ministries of Human Resource
Development and Health and make summaries. Read the chapter
on social sector in the Economic Survey .
Books
BECKER, GARY S. 1964. Human Capital. 2nd Edition, Columbia University
Press, New York.
FREEMAN, RICHARD. 1976. The Overeducated American. Academic Press, New
York.
Government Reports
Education in India, Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government
of India (for recent years) for various years.
Annual Reports, Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government
of India.
Websites
www.education.nic.in
www.cbse.nic.in
www.ugc.ac.in
www.aicte.ernet.in
www.ncert.nic.in
www.finmin.nic.in
www.mospi.nic.in
REFERENCES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
After studying this chapter, the learners will
understand rural development and the major issues associated with it
appreciate how crucial the development of rural areas is for India’s overall
development
understand the critical role of credit and marketing systems in rural
development
learn about the importance of diversification of productive activities to
sustain livelihoods
understand the significance of organic farming in sustainable
development.
RURAL
DEVELOPMENT
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
6.1 INTRODUCTION
In Chapter 4, we studied how poverty
was a major challenge facing India. We
also came to know that the majority
of the poor live in rural areas where
they do not have access to the basic
necessities of life.
Agriculture is the major source of
livelihood in the rural sector. Mahatma
Gandhi once said that the real progress
of India did not mean simply the growth
and expansion of industrial urban
centres but mainly the development of
the villages. This idea of village
development being at the centre of the
overall development of the nation is
relevant even today. Why is this so?
Why should we attach such significance
to rural development when we see
around us fast growing cities with large
industries and modern information
technology hubs? It is because more
than two-third of India’s population
depends on agriculture that is yet to
become productive enough to provide
for them;  one-third of rural India still
lives in abject poverty. That is the
reason why we have to see a developed
rural India if our nation has to realise
real progress. What, then, does rural
development imply?
6.2 WHAT IS RURAL DEVELOPMENT?
Rural development is a comprehensive
term. It essentially focuses on action for
the development of areas that are
lagging behind in the overall
development of the village economy.
Some of the areas which are
challenging and need fresh initiatives
for development in rural India include
• Development of human resources
including
– literacy, more specifically, female
literacy, education and skill
development
– health, addressing both sanitation
and public health
• Land reforms
• Development of the productive
resources of each locality
• Infrastructure development like
electricity, irrigation, credit,
marketing, transport facilities
including construction of village
roads and feeder roads to nearby
highways, facilities for agriculture
research and extension, and
information dissemination
• Special measures for alleviation
of poverty and bringing about
significant improvement in the living
conditions of the weaker sections
of the population emphasising
access to productive employment
opportunities
All this means that people engaged
in farm and non-farm activities in
rural areas have to be provided with
various means that help them increase
the productivity. They also need to be
given opportunities to diversify
into various non-farm productive
“Only the tillers of the soil live by the right. The rest form their train and eat
only the bread of dependence”.
Thiruvalluvar
2015-16(20/01/2015)
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
activities such as food processing.
Enabling them better and more
affordable access to healthcare,
sanitation facilities at workplaces and
homes and education for all would also
need to be given top priority for rapid
rural development.
It was observed in an earlier chapter
that although the share of agriculture
sector’s contribution to GDP was on a
decline, the population dependent on
this sector did not show any significant
change. Further, after the initiation of
reforms, the growth rate of agriculture
sector decelerated to about 3 per cent
per annum during the 1991-2012,
which was lower than the earlier years.
Scholars identify decline in public
investment since 1991 as the major
reason for this. They also argue that
inadequate infrastructure, lack of
alternate employment opportunities in
the industry or service sector,
increasing casualisation of employment
etc., further impede rural development.
The impact of this phenomenon can be
seen from the growing distress
witnessed among farmers across
different parts of India. During 2007-
12, agriculture output has grown at
3.2 per cent. Against this background,
we will critically look at some of the
crucial aspects of rural India like credit
and marketing systems, agricultural
diversification and the role of organic
farming in promoting sustainable
development.
6.3 CREDIT AND MARKETING IN RURAL
AREAS
Credit: Growth of rural economy
depends primarily on infusion of
capital, from time to time, to realise
higher productivity in agriculture and
non-agriculture sectors. As the time
gestation between crop sowing and
realisation of income after production is
quite long, farmers borrow  from various
sources to meet their  initial investment
on seeds, fertilisers, implements and
other family expenses of marriage,
death, religious ceremonies etc.
At the time of independence,
moneylenders and traders exploited
small and marginal farmers and
landless labourers by lending to them
on high interest rates and by
manipulating the accounts to keep
them in a debt-trap. A major change
occurred after 1969 when India
adopted social banking and multi-
agency approach to adequately meet
the needs of rural credit. Later,  the
National Bank for Agriculture and
Rural Development (NABARD) was set
up in 1982 as an apex body to
Work These Out
Ø On a monthly basis, go through
the newspapers of your region
and identify the problems raised
by them in relation to rural areas
and the solutions offered.  You
could also visit a nearby village
and identify the problems faced
by people there. Discuss this in
the classroom.
Ø Prepare a list of recent schemes
and their objectives from the
government website http://
www.rural.nic.in
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Box 6.1: The Poor Women’s Bank
‘Kudumbashree’ is a women-oriented community-based poverty reduction
programme being implemented in Kerala. In 1995, a thrift and credit society
was started as a small savings bank for poor women with the objective to
encourage savings. The thrift and credit society mobilised Rs 1 crore as thrift
savings. These societies have been acclaimed as the largest informal banks in
Asia in terms of participation and savings mobilised.
Source:  www.kudumbashree.com. Visit this website and explore various other
initiatives undertaken by this organisation. Can you identify some factors
which contributed to their successes?
coordinate the activities of all
institutions involved in the rural
financing
system.
Green
Revolution was a harbinger of major
changes in the credit system as it led to
the diversification of the portfolio of
rural credit towards production-
oriented lending.
The institutional structure of rural
banking today consists of a set of
multi-agency institutions, namely,
commercial banks, regional rural
banks (RRBs), cooperatives and land
development banks. They are expected
to dispense adequate credit at cheaper
rates. Recently, Self-Help Groups
(henceforth SHGs) have emerged to fill
the gap in the formal credit system
because the formal credit delivery
mechanism has not only proven
inadequate but has  also not been fully
integrated into the overall rural social
and community development. Since
some kind of collateral is required, vast
proportion of poor rural households
were automatically out of the credit
network. The SHGs promote thrift in
small proportions by a minimum
contribution from each member. From
the pooled money, credit is given to the
needy members to be repayable in
small instalments at reasonable interest
rates. By March end 2003, more than
seven lakh SHGs had reportedly been
Work These Out
Ø In your locality/neighbourhood, you might notice self-help groups providing
credit. Attend few meetings of such self-help groups. Write a report on the
profile of a self-help group. The profile may include — when it was started,
the number of members, amount of savings and type of credit they provide
and how borrowers use the loan.
Ø You might also find that those who take a loan for starting self-employment
activities but use it for other purposes. Interact with few such borrowers.
Identify the reasons for not starting self employment activities and discuss
in the classroom.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
credit linked. Such credit provisions are
generally referred to as micro-credit
programmes.  SHGs have helped in the
empowerment of women. It is alleged
that the borrowings are mainly confined
to consumption purposes. Why are
borrowers not spending for productive
purposes?
Rural Banking — a Critical
Appraisal: Rapid expansion of the
banking system had a positive effect on
rural farm and non-farm output,
income and employment, especially
after the green revolution — it helped
farmers to avail  services and credit
facilities and a variety of loans for
meeting their prodution needs. Famines
became events of the past; we have now
achieved food security which is reflected
in the abundant buffer stocks of grains.
However, all is not well with our
banking system.
With the possible exception of the
commercial banks, other formal
institutions have failed to develop a
culture of deposit mobilisation —
lending to worthwhile borrowers and
effective loan recovery. Agriculture
loan default rates have been
chronically high. Why farmers failed
to pay back loans? It is alleged that
farmers are deliberately refusing to
pay back loans. What could be the
reasons?
Thus, the expansion and promotion
of the rural banking sector has taken a
backseat after reforms. To improve the
situation, it is suggested that banks
need to change their approach from
just being lenders to building up
relationship banking with the
borrowers. Inculcating the habit of
thrift and efficient utilisation of financial
resources needs to be enhanced among
the farmers too.
Work These Out
Ø In the last few years, you might have taken note — in your neighbourhood
if you are living in rural areas or read in the newspapers or seen on TV — of
farmers commiting suicides. Many such farmers had borrowed money for
farming and other purposes. It was found that when they were unable to
pay back due to crop failure, insufficient income and employment
opportunities, they took such steps. Collect information relating to such
cases and discuss in the classroom.
Ø Visit banks that cater to rural areas. They may be primary agricultural
cooperative banks, land development banks, regional rural banks or district
cooperative banks. Collect details such as how many rural households
borrowed from them,  amount generally borrowed, kinds of collateral used,
interest rates and dues.
Ø If farmers who borrowed from cooperative banks could not pay back due to
crop failure and other reasons, their loans should be waived otherwise they
may take drastic decisions like committing suicides. Do you agree?
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
6.4 AGRICULTURAL MARKET SYSTEM
Have you ever asked yourself how food
grains, vegetables and fruits that we
consume daily come from different parts
of the country? The mechanism
through which these goods reach
different places depends on the market
channels. Agricultural marketing is a
process that involves the assembling,
storage, processing, transportation,
packaging, grading and distribution of
different agricultural commodities
across the country.
Prior to independence, farmers,
while selling their produce to traders,
suffered from faulty weighing and
manipulation of accounts. Farmers
who did not have the required
information on prices prevailing in
markets were often forced to sell at low
prices. They also did not have proper
storage facilities to keep back their
produce for selling later at a better
price. Do you know that even today,
more than 10 per cent of goods
produced in farms are wasted due to
lack of storage? Therefore, state
intervention became necessary to
regulate the activities of the private
traders.
Let us discuss four such measures
that were initiated to improve the
marketing aspect. The first step was
regulation of markets to create orderly
and transparent marketing conditions.
By and large, this policy benefited
farmers as well as consumers. However,
there is still a need to develop about
27,000 rural periodic markets as
regulated market places to realise the
full potential of rural markets. Second
component is provision of physical
infrastructure facilities like roads,
railways, warehouses, godowns, cold
storages and processing units. The
current infrastructure facilities are quite
inadequate to meet the growing demand
and need to be improved. Cooperative
marketing, in realising fair prices for
farmers’ products, is the third aspect of
government initiative. The success of
milk cooperatives in transforming the
Fig. 6.1 Regulated market yards benefit farmers as well as consumers
2015-16(20/01/2015)
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
social and economic landscape of
Gujarat and some other parts of the
country is testimony to the role of
cooperatives. However cooperatives have
received a setback during the recent past
due to inadequate coverage of farmer
members, lack of appropriate link
between marketing and processing
cooperatives and inefficient financial
management. The fourth element is the
policy instruments like (i) assurance of
minimum support prices (MSP) for
agricultural products (ii) maintenance
of buffer stocks of wheat and rice
by Food Corporation of India and
(iii) distribution of food grains and sugar
through PDS. These instruments are
aimed at protecting the income of the
farmers and providing foodgrains at a
subsidised rate to the poor. However,
despite government intervention, private
trade (by moneylenders, rural political
elites, big merchants and rich farmers)
predominates agricultural markets. The
need for government intervention is
imminent particularly when a large
share of agricultural products,  is
handled by the private sector.
Agricultural marketing has come
a long way with the intervention of the
government in various forms. Some
scholars argue that commercialisation
of agriculture offers tremendous scope
for farmers to earn higher incomes
provided the government intervention
is restricted. What do you think about
this view?
Emerging Alternate Marketing
Channels: It has been realised that if
farmers directly sell their produce to
consumers, it increases their incomes.
Some examples of these channels are
Apni Mandi (Punjab, Haryana and
Rajasthan); Hadaspar Mandi (Pune);
Rythu Bazars (vegetable and fruit
markets in Andhra Pradesh and
Telangana) and Uzhavar Sandies
(farmers markets in Tamil Nadu).
Further, several national and
multinational fast food chains are
increasingly entering into contracts/
alliances with farmers to encourage
them to cultivate farm products
(vegetables, fruits, etc.) of the desired
quality by providing them with not only
seeds and other inputs but also assured
Work These Out
Ø Visit a nearby vegetable and fruit market. Observe and identify different
characteristics of the market. Identify the place of origin of at least ten
different fruits and vegetables and distance travelled to reach the market.
Further, look at the modes of transport and its implication on prices.
Ø Most small towns have regulated market yards. Farmers can go to these
markets and sell their produce. They can also store their goods in the yard.
Visit one regulated market yard; collect the details of its functioning, kind
of goods coming to the yard and how prices are fixed.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
procurement of the produce at pre-
decided prices. It is argued that such
arrangements will help in reducing the
price risks of farmers and would also
expand the markets for farm products.
Do you think such arrangements raise
incomes of small farmers.
season, in areas where there are
inadequate  irrigation facilities, it
becomes difficult to find gainful
employment. Therefore expansion
into other sectors is essential to
provide supplementary gainful
employment and in realising higher
levels of income for rural people to
overcome
poverty
other
tribulations. Hence, there is a need to
focus on allied activities, non-farm
employment and other emerging
alternatives of livelihood, though
there are many other options available
for providing sustainable livelihoods
in rural areas.
agriculture
already
overcrowded, a major proportion of the
increasing labour force needs to find
alternate employment opportunities in
other non-farm sectors. Non-farm
economy has several segments in it;
6.5 DIVERSIFICATION INTO PRODUCTIVE
ACTIVITIES
Diversification includes two aspects -
one relates to change in cropping
pattern and the other relates to a shift
of workforce from agriculture to other
allied activities (livestock, poultry,
fisheries etc.) and non-agriculture
sector. The need for diversification
arises from the fact that there is
greater risk in depending exclusively
farming
livelihood.
Diversification towards new areas is
necessary not only to reduce the risk
from agriculture sector but also to
provide productive sustainable
livelihood options to rural people.
Much of the agricultural employment
activities are concentrated in the
Kharif season. But during the Rabi
Work This Out
Ø Visit one such alternative
marketing system which farmers
in your locality, or in the
neighbourhood rural areas, use.
How are they different from
regulated market yards? Should
they be encouraged and supported
by the government? Why and how?
Discuss.
Fig. 6.2 Jaggery making is an allied activity
of the farming sector
2015-16(20/01/2015)
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
some possess dynamic linkages that
permit healthy growth while others are
in subsistence, low productivity
propositions. The dynamic sub-sectors
include agro-processing industries,
food processing industries, leather
industry, tourism, etc. Those sectors
which have the potential but seriously
lack infrastructure and other support
include traditional home-based
industries like pottery, crafts,
handlooms etc. Majority of rural
women find employment in agriculture
while men generally
look for non-farm
employment. In recent
times, women have
also begun looking
for non-farm jobs (see
Box 6.2).
Animal Husbandry: In
India, the farming
community uses the
mixed crop-livestock
farming system —
cattle, goats, fowl
are the widely held
species. Livestock
production provides increased stability
in income, food security, transport, fuel
and nutrition for the family without
disrupting other food-producing
activities. Today, livestock sector alone
provides alternate livelihood options to
over 70 million small and marginal
farmers including landless labourers. A
significant number of women also find
employment in the livestock sector.
Chart 6.1 shows the distribution of
livestock in India. Poultry accounts for
the largest share with 58 per cent
Box 6.2: Tamil Nadu Women in Agriculture (TANWA)
Tamil Nadu Women in Agriculture (TANWA) is a project initiated in Tamil Nadu
to train women in latest agricultural techniques. It induces women to actively
participate in raising agricultural productivity and family income. At a Farm
Women’s Group in Thiruchirapalli, run by Anthoniammal, trained women are
successfully making and selling vermicompost and earning money from this
venture. Many other Farm Women’s Groups are creating savings in their group
by functioning like mini banks through a micro-credit system.  With the
accumulated savings, they promote small-scale household activities like
mushroom cultivation, soap manufacture, doll making or other income-
generating activities.
Chart 6.1: Distribution of Poultry and
Livestock in India, 2012
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
followed by others. Other animals which
include camels, asses, horses, ponies
and mules are in the lowest rung. India
had about 300 million cattle, including
108 million buffaloes, in 2012.
Performance of the Indian dairy sector
over the last three decades has been
quite impressive. Milk production in
the country has increased by more than
five times between 1960-2012. This
can be attributed mainly to the
successful
implementation
‘Operation Flood’. It is a system
whereby all the farmers can pool their
milk produced according to different
grading (based on quality) and the
same is processed and marketed to
urban centres through cooperatives. In
this system the farmers are assured of
a fair price and income from the supply
of milk to urban markets. As pointed
out earlier Gujarat state is held as a
success story in the efficient
implementation of milk cooperatives
which has been emulated by many
states. Meat, eggs, wool and other by-
products are also emerging as
important productive sectors for
diversification.
Fisheries: The fishing community
regards the water body as ‘mother’ or
‘provider’. The water bodies consisting
of sea, oceans, rivers, lakes, natural
aquatic ponds, streams etc. are,
therefore, an integral and life-giving
source for the fishing community. In
India, after progressive increase in
budgetary allocations and introduction
of new technologies in fisheries and
aquaculture, the development of
fisheries has come a long way.
Presently, fish production from inland
sources contributes about 64 per cent
to the total fish production and the
balance 36 per cent comes from the
marine sector (sea and oceans). Today
total fish production accounts for
0.8 per cent of the total GDP. In India,
West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala,
Gujarat, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu
are major fish producing states. A large
share of fishworker families are poor.
Rampant underemployment, low per
capita earnings, absence of mobility of
labour to other sectors and a high rate
of illiteracy and indebtedness are some
of the major problems fishing
community face today. Even though
women are not involved in active
fishing, about 60 per cent of the
workforce in export marketing and 40
per cent in internal marketing are
women. There is a need to increase
credit facilities through cooperatives
and SHGs for fisherwomen to meet the
Fig. 6.3 Sheep rearing — an important income
augmenting activity in rural areas
2015-16(20/01/2015)
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
working capital requirements for
marketing.
Horticulture: Blessed with a varying
climate and soil conditions, India has
adopted growing of diverse horti-
cultural crops such as fruits,
vegetables, tuber crops, flowers,
medicinal and aromatic plants, spices
and plantation crops. These crops play
a vital role in providing food
and nutrition, besides addressing
employment concerns. Horticulture
sector contributes nearly one-third of
the value of agriculture output and six
per cent of Gross Domestic Product of
India. India has emerged as a world
leader in producing a variety of fruits
like mangoes, bananas, coconuts,
cashew nuts and a number of spices
and is the second largest producer of
fruits and vegetables.  Economic
condition of many farmers engaged in
horticulture has improved and it has
become a means of improving livelihood
for many unprivileged classes. Flower
harvesting, nursery maintenance,
hybrid seed production and tissue
culture, propagation of fruits and
flowers and  food processing are highly
remunerative employment options for
women in rural areas.
Though, in terms of numbers, our
livestock population is quite impressive
but its productivity is quite low as
compared to other countries. It requires
improved technology and
promotion
breeds of animals to
enhance productivity.
Improved veterinary care
and credit facilities to
small and marginal
farmers and landless
labourers would enhance
sustainable livelihood
options through livestock
production. Production
of fisheries has already
increased substantially.
However problems
related to over- fishing and
Fig. 6.4 Poultry has the largest share of total livestock in India
Fig. 6.5 Women in rural households take up bee-
keeping as an entrepreneurial activity
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
pollution need to be regulated and
controlled. Welfare programmes for the
fishing community have to be reoriented
in a manner which can provide long-term
gains and sustenance of livelihoods.
Horticulture has emerged as a successful
sustainable livelihood option and needs
to be encouraged significantly.
Enhancing its role requires investment
in infrastructure like electricity, cold
storage systems, marketing linkages,
small-scale processing units and
technology
improvement
dissemination.
Other Alternate Livelihood Options:
The IT has revolutionised many sectors
in the Indian economy. There is broad
consensus that IT can play a critical
role in achieving sustainable
development and food security in the
twenty-first century. Governments can
predict areas of food insecurity and
vulnerability using appropriate
information and software tools so that
action can be taken to prevent or
reduce the likelihood of an emergency.
It also has  a positive impact on the
agriculture sector as it can disseminate
information regarding emerging
technologies and its applications,
prices, weather and soil conditions for
growing different crops etc. Though IT
is, by itself, no catalyst of change but
it can act as a tool for releasing the
creative potential and knowledge
embedded in the society. It also has
potential of employment generation in
rural areas. Experiments with IT and
its application to rural development are
carried out in different parts of India
(see Box 6.3).
6.6 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND
ORGANIC FARMING
In recent years, awareness of the
harmful effect of chemical-based
fertilisers and pesticides on our health
is on a rise. Conventional agriculture
relies heavily on chemical fertilisers
and toxic pesticides etc., which enter
the food supply, penetrate the water
sources, harm the livestock, deplete the
soil and devastate natural eco-systems.
Efforts in evolving technologies which
are eco-friendly are essential for
sustainable development and one
such technology which is eco-friendly
is organic farming. In short, organic
Box 6.3: Adoption of Village by Parliamentarians
In October, 2014, The Government of India introduced a new scheme called
Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY). Under this scheme, Members of India's
Parliament need to identify and develop one village from their constituencies. To
begin with, MPs can develop one village as a model village by 2016, and two more
by 2019, covering over 2,500 villages in India. According to the scheme, the village
can have a population of 3,000-5,000 in the plains and 1,000-3,000 in the hills
and should not be MPs' own or their spouse's village. MPs are expected to facilitate
a village development plan, motivate villagers to take up activities and built
infrastructure in the areas of health, nutrition and education.
Source: www.pib.nic.in accessed on 24 October 2014
2015-16(20/01/2015)
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
agriculture is a whole system of
farming that restores, maintains and
enhances the ecological balance. There
is an increasing demand for
organically grown food to enhance
food safety throughout the world (see
Box 6.4).
Benefits of Organic Farming: Organic
agriculture offers a means to substitute
costlier agricultural inputs (such as
HYV seeds, chemical fertilisers,
pesticides etc.) with locally produced
organic inputs that are cheaper and
thereby generate good returns on
investment. Organic agriculture also
generates income through exports as
the demand for organically grown crops
is on a rise. Studies across countries
have shown that organically grown food
has more nutritional value than
chemical farming thus providing us
with healthy foods. Since organic
farming requires more labour input
than conventional farming, India will
find organic farming an attractive
proposition. Finally, the produce is
pesticide-free and produced in an
environmentally sustainable way (see
Box 6.5).
Popularising organic farming
requires awareness and willingness on
the part of farmers to adapt to new
technology. Inadequate infrastructure
and the problem of marketing the
products are major concerns which
Box 6.4: Organic Food
Organic food is growing in popularity across the world. Many countries have
around 10 per cent of their food system under organic farming. There are
many retail chains and supermarkets which are accorded with green status
to sell organic food. Moreover, organic foods command higher price of around
10-100 per cent than conventional ones.
Box 6.5: Organically Produced Cotton in Maharashtra
In 1995, when Kisan Mehta of Prakruti (an NGO) first suggested that cotton,
the biggest user of chemical pesticides, could be grown organically, the then
Director of the Central Institute for Cotton Research, Nagpur, famously
remarked, “Do you want India to go naked?”  At present, as many as 130
farmers have committed 1,200 hectares of land to grow cotton organically on
the International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movement’s standards.
The produce was later tested by the German Accredited Agency, AGRECO,
and found to be of high quality. Kisan Mehta feels that about 78 per cent of
Indian farmers are marginal farmers owning about less than 0.8 hectare but
accounting for 20 per cent of India’s cultivable land. For such farmers, organic
agriculture is more profitable in terms of money and soil conservation in the
long run.
Source: Lyla Bavadam, A Green Alternative, Frontline, 29 July 2005.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
need to be addressed apart from an
appropriate agriculture policy to
promote organic farming. It has been
observed that the yields from organic
farming are less than modern
agricultural farming in the initial years.
Therefore, small and marginal farmers
may find it difficult to adapt to large-
scale production. Organic produce may
also have more blemishes and a shorter
shelf life than sprayed produce.
Moreover choice in production of
off-season crops is quite limited in
organic farming. Nevertheless, organic
farming helps in sustainable
development of agriculture and India
has a clear advantage in producing
organic products for both domestic and
international markets. Do you think
food and non-food items cultivated
using organic farming methods will be
cheaper?
6.7 CONCLUSION
It is clear that until and unless some
spectacular changes occur, the rural
sector might continue to remain
backward. There is a greater need
today to make rural areas more
vibrant through diversification into
dairying,
poultry,
fisheries,
vegetables and fruits and linking up
the rural production centres with the
urban and foreign (export) markets
to realise higher returns on the
investments for the products.
Moreover, infrastructure elements
like credit and marketing, farmer-
friendly agricultural policies and a
constant appraisal and dialogue
between farmers’ groups and state
agricultural departments are
essential to realise the full potential
of the sector.
Today we cannot look at the
environment and rural development as
two distinct subjects. There is need to
invent or procure alternate sets of eco-
friendly technologies that lead to
sustainable development in different
Work These Out
Ø Make a list of five popular items that are organically produced in India.
Ø Visit a nearby super market, vegetable shop and/or a departmental shop.
Identify a few products. Prepare a chart comparing a few goods that are
produced organically and in the normal way on the basis of their prices,
shelf life, quality and the kind of advertisement through which they are
popularised.
Ø Visit a horticultural farm in the nearby locality. Collect the details of
goods that they cultivate on the farm. They could have diversified their
cropping patterns. Discuss with them the merits and demerits of the
diversification.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
circumstances. From these, each rural
community can choose whatever will
suit its purpose. First of all, then, we
need to learn from, and also try out
when found relevant, practices from
the available set of ‘best practice’
illustrations (which means success
stories of rural development
experiments that have already been
carried out in similar conditions in
different parts of India), to speed up
this process of ‘learning by doing’.
What do you mean by rural development? Bring out the key issues in
rural development.
Discuss the importance of credit in rural development.
Explain the role of micro-credit in meeting credit requirements of the
poor.
Explain the steps taken by the government in developing rural
markets.
Why is agricultural diversification essential for sustainable
livelihoods?
Recap
Ø Rural development is quite a comprehensive term but it essentially means
a plan of action for the development of rural areas which are lagging
behind in socio-economic development.
Ø There is a need for improving the quantity and quality of infrastructure
in rural areas such as banking, marketing, storage, transport and
communications etc. to realise its true potential.
Ø Diversification towards new areas such as livestock, fisheries and other
non-agricultural activities is necessary not only to reduce the risk from
agriculture sector but also to provide productive sustainable livelihood
options to our rural people.
Ø The importance of organic farming as an environmentally sustainable
production process is on a rise and needs to be promoted.
EXERCISES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Critically evaluate the role of the rural banking system in the process
of rural development in India.
What do you mean by agricultural marketing?
Mention some obstacles that hinder the mechanism of agricultural
marketing.
What are the alternative channels available for agricultural
marketing? Give some examples.
Distinguish between ‘Green Revolution’ and ‘Golden Revolution’.
Do you think various measures taken by the government to improve
agricultural marketing are sufficient? Discuss.
Explain the role of non-farm employment in promoting rural
diversification.
Bring out the importance of animal husbandry, fisheries and
horticulture as a source of diversification.
‘Information technology plays a very significant role in achieving
sustainable development and food security’ — comment.
What is organic farming and how does it promote sustainable
development?
Identify the benefits and limitations of organic farming.
Enlist some problems faced by farmers during the initial years of
organic farming.
ACHARYA, S.S. 2004. Agricultural Marketing, State of the Indian Farmer, a
Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi.
ALAGH, Y.K. 2004. State of the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study —  an Overview.
Academic Foundation, New Delhi.
CHAWLA, N.K., M.P.G. KURUP and V. P. SHARMA. 2004. Animal Husbandry, State of
the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi.
DEHADRAI, P.V.  and Y.S. YADAV. 2004. Fisheries Development, State of the Indian
Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi.
JALAN, BIMAL. (Ed.). 1992. The Indian Economy: Problems and Perspectives.
Penguin Publication, New Delhi.
REFERENCES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
NARAYANAN, S. 2005. Organic Farming in India. NABARD Occasional Paper No:
38, Department of Agriculture and Rural Development, Mumbai.
SINGH, H.P., P.P. DUTTA and M. SUDHA. 2004. Horticulture Development, State of
the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi.
SINGH, SURJIT  and VIDYA SAGAR. 2004. Agricultural Credit in India: State of the
Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi.
SINHA, V.K. 1998. Challenges in Rural Development. Discovery Publishing
House, New Delhi.
TODARO, MICHAEL P. 1987. Economic Development in the Third World. Orient
Longman Ltd, Hyderabad.
TOPPO, E. 2004. Organic Vegetable Gardening: Grow Your Own Vegetables. Unit
for Labour Studies, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai.
Government Reports
Successful Governance Initiatives and Best Practices: Experiences from Indian
States, Government of India in Coordination with Human Resource
Development Centre and UNDP, Planning Commission, Delhi, 2002.
Annual Reports, Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India, New
Delhi.
Website
www.dahd.nic.in
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
After studying this chapter, the learners will
understand a few basic concepts relating to employment such as
economic activity, worker, workforce and unemployment
understand the nature of participation of men and women in various
economic activities in various sectors
know the nature and extent of unemployment
assess the initiatives taken by the government in generating employment
opportunities in various sectors and regions.
EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH,
INFORMALISATION
AND OTHER ISSUES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES
7.1 INTRODUCTION
People do a variety of work.
Some work on farms, in
factories, banks, shops and
many other workplaces; yet a
few others work at home. Work
at home includes not only
traditional work like weaving,
lace making or variety of
handicrafts but also modern
jobs like programming work in
the IT industry. Earlier factory
work meant working in
factories located in cities
whereas now technology has
enabled people to produce those
factory-based goods at home in
villages.
Why do people work? Work plays
an important role in our lives as
individuals and as members of society.
People work for ‘earning’ a living. Some
people get, or have, money by inheriting
it, not working for it. This does not
completely satisfy anybody. Being
employed in work gives us a sense of
self-worth and enables us to relate
ourselves meaningfully with others.
Every working person is actively
contributing to national income and
hence, the development of the country
by engaging in various economic
activities — that is the real meaning of
‘earning’ a living. We do not work only
for ourselves; we also have a sense of
accomplishment when we work to meet
the requirements of those who are
dependent on us. Having recognised
the  importance of work, Mahatma
Gandhi insisted upon education and
training through a variety of works
including craft.
Studying about working people
gives us insights into the quality and
nature of employment in our country
and helps in understanding and
planning our human resources. It helps
us to analyse the contribution made by
different industries and sectors towards
national income. It also helps us to
address many social issues such as
exploitation of marginalised sections of
the society, child labour etc.
What I object to, is the ‘craze’ for machinery, not machinery as such. The
craze is for what they call labour-saving machinery. Men go on ‘saving labour’
till thousands are without work and thrown on the open streets to die of
starvation...
Mahatma Gandhi
Fig. 7.1 Multinational companies sell footballs
made in the houses of Jalandhar, Punjab
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
7.2 WORKERS  AND EMPLOYMENT
What is employment? Who is a worker?
When a farmer works on fields, he or
she produces food grains and raw
materials for industries. Cotton
becomes cloth in textile mills and in
powerlooms. Lorries transport goods
from one place to another. We know
that the total money value of all such
goods and services produced in a
country in a year is called its gross
domestic product for that year. When
we also consider what we pay for our
imports and get from our exports we
find that there is a net earning for the
country which may be positive (if we
have exported more in value terms than
imported) or negative (if imports
exceeded exports in value terms) or zero
(if exports and imports were of the same
value). When we add this earning (plus
or minus) from foreign transactions,
what we get is called the country’s gross
national product for that year.
Those activities which contribute to
the gross national product are called
economic activities. All those who are
engaged in economic activities, in
whatever capacity — high or low, are
workers. Even if some of them
temporarily abstain from work due to
illness, injury or other physical
disability, bad weather, festivals, social
or religious functions, they are also
workers.  Workers also include all those
who help the main workers in these
activities. We generally think of only
those who are paid by an employer for
their work as workers. This is not so.
Those who are self-employed are also
workers.
The nature of employment in India
is multifaceted. Some get employment
throughout the year; some others get
employed for only a few months in a
year. Many workers do not get fair
wages for their work. While estimating
the number of workers, all those who
are engaged in economic activities are
included as employed. You might be
interested in knowing the number of
people actively engaged in various
economic activities. During 2011-12,
India had about a 473 million strong
workforce. Since majority of our people
reside in rural areas, the proportion of
workforce residing there is higher. The
Work This Out
house
neighbourhood, you might
come across many women
who, even though they
have technical degrees
and diplomas and also free
time to go to work, do not
go to work. Ask them the
reasons for not going to
work. List all of them and
discuss in the classroom
whether they should go for
work and why, and also
ways by which they could
be sent for work.  Some
social scientists argue that
housewives working at
home without getting paid
for that work must also be
regarded as contributing to
the gross national product
and therefore, as engaged
in an economic activity.
Would you agree?
2015-16(20/01/2015)
EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES
rural workers constitute about three-
fourth of this 473 million. Men form the
majority of workforce in India. About
70 per cent of the workers are men and
the rest are women (men and women
include child labourers in respective
sexes). Women workers account for
one-third of the rural workforce
whereas in urban areas, they are just
one-fifth of the workforce. Women
carry out works like cooking, fetching
water and fuelwood and participate in
farm labour. They are not paid wages
in cash or in the form of grains; at
times they are not paid at all. For this
reason, these women are not
categorised as workers. Economists
have argued that these women should
also be called workers.
7.3 PARTICIPATION OF PEOPLE IN
EMPLOYMENT
Worker-population ratio is an indicator
which is used for analysing the
employment situation in the country.
This ratio is useful in knowing the
proportion of population that is
actively contributing to the production
of goods and services of a country. If
the ratio is higher, it means that the
engagement of people is greater; if the
ratio for a country is medium, or low,
it means that a very high proportion
of its population is not involved
directly in economic activities.
You might have already studied,
in lower classes, the meaning of the
term ‘population’. Population is
defined as the total number of people
who reside in a particular locality at
a particular point of time. If you want
to know the worker-population ratio
for India, divide the total number of
workers in India by the population in
India and multiply it by 100, you will
get the worker-population ratio for
India.
If you look at Table 7.1, it shows
the different levels of participation of
people in economic activities. For
every 100 persons, about 39 (by
rounding off 38.6) are workers in
India. In urban areas, the proportion
is about 36 whereas in rural India, the
ratio is about 40. Why is there such a
difference? People in rural areas have
limited resources to earn a higher
income and participate more in the
employment market. Many do not go
to schools, colleges and other training
institutions. Even if some go, they
discontinue in the middle to join the
workforce; whereas, in urban areas, a
considerable section is able to study in
various educational institutions. Urban
people have a variety of employment
opportunities. They look for the
appropriate job to suit their
qualifications and skills. In rural areas,
people cannot stay at home as their
economic condition may not allow them
to do so.
TABLE 7.1
Worker-Population Ratio in India,
2009-2010
Worker-Population Ratio
Total
Rural
Urban
Women
Total
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Compared to females, more males
are found to be working. The difference
in participation rates is very large in
urban areas: for every 100 urban
females, only about 15 are engaged in
some economic activities. In rural areas,
for every 100 rural women about 25
participate in the employment market.
Why are women, in general, and urban
women, in particular, not working? It
is common to find
that where men are
able to earn high
incomes, families
discourage female
members
taking up jobs.
Going back to
what has already
mentioned
above, many activi-
ties for the household
engaged in by women
are not  recognised as
productive work.
This narrow defini-
tion of work leads to
non-recognition of
women’s work and, therefore, to the
underestimation of the number of
women workers in the country. Think
of the women actively engaged in many
activities within the house and at family
farms who are not paid for such work.
As they certainly contribute to the
maintenance of the household and
farms, do you think that their number
should be added to the number of
women workers?
7.4 SELF -EMPLOYED AND HIRED
WORKERS
Does the worker-population ratio say
anything about workers’ status in
society or about the working
conditions? By knowing the status
with which a worker is placed in an
enterprise, it may be possible to know
one dimension — quality of employment
in a country. It also enables us to know
the attachment a worker has with his
Fig. 7.2 Brick-making: a form of casual work
Work These Out
Ø Any study of employment
must start with a review
of the worker -population
ratios — why?
Ø In some communities, you
might have noticed that
even if the males do not
earn a high income, they do
not send women to work.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES
or her job and the authority she or he
has over the enterprise and over other
co-workers.
Let us take three workers from the
construction industry — a cement shop
owner, a construction worker and a civil
engineer of a construction company. Since
the status of each one of them is different
from another, they are
also called differently.
Workers who own and
operate an enterprise to
earn their livelihood
are known as self-
employed. Thus the
cement shop owner is
self-employed. About 52
per cent workforce in
India belongs to this
category. The construction
workers are known as
casual wage labourers;
they account for 30 per
cent of India’s workforce.
labourers
casually engaged in others’
farms and, in return,  get a
remuneration for the work
done. Workers like the civil
engineer working in the
construction company
account for 18 per cent of
India’s workforce. When  a
worker is engaged by
someone or an enterprise
and paid his or her wages
on a regular basis, they are
known as regular salaried
employees.
Look at Chart 7.1:
you will notice that self-
employment is a major source of
livelihood for both men and women as
this category accounts for more than
50 per cent of the workforce in both
diagrams. Casual wage work is the
second major source for both men and
women, a little more so for the latter
(31 per cent). When it comes to regular
Chart 7.1 : Distribution of Employment
by Gender
Chart 7.2 : Distribution of Employment by Region
Urban Workers
Rural Workers
Self-employed         Regular Salaried Employees
Casual Wage Labourers
Male Workers
Female Workers
Self-employed
Casual Wage Labourers
Regular Salaried Employees
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
urban areas. In the latter, both self-
employment and regular wage salaried
jobs are greater. In the former, since
majority of those depending on farming
own plots of land and cultivate
independently, the share of self-
employed is greater.
The nature of work in urban areas
is different. Obviously everyone cannot
run factories, shops and offices of
various types. Moreover enterprises in
urban areas require workers on a
regular basis.
salaried employment, men are found  to
be so engaged in greater proportion.
They form 20 per cent whereas women
form only 13 per cent. One of the reasons
could be skill requirement. Since regular
salaried jobs require skills and a higher
level of literacy, women might not have
been engaged to a great extent.
When we compare the distribution
of workforce in rural and urban areas
in Chart 7.2 you will notice that the self-
employed and casual wage labourers
are found more in rural areas than in
Work These Out
Ø We generally think that only those who are doing paid work regularly or
casually such as agricultural labourers, factory workers, those who work
in banks and other offices as assistants and clerks are workers. From the
above discussion, you must have understood that those who are self-
employed such as pavement vegetable vendors, professionals such as
lawyers, doctors and engineers are also workers.  Mark (a), (b) and (c) against
self-employed, regular salaried employees and casual wage labourers
respectively:
Owner of a saloon
Worker in a rice mill who is paid on daily basis but employed regularly
Cashier in State Bank of India
Typist working in a state government office on a daily wage basis but
paid monthly
A handloom weaver
Loading worker in wholesale vegetable shop
Owner of a cool drinks shop which sells Pepsi, Coca Cola and Mirinda
Nurse in a private hospital who gets monthly salary and has been
working regularly for the past 5 years.
Ø Economists point out that casual wage labourers are the most vulnerable
among the three categories. Could you locate who these workers are and
where they are found and why?
Ø Can we say that the self-employed earn more than the casual wage labourers
or regular salaried employees? Identify a few other indicators of quality of
employment.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES
7.5 EMPLOYMENT IN
FIRMS, FACTORIES
AND OFFICES
course
economic development of
a country, labour flows
from agriculture and
other related activities to
industry and services. In
this process, workers
migrate from rural to
urban areas. Eventually,
at a much later stage,
the industrial sector begins to lose its
share of total employment as the service
sector enters a period of rapid
expansion. This shift can be understood
by looking at the distribution of
workers by industry. Generally, we
divide all economic activities into eight
different industrial divisions. They are
(i) Agriculture (ii) Mining and Quarrying
(iii) Manufacturing (iv) Electricity, Gas
and Water Supply (v) Construction (vi)
Trade (vii) Transport and Storage and
(viii) Services. For simplicity, all the
working persons engaged in these
divisions can be clubbed into three
major sectors viz., (a) primary sector
which includes (i) , (b) secondary sector
which includes (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) and
(c) service sector which includes
divisions (vi), (vii) and (viii). Table 7.2
shows the distribution of working
persons in different industries during
the year 2011-12.
Primary sector is the main source
of employment for majority of workers
TABLE 7.2
Distribution of Workforce by Industry, 2011-2012
Industrial Category
Place of Residence
Total
Rural
Urban
Women
Primary Sector
Secondary Sector
Tertiary/ Service Sector
Total
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Fig. 7.3 Garment workers: upcoming factory employment for women
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
in India. Secondary sector provides
employment to only about 24 per cent
of workforce. About 27 per cent of
workers are in the service sector. Table
7.2 also shows that about 67 per cent
of the workforce in rural India depends
on agriculture, forestry and fishing.
About 16 per cent of rural workers are
working in manufacturing industries,
construction and other industrial
activities. Service sector provides
employment to only about 17 per cent
of rural workers. Agriculture is not a
major source of employment in urban
areas where people  are mainly engaged
in the service sector. About 60 per cent
of urban workers are in the service
sector. The secondary sector gives
employment to about 30 per cent of
urban workforce.
Though both men and women
workers are concentrated in the
primary sector, women workers’
concentration is very high there. About
63 per cent of the  female workforce is
employed in the primary sector whereas
less than half of males work in that
sector. Men get opportunities in both
secondary and service sectors.
7.6 GROWTH AND CHANGING STRUCTURE
OF EMPLOYMENT
In Chapters 2 and 3, you might have
studied about the planning strategies
in detail. Here we will look at two
developmental indicators — growth of
employment and GDP. Sixty years of
planned development have been aimed
at expansion of the economy through
increase in national output and
employment.
During the period 1950–2010,
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of India
grew positively and was higher than
the employment growth. However,
there was always fluctuation in the
growth of GDP. During this period,
employment grew at the rate of not
more than 2 per cent.
Chart 7.3 also points at another
disheartening development in the late
1990s: employment growth started
declining and reached the level of
growth that India had in the early
stages of planning. During these years,
we also find a widening gap between
the growth of GDP and employment.
This means that in the Indian economy,
without generating employment, we
have been able to produce more goods
Work This Out
Ø All newspapers have one section meant for job opportunities. Some also
devote an entire supplement in a day or every week like Opportunities in
The Hindu or Ascent in The Times of India. Many companies advertise
vacancies for various positions. Cut those sections. Develop a table which
contains four columns: whether the company is private or public, name of
the post, number of posts, sector — primary, secondary or tertiary — and
qualification required. Analyse the table in the classroom about jobs
advertised in the newspapers.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES
and services. Scholars refer to this
phenomenon as jobless growth.
So far we have seen how
employment has grown in comparison
to GDP. Now it is necessary to know
how the growth pattern of employment
and GDP affected different sections of
workforce. From this we will also be
able to understand what types of
employment are generated in our
country.
Let us look at two indicators that
we have seen in the preceding sections
— employment of people in various
industries and their status. We know
that India is an agrarian nation; a
major section of population lives in
rural areas and is dependent on
agriculture as their main livelihood.
Developmental strategies in many
countries, including India, have aimed
at reducing the proportion of people
depending on agriculture.
Distribution of workforce by
industrial sectors shows substantial
shift from farm work to non-farm work
(see Table 7.3). In 1972-73, about 74
per cent of workforce was engaged in
primary sector and in 2011-12, this
proportion has declined to about
50 per cent. Secondary and service
sectors are showing promising future
for the Indian workforce. You may
notice that the shares of these sectors
have increased from 11 to 24 per cent
and 15 to 27 per cent, respectively.
The distribution of workforce in
different status indicates that over the
Chart 7.3: Growth of Employment and Gross Domestic
Product, 1951–2012 (%)
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
last four decades (1972-2012),
people have moved from self-
employment and regular salaried
employment to casual wage work. Yet
self-employment continues to be the
major employment provider. Scholars
call the process of moving from
self-employment and regular
salaried employment to casual wage
work as casualisation of workforce.
This makes the workers highly
vulnerable. How? Look at the case
study of Ahmedabad in the preceding
section.
1972-73
1993-94
1999-2000   2011-2012
Sector
Primary
Secondary
Services
Total
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Status
Self-employed
Regular Salaried Employees
Casual Wage Labourers
Total
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
TABLE 7.3
Trends in Employment Pattern (Sector-wise and Status-wise), 1972-2012 (in %)
Work These Out
ØDo you know that maintaining employment growth at 2 per cent for a country
like India is not an easy thing? Why?
Ø What will happen if there is no additional employment generated in the
economy even though we are able to produce goods and services in the
economy? How could jobless growth happen?
Ø Economists say that if casualisation increases the earning of the people,
such phenomenon should be welcomed. Suppose a marginal farmer becomes
a full-time agricultural labourer, do you think he will be happy even if he
earns more in his daily wage work? Or will a permanent and regular worker
of the pharmaceutical industry be happy if he  becomes a daily wage labourer,
even if his or her overall earnings increase? Discuss in the classroom.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES
7.7 INFORMALISATION OF INDIAN
WORKFORCE
In the previous section we have found
that the proportion of casual labourers
has been increasing. One of the objectives
of development planning in India, since
India’s independence, has been to
provide decent livelihood to its people. It
envisaged
industrialisation strategy would bring
surplus workers from agriculture to
industry with better standard of living as
in developed countries. We have seen in
the preceding section,  that even after 55
years of planned development, more than
half of the Indian workforce depends on
farming as the major source of livelihood.
Economists argue that, over the
years, the quality of employment has
been deteriorating. Even after working for
more than 10-20 years, why do some
workers not get maternity benefit,
provident fund, gratuity and pension?
Why does a person working in the private
sector get a  lower salary as compared to
another person doing the same work but
in the public sector?
You may find that a small section
of Indian workforce is getting regular
income. The government, through its
labour laws, enable them to protect
their rights in various ways. This
section of the workforce forms trade
unions, bargains with employers for
better wages and other social security
measures. Who are they? To know this
we classify workforce into two
categories: workers in formal and
informal sectors, which are also referred
to as organised and unorganised
sectors. All the public sector
establishments and those private
sector establishments  which employ
10 hired workers or more are called
formal sector establishments and those
who work in such establishments are
formal sector workers. All other
enterprises and workers working in
those enterprises form the informal
sector. Thus, informal sector includes
millions of farmers, agricultural
labourers, owners of small enterprises
and people working in those enterprises
as also the self-employed who do not
have any hired workers. It also includes
all non-farm casual wage labourers
who work for more than one employer
such as construction workers and
headload workers.
Those who are working in the formal
sector enjoy social security benefits.
Box 7.1: Formal Sector Employment
The information relating to employment in the formal sector is collected by the
Union Ministry of Labour through employment exchanges located in different parts
of the country. Do you know who is the major employer in the formal sector in
India? In 2012, out of about 30 million formal sector workers, about 18 million
workers were employed by the public sector.  Here also men form the majority, as
women constitute only about one-sixth of the formal sector workforce. Economists
point out that the reform process initiated in the early 1990s resulted in a decline
in the number of workers employed in the formal sector.  What do you think?
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
They earn more than those in the
informal sector. Developmental
planning envisaged that as the economy
grows, more and more workers would
become formal sector workers and the
proportion of workers engaged in the
informal sector would dwindle.
But what has happened in India?
Look at the following
chart which gives
the distribution of
workforce in formal
and informal sectors.
In Section 7.2, we
learnt that there are
about 473 million
workers in the country.
There are about 30
million workers in the
formal sector. Can you
estimate the percentage
of people employed in
the formal sectors in
the country? About only six per cent
(30/473×100)! Thus, the rest 94 per
cent are in the informal sector. Out of
30 million formal sector workers, only
6 million, that is, only about 21 per cent
(30/6×100) are women. In the informal
sector, male workers account for 69 per
cent of  the workforce.
Chart 7.4: Workers in Formal/ Informal Sector, 2009-2012
Fig. 7.4 Road side vending: an increasing variety of informal sector employment
Number of Workers
(in million)
Female
2015-16(20/01/2015)
EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES
Box 7.2: Informalisation in Ahmedabad
Ahmedabad is a prosperous city with its wealth based on the produce of more
than 60 textile mills with a labour force of 1,50,000 workers employed in them.
These workers had, over the course of the century, acquired a certain degree
of income security. They had
secure jobs with a living
wage; they were covered by
social security schemes
protecting their health and
old age. They had a strong
trade union which not only
represented
disputes but also ran
activities for the welfare of
workers and their families.
In the early 1980s, textile
mills all over the country
began to close down. In some
places, such as Mumbai,
the mills closed rapidly. In
Ahmedabad, the process of
closure was long drawn out
and spread over 10 years.
Over this period, approximately over 80,000 permanent workers and over 50,000
non-permanent workers lost their jobs and were driven to the informal sector.
The city experienced an economic recession and public disturbances, especially
communal riots. A whole class of workers was thrown back from the middle
class into the informal sector, into poverty. There was widespread alcoholism
and suicides, children were withdrawn from school and sent to work.
Source: Renana Jhabvala, Ratna M. Sudarshan and Jeemol Unni  (Ed.) Informal
Economy at Centre Stage: New Structures of Employment, Sage
Publications, New Delhi, 2003, pp.265.
Since the late 1970s, many
developing countries, including India,
started paying attention to enterprises
and workers in the informal sector as
employment in the formal sector is not
growing. Workers and enterprises in the
informal sector do not get regular income;
they do not have any protection or
regulation from the government. Workers
are dismissed without any compensation.
Technology used in the informal sector
enterprises is outdated; they also do not
maintain any accounts. Workers of this
sector live in slums and are squatters.
Of late, owing to the efforts of the
International Labour Organisation (ILO),
Change in the balance of power  in a house: an
unemployed mill worker peeling garlic whereas his wife
has a new job of beedi rolling.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
the Indian government has initiated the
modernisation of informal sector
enterprises and provision of social security
measures to informal sector
workers.
7.8 UNEMPLOYMENT
You might have seen people
looking
newspapers. Some look for
a job  through friends
and relatives. In many
cities, you might find
people standing in some
select areas looking for
people to employ them
for that day’s work. Some
go to factories and offices
and give their bio-data
and ask whether there is any vacancy
in their factory or office. Many in
the rural areas do not go out and
Work These Out
Tick (ü) mark against those which are in the informal sector
Ø Worker in a hotel which has seven hired workers and three family workers
Ø A private school teacher in a school which has 25 teachers
Ø A police constable
Ø Nurse in a government hospital
Ø Cycle-rickshaw puller
Ø The owner of a textile shop employing  nine workers
Ø Driver of a bus company which has more than 10 buses with 20 drivers,
conductors and other workers
Ø Civil engineer working in a construction company which has 10 workers
Ø Computer operator in the state government office working on a temporary
basis
Ø A clerk in the electricity office.
Fig. 7.5 Unemployed mill workers waiting for casual jobs
2015-16(20/01/2015)
EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES
ask for a job but stay home when
there is no work. Some go to
employment exchanges and register
themselves for vacancies notified
through employment exchanges. NSSO
defines unemployment as a situation
in which all those who, owing to lack
of work, are not working but
either seek work through employment
exchanges, intermediaries, friends or
relatives or by making applications to
prospective employers or express their
willingness or availability for work
under the prevailing condition of work
and remunerations. There are a variety
of ways by which an unemployed
person is identified. Economists define
unemployed person as one who is not
able to get employment of even one
hour in half a day.
There are three sources of data on
unemployment : Reports of Census of
India, National Sample Survey
Organisation’s Reports of Employment
and Unemployment Situation and
Directorate General of
Employment and Training
Data of Registration with
Employment Exchanges.
Though they provide
different estimates of
unemployment, they do
provide us with the
attributes
unemployed
variety of unemployment
prevailing in our country.
Do we have different
types of unemployment
in our economy? The
situation described in the
first paragraph of this section is called
open unemployment. Economists call
unemployment prevailing in Indian
farms as disguised unemployment.
What is disguised unemployment?
Suppose a farmer has four acres of land
and he actually needs only two workers
and himself to carry out various
operations on his farm in a year, but if
he employs five workers and his family
members such as his wife and children,
this situation is known as disguised
unemployment. One study conducted
in the late 1950s showed about one-
third of agriculture workers in India as
disguisedly unemployed.
You may have noticed that many
people migrate to an urban area, pick
up a job and stay there for some time,
but come back to their home villages
as soon as the rainy season begins.
Why do they do so? This is because
work in agriculture is seasonal; there
are no employment opportunities in the
village for all months in the year. When
Fig. 7.6 Sugar cane cutters: disguised unemployment is common
in farm works
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
there is no work to do on farms, people
go to urban areas and look for jobs.
This kind of unemployment is known
as seasonal unemployment. This is also
a common form of unemployment
prevailing in India.
Though we have witnessed slow
growth of employment, have you seen
people being unemployed over a very
long time? Scholars says that in India,
people  cannot remain  completely
unemployed for very long because their
desperate economic condition would
not allow them to be so. You will rather
find them being forced to accept
jobs that nobody else would do,
unpleasant or even dangerous jobs in
unclean, unhealthy surroundings. The
central and state governments take
many initiatives and generate
Fig. 7.7 Dam construction work is a direct way of employment
generation by the government
employment to facilitate a
decent living for low
income families through
various measures. These
will be discussed in the
following section.
7.9 GOVERNMENT AND
EMPLOYMENT
GENERATION
You may recall about
the National Rural
Employment Guarantee
Act 2005. It promises
100 days of guaranteed
wage employment to all
rural households who
volunteer to do unskilled
manual work. This
scheme is one of the many measures
governments implement to generate
employment for those who are in need
of jobs in rural areas.
Since independence, the Union and
state governments have played
an important role in generating
employment or creating opportunities
for employment generation. Their
efforts can be broadly categorised into
two — direct and indirect. In the first
category, as you have seen in the
preceding section, government employs
people in various departments for
administrative purposes. It also runs
industries, hotels and transport
companies and hence provides
employment directly to workers. When
output of goods and services from
government enterprises increases, then
2015-16(20/01/2015)
EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES
private enterprises which receive raw
materials from government enterprises
will also raise their output and hence
increase the number of employment
opportunities in the economy. For
example, when a government owned steel
company increases its output, it will
result in direct increase in employment
government
company.
Simultaneously, private companies,
which purchase steel from it, will also
increase their output and thus
employment. This is the indirect
generation of employment opportunities
by the government initiatives in the
economy.
In Chapter 4, you would have
noticed that many programmes that
the governments implement, aimed at
alleviating poverty, are through
employment generation. They are
known
employment
generation programmes. All these
programmes aim at providing not
only employment but also services in
areas such as primary health, primary
education,  rural drinking water,
nutrition, assistance for people to buy
income and employment generating
assets, development of community
assets
generating
employment, construction of houses
and sanitation, assistance for
constructing houses, laying of rural
roads, development of wastelands/
degraded lands.
7.10 CONCLUSION
There has been a change in the
structure of workforce in India. Newly
emerging jobs are found mostly in the
service sector. The expansion of the
service sector and the advent of high
technology now frequently permit a
highly competitive existence for efficient
small scale and often individual
enterprises or specialist workers side by
side with the multinationals.
Outsourcing of work is becoming a
common practice. It means that a
big firm finds it profitable to close
specialist
departments (for example, legal or
computer programming or customer
service sections) and hand over a large
number of small piecemeal jobs to very
small enterprises or specialist
individuals, sometimes situated even in
other countries. The traditional notion
of the modern factory or office, as a
result, has been altering in such
a manner that for many the home
is becoming the workplace. All of
this change has not gone in favour
of the individual worker. The nature
of employment has become more
informal with only limited availability
of social security measures to the
workers.
In the last two decades, there
has been rapid growth in the gross
domestic product, but without
simultaneous increase in  employment
opportunities. This has forced the
government to take up initiatives in
generating employment opportunities
particularly in the rural areas.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Who is a worker?
Define worker-population ratio.
Are the following workers — a beggar, a thief, a smuggler, a gambler?
Recap
Ø All those persons who are engaged in various economic activities and
hence contribute to gross national product are workers.
Ø About two-fifth of the total population in the country is engaged in various
economic activities.
Ø Men particularly rural men, form the major section of workforce in India.
Ø Majority of workers in India are self-employed. Casual wage labourers
and regular salaried employees together account for less than half the
proportion of India’s workforce.
Ø About three-fifth of India’s workforce depends on agriculture and other
allied activities as the major source of livelihood.
Ø In recent years, the growth of employment has decelerated.
Ø During post-reform period, India has been witness to employment
opportunities in the service sector. These new jobs are found mostly in
the informal sector and the nature of jobs is also mostly casual.
Ø Government is the major formal sector employer in the country.
Ø Disguised unemployment is a common form of unemployment in rural
India.
Ø There has been a change in the structure of the workforce in India.
Ø Through various schemes and policies, the government takes initiatives
to generate employment directly and indirectly.
EXERCISES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES
Find the odd man out (i) owner of a saloon (ii) a cobbler (iii) a cashier
in Mother Dairy (iv)  a tuition master (v) transport operator
(vi) construction worker.
The newly emerging jobs are found mostly in the
sector
(service/manufacturing).
An establishement with four hired workers is known as
(formal/informal) sector establishment.
Raj is going to school. When he is not in school, you will find him
working in his farm. Can you consider him as a worker? Why?
Compared to urban women, more rural women are found working.
Meena is a housewife. Besides taking care of household chores, she
works in the cloth shop which is owned and operated by her husband.
Can she be considered as a worker? Why?
Find the odd man out (i) rickshaw puller who works under a rick-
shaw owner (ii) mason (iii) mechanic shop worker (iv) shoeshine boy.
The following table shows distribution of workforce in India for the
year 1972-73. Analyse it and give reasons for the nature of workforce
distribution. You will notice that the data is pertaining to the situation
in India 30 years ago!
Place of Residence
Workforce (in millions)
Female
Total
Rural
Urban
The following table shows the population and worker population ratio
for India in 1999-2000. Can you estimate the workforce (urban and
total) for India?
Region
Estimates of
Worker
Estimated
Population
Population
No. of Workers
(in crores)
Ratio
(in crores)
Rural
71.88
71.88 × 41.9 = 30.12
Urban
28.52
Total
100.40
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Why are regular salaried employees more in urban areas than in
rural areas?
Why are less women found in regular salaried employment?
Analyse the recent trends in sectoral distribution of workforce in India.
Compared to the 1970s, there has hardly been any change in the
distribution of workforce across various industries. Comment.
Do you think that in the last 50 years, employment generated in the
country is commensurate with the growth of GDP in India? How?
18.   Is it necessary to generate employment in the formal sector rather
than in the informal sector? Why?
Victor is able to get work only for two hours in a day. Rest of the day,
he is looking for work. Is he unemployed? Why? What kind of jobs
could persons like Victor be doing?
You are residing in a village. If you are asked to advice the village
panchayat, what kinds of activities would you suggest for the
improvement of your village which would also generate employment.
Who is  a casual wage labourer?
How will you know whether a worker is working in the informal sector?
Select a region, say a street or colony, and divide it into 3-4
sub-regions. Conduct a survey by which you can collect the details
of activity each person living there is engaged in. Derive the
worker-population ratio for all the regions. Interpret the results for
differences in worker-population ratio for the different sub-regions.
Suppose 3-4 groups of students are given different regions of a state.
One region is mainly engaged in cultivation of paddy. In another region,
coconut is the main plantation. The third region is a coastal region
where fishing is the main activity. The fourth region has a river nearby
with a lot of livestock rearing activities. Ask all the four groups to
develop a report on what kind of employment could be generated in
the four regions.
Visit the local library and ask for Employment News, a weekly published
by the Government of India. Go through each issue for the last two
months. There will be seven issues. Select 25 advertisements and
SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES
fill in the following table (expand the table as needed). Discuss the
nature of jobs in the classroom.
Items
Advertisement 1       Advertisement 2
Name of Office
Department/company
Private/public/joint venture
Name of the post
Sector—primary/seconday/
service
Number of posts/vacancies
Qualification required
You might notice, in your locality, a variety of works being done by
the  government, for example laying of roads, desilting of tanks,
construction of school buildings, hospital and other government
offices, construction of check dams and houses for the poor etc.
Prepare a critical assessment report on one such activity. The issues
covered could be the following (i) how the work was identified (ii)
amount sanctioned (iii) contribution of local people, if any (iv) number
of persons involved — both men and women (v) wages paid (vi) is it
really required in that area and other critical comments on the
implementation of the scheme under which the work is being carried
In recent years, you may have noticed that many voluntary
organisations also take initiatives to generate employment in hilly
and dry land regions. If you find such initiatives in your locality, visit
and prepare a report.
CHADHA, G.K. and P.P. SAHU, 2002. ‘Post-reform Setbacks in Rural Employment:
Issues that need further scrutiny.’ Economic and Political Weekly, May
25, pp.1998-2026.
DESAI, S and M.B.DAS. 2004. ‘Is Employment Driving India’s Growth Surge’,
Economic and Political Weekly, July 3, pp. 3045-3051.
GHOSE, AJIT K. 1999. ‘Current Issues of Employment Policy in India.’ Economic
and Political Weekly, September 4, pp. 2592-2608.
HIRWAY, INDIRA. 2002. ‘Employment and Unemployment Situation in 1990s:
How Good are NSS Data.’ Economic and Political Weekly, May 25,
pp. 2027-2036.
REFERENCES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
JACOB, PAUL. 1986. ‘Concept of ‘work’ and estimates of ‘workforce’ — An
appraisal of the treatment of activities relating to non-marketed output,’
Sarvekshana, Vol.IX, No.4, April.
KULSHRESHTHA, A.C., GULAB SINGH, ALOK KAR and R.L. MISHRA. 2000. ‘Workforce in
the Indian National Accounts Statistics,’ The Journal of Income and Wealth,
Vol.22, No.2, July, pp. 3-39.
PRADHAN, B.K. and M.R.SALUJA. 1996. ‘Labour Statistics in India: A Review.’
Margin, July- September, Vol.28, Number 4, pp. 319-347.
RATH, NILAKANTHA. 2001. ‘Data on Employment, Unemployment and Education:
Where to go from here?’ Economic and Political Weekly, June 9,
pp. 2081-2087.
SUNDARAM, K. 2001. ‘Employment-Unemployment Situation in the Nineties:
Some Results from NSS 55th Round Survey’, Economic and Political
Weekly, March 17, pp. 931-940.
SUNDARAM, K. 2001. ‘Employment and Poverty in 1990s: Further Results from
NSS 55th Round Employment-Unemployment Survey, 1999-2000,’
Economic and Political Weekly, August 11, pp. 3039-3049.
VISARIA, PRAVIN. 1996. ‘Structure of the Indian Workforce, 1961-1994,’ The
Indian Journal of Labour Economics, Vol.39, No.4, pp. 725-740.
Government Reports
Annual Reports, Ministry of Labour, Government of India, Delhi.
Census of India 2011, Primary Census Abstract, Registrar General of Census
Operations, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, Delhi.
Economic Survey, Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
Reports on Employment and Unemployment Situation in India, Ministry of
Statistics and Planning, Government of India.
Websites
www.censusofindia.nic.in
www.mospi.nic.in
2015-16(20/01/2015)
After studying this chapter, the learners will
understand the main challenges India faces in the areas of social and
economic infrastructure
know the role of infrastructure in economic development
understand the role of energy as a critical component of infrastructure
understand the problems and prospects of the energy and health sectors
understand the health infrastructure of India.
INFRASTRUCTURE
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
8.1 INTRODUCTION
Have you ever thought of why some
states in India are performing much
better than others in certain areas? Why
do Punjab, Haryana and Himachal
Pradesh prosper in agriculture and
horticulture? Why are Maharashtra
and Gujarat industrially more
advanced than others? How come
Kerala, popularly known as ‘God’s own
country’, has excelled in literacy, health
care and sanitation and also attracts
tourists in such large numbers? Why
Karnataka’s
information
technology industry attracts world
attention?
It is all because these states have
better infrastructure in the areas they
excel than other states of India. Some
have better irrigation facilities. Others
have better transportation facilities, or
are located near ports which makes  raw
materials required for various
manufacturing industries easily
accessible. Cities like Bengaluru in
Karnataka attract many multinational
companies because they provide
world-class communication facilities.
All these support structures, which
facilitate development of a country,
constitute its infrastructure. How
then does infrastructure facilitate
development?
8.2 WHAT IS INFRASTRUCTURE?
Infrastructure provides supporting
services in the main areas of industrial
and agricultural production, domestic
and foreign trade and commerce. These
services include roads, railways, ports,
airports, dams, power stations, oil and
gas pipelines, telecommunication
facilities, the country’s educational
system including schools and colleges,
health system including hospitals,
sanitary system including clean
drinking water facili-
ties and the monetary
system
including
banks, insurance and
other financial institu-
tions. Some of these
facilities have a direct
impact on production
of goods and services
while others give
indirect support by
building the social
sector of the economy.
“Many things we need can wait, the child cannot. To him, we cannot say,
‘tomorrow’. His name is today.”
Gabrriella Mistral— Chilean poet
So is the Infrastructure.
Fig. 8.1 Roads are the missing link with growth
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INFRASTRUCUTRE
Some divide infrastructure into
two categories — economic and social.
Infrastructure associated with energy,
transportation and communication
are included in the former category
whereas those related to education,
health and housing are included in
the latter.
speedy and large-scale
transport of seeds,
pesticides, fertilisers
and the produce using
modern
roadways,
railways and shipping
facilities. In recent times,
agriculture also depends
insurance
banking
facilities
because of its need to
operate on a very large
scale.
Infrastructure contributes to
economic development of a country
both by increasing the productivity of
the factors of production and improving
the quality of life of its people.
Inadequate infrastructure can have
multiple adverse effects on health.
Improvements in water supply and
sanitation have a large impact by
reducing
morbidity
(meaning
proneness to fall ill) from major
waterborne diseases and reducing the
severity of disease when it occurs. In
addition to the obvious linkage between
water and sanitation and health,
the quality of transport and
communication infrastructure can
affect access to health care. Air pollution
and safety hazards connected to
transportation also affect morbidity,
particularly in densely populated areas.
8.4 THE STATE OF INFRASTRUCTURE IN
INDIA
Traditionally, the  government has been
solely responsible for developing  the
8.3 RELEVANCE OF INFRASTRUCTURE
Infrastructure is the support system on
which depends the efficient working of
a modern industrial economy. Modern
agriculture also largely depends on it for
Work This Out
locality
neighbourhood you might
be using a variety of
infrastructure. List all of
those. Your locality may also
be requiring a few more.
List those separately.
Fig. 8.2 Schools: an important infrastructure for a nation
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
country’s infrastructure. But it was
found that the government’s investment
in infrastructure was inadequate.
Today, the private sector by itself and
also in joint partnership with the public
sector, has started playing a very
important role in infrastructure
development.
A majority of our people live
in rural areas. Despite so much
technical progress in the world,
rural women are
still using bio-fuels
residues, dung
and fuel wood to
meet their energy
requirement. They
walk long dis-
tances to fetch
fuel, water and
other basic needs.
The census 2001
shows that in rural
India only 56 per
cent households
have an electricity
connection and 43
per cent still use
kerosene. About
90 per cent of the
rural households
use bio-fuels for
cooking. Tap water
availability
limited to only 24
rural
households.  About
76 per cent of the
population drinks
water from open
sources such as wells, tanks, ponds,
lakes, rivers, canals, etc. Access to
improved sanitation in rural areas was
only 20 per cent.
Look at Table 8.1 which shows the
state of some infrastructure in India in
comparison to a few other countries.
Though it is widely understood that
infrastructure is the foundation of
development, India is yet to wake up
to the call. India invests only 5 per cent
Fig. 8.3 Dams: temples of development
Fig. 8.4 Safe drinking water with pucca house: still a dream
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INFRASTRUCUTRE
of its GDP on infrastructure, which is
far below that of China and Indonesia.
Some economists have projected
that India will become the third biggest
economy in the world a few decades
from now. For that to happen, India will
have to boost its infrastructure
investment. In any country, as the
income rises, the composition of
infrastructure requirements changes
significantly. For low-income countries,
basic infrastructure services like
irrigation, transport and power are
more important. As economies mature
and most of their basic consumption
demands are met, the share of
agriculture in the economy shrinks and
more service related infrastructure is
required. This is why the share of power
and telecommunication infrastructure
is greater in high-income countries.
Thus, development of infrastructure
and economic development go hand in
hand. Agriculture depends, to a
considerable extent, on the adequate
expansion and development of irrigation
facilities. Industrial progress depends
on the development of power and
electricity generation, transport and
communications. Obviously, if proper
attention is not paid to the development
of infrastructure, it is likely to act as a
TABLE 8.1
Some Infrastructure in India and other Countries
Country
Investment* in
Access to
Access to
Mobile
Power
Infrastructure
Improved
Improved
Subscribers/100
Generation
as a % GDP
Water Source
Sanitation (%)
People
(billion kwh)
(2013)
(2012) (%)
(2013)
China
Hong Kong
India
South Korea
Pakistan
Singapore
Indonesia
Source: World Development Indicators, world bank website: www.worldbank.org./ (*) refers to Gross
Capital Formation.
Work These Out
Ø While reading newspapers
you will come across  terms
like Bharat nirman, Special
Purpose Vehicle (SPV),
Special Economic Zones
(SEZ),
Build
Operate
Transfer (BOT), Private
Public Partnership (PPP)
etc. Make a scrapbook of
news items containing
these terms. How are these
terms related to infras-
tructure?
Ø Using the references at the
end of the chapter, collect
the details of other infras-
tructure.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
severe constraint on
economic development.  In
this chapter the focus
will be on only two kinds of
infrastructure —those
associated with energy
and health.
8.5 ENERGY
Why do we need energy?
In what forms is it
available? Energy is a
critical aspect of the
development process of a
nation. It is, of course,
essential for industries.
Now it is used on a large
scale in agriculture and related areas
like production and transportation of
fertilisers, pesticides and farm
equipment. It is required in houses for
cooking, household lighting and
heating. Can you think of producing a
commodity or service without using
energy?
Sources of Energy: There are
commercial and non-commercial
sources of energy. Commercial
sources are coal, petroleum and
electricity as they are bought and
sold. Non-commercial sources of
energy are firewood, agricultural
waste and dried dung. These are non-
commercial as they are
found in nature/forests.
While commercial
sources of energy are
generally exhaustible
(with the exception of
hydropower),
commercial sources  are
generally renewable.
More than 60 per cent of
Indian
households
depend on traditional
sources of energy for
meeting their regular
cooking and heating
needs.
Fig. 8.6 Bullock carts still play a crucial role in rural
transportation market
Fig. 8.5 Fuel wood is the major source of energy
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INFRASTRUCUTRE
Non-conventional Sources of
Energy: Both commercial and
non-commercial sources of
energy
known
conventional sources of energy.
There are three other sources
of energy which are commonly
termed as non-conventional
sources — solar energy, wind
energy and tidal power. Being
a tropical country, India has
almost unlimited potential for
producing all three types of
energy if some appropriate cost
effective technologies that are already
available are used. Even cheaper
technologies can be developed.
Consumption Pattern of Commercial
Energy: In India, commercial energy
consumption makes up about 74 per
cent of the total energy consumed in
India. This includes coal with the
largest share of 54 per cent, followed
by oil at 32 per cent, natural gas at 10
per cent and hydro energy at 2 per cent.
Non-commercial energy sources
consisting of firewood, cow dung and
agricultural wastes  account for
over 26 per cent of the total energy
consumption. The critical feature of
India’s energy sector, and its linkages
to the economy, is the import
dependence on crude and petroleum
products, which is likely to grow rapidly
in the near future.
The sectoral pattern of consumption
of commercial energy is given in Table
8.2. The transport sector was the largest
consumer of commercial energy in
1953-54. However, there has been
continuous fall in the share of the
transport sector while the shares of the
household, agriculture and industrial
sector have been increasing. The share
Fig. 8.7 Wind mill : another source of generating
power
Fig. 8.8 Solar energy has great prospects
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
of oil and gas is highest among all
commercial energy consumption.  With
the rapid rate of economic growth, there
has been a corresponding increase in
the use of energy.
Power/Electricity: The most visible
form of energy, which is often identified
with progress in modern civilization, is
power, commonly called electricity. It is
a critical component of infrastructure
that determines the economic
development of a country. The growth
rate of demand for power is generally
higher than the GDP growth rate.
Studies point that in order to have 8
per cent GDP growth per annum, power
supply needs to grow around 12 per
cent annually.
In India, in 2012-13, thermal
sources accounted for 70 per cent
of the power generation capacity.
Hydel and wind power accounted for
16 per cent while nuclear power
accounted only for
2 per cent. India’s
energy
policy
encourages
energy sources—
hydel and wind —as
they do not rely on
fossil fuel and,
hence, avoid carbon
emissions. Yet, this
has not resulted in
faster growth of
electricity produced
from these two
sources.
Source: Ninth Five year Plan, Vol. II, Chapter 6, Planning Commission, Government of India, New Delhi
and Growth of Electricty Sector in India from 1947–2013, Central Electricity Authority, Ministry of Power,
Government of India.
Chart 8.1: Different Sources of Electricity Generated in India, 2013
TABLE 8.2
Trends in Sectoral Share of Commercial Energy Consumption (in %)
Sector
1953-54
1970-71
1990-91
2012-13
Household
Agriculture
Industries
Transport
Others
Total
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INFRASTRUCUTRE
Atomic energy is an important
source of electric power, it has economic
advantages. At present, nuclear energy
accounts for only 2 per cent of total
energy consumption, against a global
average of 13 per cent. This is far
too low. Hence, some scholars suggest
to generate more electricity through
atmoic (nuclear) sources and yet a few
others object about this, from the view
point of environment and sustainable
development. What do you think?
Some Challenges in the Power
Sector: Electricity generated by
various power stations is not consumed
entirely by ultimate consumers; a part
is consumed by power station
auxiliaries. Also, while transmitting
power, a portion is lost in transmission.
What we get in our houses, offices and
factories is the net availability.
Some of the challenges that India’s
power sector faces today are (i) India’s
installed capacity to generate electricity
is not sufficient to feed an annual
economic growth of 7-8 per cent. In
order to meet the growing demand for
electricity, India’s commercial energy
supply needs to grow at about 7 per
cent. At present, India is able to add
only 20,000 MW a year. Even the
installed capacity is under-utilised
because plants are not run properly
(ii) State Electricity Boards (SEBs),
which distribute electricity, incur
losses which exceed Rs 500 billion.
This is due to transmission and
Box 8.1: Making a Difference
Thane city is acquiring a brand new image — an environment friendly make
over. Large-scale use of solar energy, which was considered a somewhat far-
fetched concept, has brought in real benefits and results in cost and energy
saving. It is being applied to heat water, power traffic lights and advertising
hoardings. And leading this unique experiment is the Thane Municipal
Corporation. It has made compulsory for all new buildings in the city to install
solar water heating system. (Appeared in the column, Making a Difference,
Outlook, 01 August 2005).
ØCan you suggest such other ideas to use non-conventional energy in a better
Work These Out
Ø Among other sources of
energy, you would have
noticed that a marginal share
of energy comes from nuclear
power. Why?
Ø Solar energy, wind power
and power produced from
tides are going to be future
sources of energy. What are
their comparative merits
and demerits? Discuss in
the class.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
distribution losses, wrong pricing of
electricity and other inefficiencies. Some
scholars also say that distribution of
electricity to farmers is the main reason
for the losses; electricity is also stolen
in different areas which also adds to the
woes of SEBs (iii) private sector power
generators are yet to play their role in a
major way; same is the case with
foreign investors (iv) there is general
public unrest due to high power tariffs
Box 8.2: Power Distribution: The Case of Delhi
Since independence, power management in the capital has changed hands
four times. The Delhi State Electricity Board (DSEB) was set up in 1951.
This was succeeded by the Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking (DESU) in
1958. The Delhi Vidyut Board (DVB) came into existence as SEB in February
1997.  Now the distribution of electricity vests with two leading Private
sector companies - Reliance Energy Limited (BSES Rajdhani Power Limited
and BSES Yamuna Power Limited) and Tata - Power Limited (NDPL). They
supply electricity to approximately 43 lakh customers in Delhi. The tariff
structure and other regulatory issues are monitored by the Delhi Electricity
Regulatory Commission (DERC).  Though it was expected that there will
be greater improvement in power distribution and the consumers will benefit
in a major way, experience shows unsatisfactory results.
Box 8.3: Saving Energy : Promoting the Case of Compact Fluorescent
Lamps (CFL)
According to the Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE), CFLs consume 80 per
cent less power as compared to ordinary bulbs. As put by a CFL manufacturer,
Indo-Asian, replacement of one million 100-watt bulbs with 20 watt CFLs can
save 80 megawatt in power generation. This amounts to saving Rs 400 crore.
Source: Use Common Sense to Solve Power Crisis, by Naresh Minocha in Tehelka,
01 October 2005.
and prolonged power cuts in different
parts of the country (v) thermal power
plants which are the mainstay of India’s
power sector are facing shortage of raw
material and coal supplies.
Thus,
continued
economic
development and population growth
are driving the demand for energy faster
than what India is producing currently.
More public investment, better research
and development efforts, exploration,
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INFRASTRUCUTRE
technological innovation and use of
renewable energy sources can ensure
additional supply of electricity.  Instead
of investing in the power sector by
adding to installed capacity, the
government has gone for privatisation
of the power sector and particularly the
distribution (see Box 8.2) and allowed
much higher prices for electricity that
have impacted certain sectors very
badly (see Box 3.3). Do you think it is a
right policy?
8.6 HEALTH
Health is not only absence of disease
but also the ability to realise one’s
Work These Out
Ø What kind of energy do you use in your house? Find out from your parents
the amount they spend in a month on different types of energy.
Ø Who supplies power to you and where is it generated? Can you think of
other cheaper alternative sources which could help in lighting your house
or cooking food or for travelling to far away places?
Ø Look at the following table. Do you think energy consumption is an effective
indicator of development?
Country
Per Capita Income
Per Capita Consumption of
(in US dollars) in
Energy (KWh) in 2011
2012 (ppp)
India
3,840
Indonesia
4,810
Egypt
6,640
36,880
5,472
Japan
36,290
7,848
U.S.A.
50,610
13,248
Source: World Development Indicators, www.worldbank.org
Ø Find out how power is distributed in your area/state. Also find out the total
electricity demand of your city and how it is being met.
Ø You might notice people using variety of methods to save electricity and
other energy. For instance, while using the gas stove, some suggestions are
made by gas agencies for using the gas efficiently and economically. Discuss
them with your parents and the elderly, note down the points and discuss
them in class.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
potential. It is a yardstick of one’s well
being. Health is the holistic process
related to the overall growth and
development of the nation. Though the
twentieth century has seen a global
transformation in human health
unmatched in history, it may be
difficult to define the health status of a
nation in terms of a single set of
measures. Generally scholars assess
people’s health by taking into account
indicators like infant mortality and
maternal mortality rates, life expectancy
and nutrition levels, along with the
incidence of communicable and non-
communicable diseases.
Development of health infrastructure
ensures a country of healthy manpower
for production of goods and services. In
recent times, scholars argue that people
are entitled to health care facilities. It is
the responsibility of the government to
ensure the right to healthy living. Health
infrastructure includes hospitals,
doctors, nurses and other para-medical
professionals, beds, equipment required
in hospitals and a well-developed
pharmaceutical industry. It is also true
that mere presence of health
infrastructure is not sufficient to have
healthy people: the same should be
accessible to all the people. Since, the
initial stages of planned development,
policy-makers envisaged that no
individual should fail to secure medical
care, curative and preventive, because of
the inability to pay for it. But are we able
to achieve this vision? Before we discuss
various health infrastructure, let us
discuss the status of health in India.
State of Health Infrastructure: The
government has the constitutional
obligation to guide and regulate all
Fig. 8.9 Health infrastructure is still lacking in large parts of the country
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INFRASTRUCUTRE
health related issues such as
medical education, adulteration
of food, drugs and poisons,
medical profession, vital
statistics, mental deficiency and
lunacy. The Union Government
evolves broad policies and plans
through the Central Council of
Health and Family Welfare. It
collects information and renders
financial and technical assistance
to state governments, union
territories and other bodies for
implementation of important
health programmes in the
country.
Over the years, India has built up a
vast health infrastructure and manpower
at different levels. At the village level, a
variety of hospitals technically known as
Primary Health Centres (PHCs) (see also
Box 8.5) have been set up by the
government. India also has a large
number of hospitals run by voluntary
agencies and the private sector. These
hospitals are manned by professionals
and para-medical professionals trained in
medical, pharmacy and nursing colleges.
Since independence, there has been
a significant expansion in the physical
provision of health services. During
1951-2013, the number of government
hospitals and dispensaries increased
from 9,300 to 44,000 and hospital
beds from 1.2 to 6.3 lakh. Also nursing
personnel increased from 0.18 to 23.44
lakh and allopathic doctors from 0.62
to 9.2 lakh. Expansion of health
infrastructure has resulted in the
eradication of smallpox, guinea worms
and the near eradication of polio and
leprosy.
Private Sector Health Infrastructure:
In recent times, while the public health
sector has not been so successful in
delivering the goods about which we
will study more in the next section,
private sector has grown by leaps and
bounds. More than 70 per cent of the
hospitals in India are run by the private
sector. They control nearly two-fifth of
beds available in the hospitals. Nearly
60 per cent of dispensaries are run by
the same private sector.  They provide
healthcare for 80 per cent of out-
patients and 46 per cent of in-patients.
In recent times, private sector has
been playing a dominant role in medical
education and training, medical
technology and diagnostics, manufacture
and sale of pharmaceuticals, hospital
construction and the provision of
medical services. In 2001-02, there
were more than 13 lakh medical
enterprises employing 22 lakh people;
more than 80 per cent of them are single
person owned, and operated by one
TABLE 8.3
Public Health Infrastructure in India, 1951-2010
2013-14
Hospitals
2,694
6,805
15,888
19,817
1,17,000
5,04,538 7,19,861
6,28,708
Dispensaries
6,600
16,745
23,065
24,392
9,115
22,842
24,448
Subcentres
84,736 1,37,311
1,51,684
3,043
5,187
Sources: National Commission on Macroeconomics and
Health, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
Government of India, New Delhi,  2005 and National
Health Profile 2010, www.cbhidghs.nic.in
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Box 8.5: Health System in India
India’s health infrastructure and health care is made up of a three-tier system
— primary, secondary and tertiary. Primary health care includes education
concerning prevailing health problems and methods of identifying, preventing
and controlling them; promotion of food supply and proper nutrition and
adequate supply of water and basic sanitation; maternal and child health
care; immunisation against major infectious diseases and injuries; promotion
of mental health and provision of essential drugs.
Auxiliary Nursing Midwife
(ANM) is the first person who
provides primary healthcare in
rural areas. In order to provide
primary health care, hospitals
have been set up in villages and
small towns which are generally
manned by a single doctor, a
nurse and a limited quantity of
medicines. They are known as
Primary Health Centres (PHC),
Community Health Centres
(CHC) and sub-centres.  When
the condition of a patient is not
managed by PHCs, they are
referred to secondary or tertiary hospitals. Hospitals which have better facilities
for surgery, X-ray, Electro Cardio Gram (ECG) are called secondary health
care institutions. They function both as primary health
care provider and also provide better healthcare facilities.
They are mostly located in district headquarters and in
big towns. All those hospitals which have advanced level
equipment and medicines and undertake all the
complicated health problems, which could not be
managed by primary and secondary hospitals, come
under the tertiary sector.
The tertiary sector also includes many premier
institutes which not only impart quality medical
education and conduct research but also provide
specialised health care. Some of them are — All India
Institute of Medical Science, New Delhi; Post Graduate Institute, Chandigarh;
Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research,
Pondicherry; National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences, Bangalore
and All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, Kolkata.
Source: Report of the National Commission on Macroeconomics and Health, 2005.
Polio drops being
given to an infant
A health awareness meeting  in progress
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INFRASTRUCUTRE
Box 8.6: Medical Tourism — A great opportunity
You might have seen and heard on TV news or read in newspapers about
foreigners flocking to India for surgeries, liver transplants, dental and even
cosmetic care. Why? Because our health services combine latest medical
technologies with qualified professionals and is cheaper for foreigners as
compared to costs of similar health care services in their own  countries. In
the year 2004-05, as many as 1,50,000 foreigners visited India for medical
treatment. And this figure is likely to increase by 15 per cent each year. Experts
predict that by 2012 India could earn more than 100 billion rupees through
such ‘medical tourism’. Health infrastructure can be upgraded to attract
more foreigners to India.
person occasionally employing a hired
worker.  Scholars point out that the
private sector in India has grown
independently without any major
regulation; some private practitioners
are not even registered doctors and are
known as quacks.
Since the 1990s, owing to
liberalisation measures, many non-
resident Indians and industrial and
pharmaceutical companies have set up
state-of-the-art super-specialty hospitals
to attract India’s rich and medical tourists
(see Box 8.6). Do you think most people
Box 8.7: Community and Non-Profit Organisations in Healthcare
One of the important aspects of a good healthcare system is community
participation. It functions with the idea that the people can be trained and
involved in primary healthcare system. This method is already being used in
some parts of our country. SEWA in Ahmedabad and ACCORD in Nilgiris could
be the examples of some such NGOs working in India. Trade unions have built
alternative health care services for their members and also to give low-cost health
care to people from nearby villages. The most well-known and pioneering initiative
in this regard has been Shahid Hospital, built in 1983 and sustained by the
workers of CMSS (Chhattisgarh Mines Shramik Sangh) in Durg, Madhya Pradesh.
A few attempts have also been made by rural organisations to build alternative
healthcare initiatives. One example is in Thane, Maharashtra, where in the
context of a tribal people’s organisation, Kashtakari Sangathan, trains women
health workers at the village level to treat simple illnesses at minimal cost.
in India can get access to such super-
specialty hospitals? Why not? What
could be done so that every person in
India access a decent quality health
care?
Indian Systems of Medicine (ISM):
It includes six systems — Ayurveda,
Yoga, Unani, Siddha, Naturopathy and
Homeopathy (AYUSH). At present there
are 3167 ISM hospitals, 26,000
dispensaries and as many as 7 lakh
registered practitioners in India.
But little has been done to set up a
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
framework to standardise education or
to promote research. ISM has huge
potential and can solve a large part of
our health care problems because they
are effective, safe and inexpensive.
Indicators of Health and Health
Infrastructure—A Critical Appraisal:
As pointed out earlier, the health status
of a country can be assessed through
indicators such as infant mortality and
maternal mortality rates, life expectancy
and nutrition levels, along with the
incidence of communicable and non-
communicable diseases. Some of the
health indicators, and India’s position,
are given in Table 8.4. Scholars argue
that there is greater scope for the role
of government in the health sector. For
instance, the table shows expenditure
on health sector as 8.2 per cent of total
GDP. This is abysmally low as
compared to other countries, both
developed and developing.
One study points out that India
has about 17 per cent of the world’s
population but it bears a frightening 20
per cent of the global burden of diseases
(GBD). GBD is an indicator used by
experts to gauge the number of people
dying prematurely due to a particular
disease as well as the number of years
spent by them in a state of ‘disability’
owing to the disease.
In India, more than half of GBD is
accounted for by communicable diseases
such as diarrhoea, malaria and
tuberculosis. Every year around five lakh
children die of water-borne diseases. The
danger of AIDS is also looming large.
Malnutrition and inadequate supply of
vaccines lead to the death of 2.2 million
children every year.
At present, less than 20 per cent of
the population utilises public health
facilities. One study has pointed out
that only 38 per cent of the PHCs have
the required number of doctors and
TABLE 8.4
Indicators of Health in India in Comparison with other Countries, 2012
Indicators
India
China
Sri Lanka
Infant Mortality Rate/1,000 live births
Under-5 mortality /1,000 live-births
Birth by skilled attendants (% of total)
Fully immunised
Health expenditure as % of GDP
Government health spending to
total government spending (%)
Out of pocket expenditure as a % of
private expenditure on health
Sources: World Health Statistics 2013 and www.worldbank.org
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INFRASTRUCUTRE
only 30 per cent of the PHCs have
sufficient stock of medicines.
Urban-Rural and Poor-Rich Divide:
Though 70 per cent of India’s
population lives in rural areas, only
one-fifth of its hospitals (including
private hospitals) are located in rural
areas. Rural India has only about half
the number of dispensaries. Out of
about 6.3 lakh beds in government
hospitals, roughly 30 per cent are
available in rural areas. Thus, people
living in rural areas do not have
sufficient medical infrastructure. This
has led to differences in the health
status of people. As far as hospitals are
concerned, there are only 0.36
hospitals for every one lakh people in
rural areas while urban areas have 3.6
Work These Out
Ø Visit a primary health centre located in your area or neighbourhood. Also
collect the details of the number of private hospitals, medical laboratories,
scan centres, medical shops and other such facilities in your locality.
Ø Debate in the class on the topic — ‘Should we build an army of tais (mid-
wives) to take care of the poor, who cannot afford the services of the thou-
sands of medical graduates who pass out of our medical colleges every year?’
Ø A study estimates that medical costs alone push down 2.2 per cent of the
population below the poverty line each year. How?
Ø Visit a few hospitals in your locality. Find out the number of children
receiving immunisation from them. Ask the hospital staff about the number
of children immunised 5 years ago. Discuss the details in class.
Ø Two students — Leena Talukdar (16) and Sushanta Mahanta (16) of Assam —
have developed a herbal mosquito repellent ‘jag’ using a few locally available
medicinal plants — paddy straw, husk and dried garbage. Their experiment
has been successful (Shodh Yatra  (innovation), Yojana, September 2005). If
you know anyone whose innovative methods improve the health status of
people or if you know someone who has a knowledge of medicinal plants
and heals the ailments of people, speak to them and bring them to class or
collect information about why and how they treat ailments. Share this with
your class. You can also write to local newspapers or magazines.
Ø Do you think Indian cities could be provided with world-class health
infrastructure so that they will become attractive for medical tourists? Or
should the government concentrate on providing health infrastructure for
people in rural areas? What should be the priority of the government?
Debate.
Ø Find out NGOs working in your area in the field of healthcare. Collect
information about their activities and discuss in the classroom.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
hospitals for the same number of
people. The PHCs located in rural areas
do not offer even X-ray or blood testing
facilities which, for a city dweller,
constitutes basic healthcare. States like
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and
Uttar Pradesh are relatively lagging
behind in health care facilities. In the
rural areas, the percentage of people
who have no access to proper care has
increased over the last few years.
Villagers have no access to
any specialised medical care like
paediatrics, gynaecology, anaesthesia
and obstetrics. Even though 380
recognised medical colleges produce
about 44,000 medical graduates every
year, the shortage of doctors in rural
areas persists. While one-fifth of these
doctor graduates leave the country for
better monetary prospects, many
others opt for private hospitals which
are mostly located in urban areas.
The poorest 20 per cent of Indians
living in both urban and rural areas
spend 12 per cent of their income on
healthcare while the rich spend only 2
per cent. What happens when the poor
fall sick? Many have to sell their land
or even pledge their children to afford
treatment. Since government-run
hospitals do not provide sufficient
Fig. 8.10 Despite availing of various healthcare measures, maternal health is cause for concern
Work These Out
Ø The overall health status of the country has certainly improved through the
years. Life expectancy has gone up, infant mortality rate has come down.
Small pox has been eradicated and the goal to eradicate leprosy and polio
looks achievable. But these statistics seem good only when you look at them
in isolation. Compare these with the rest of the world. You can get these
details from World Health Report brought out by World Health Organisation
What do you find?
Ø Observe your class for a month and find out why some students remain
absent. If it is due to health problems then find out what kind of medical
problem they had. Collect the details of the problem, the nature of treatment
they took and the amount of money their parents spent on their treatment.
Discuss the information in class.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INFRASTRUCUTRE
facilities, the poor  are driven to private
hospitals which makes them indebted
forever. Or else they opt to die.
Women’s Health: Women constitute
about half the total population in
India. They suffer many disadvantages
as compared to men in the areas of
education, participation in economic
activities and health care. The
deterioration in the child sex ratio in
the country from 927 in 2001 to 914,
as revealed by the census of 2011,
points to the growing incidence of
female foeticide in the country. Close
to 3,00,000 girls under the age of 15
are not only married but have already
borne children at least once. More than
50 per cent of married women between
the age group of 15 and 49 have
anaemia and nutritional anaemia
caused by iron deficiency, which has
contributed to 19 per cent of maternal
deaths. Abortions are also a major
cause of maternal morbidity and
mortality in India.
Health is a vital public good and a
basic human right. All citizens can get
better health facilities if public health
services are decentralised.  Success in
the long-term battle against diseases
depends on education and efficient
health infrastructure. It is, therefore,
critical to create awareness on health
and hygiene and provide efficient
systems. The role of telecom and IT
sectors cannot be neglected in this
process. The effectiveness of healthcare
programmes also rests on primary
healthcare. The ultimate goal should
be to help people move towards a
better quality of life. There is a sharp
divide between the urban and rural
healthcare in India. If we continue to
ignore this deepening divide, we run
the risk of destabilising the socio-
economic fabric of our country. In
order to provide basic healthcare to all,
accessibility and affordability need to
be integrated in our basic health
infrastructure.
8.7 CONCLUSION
Infrastructure, both economic and
social, is essential for the development
of a country. As a support system, it
directly influences all economic
activities by increasing the productivity
of the factors of production and
improving the quality of life. In the last
six decades of independence, India has
made considerable progress in building
infrastructure, nevertheless, its
distribution is uneven. Many parts of
rural India are yet to get good roads,
telecommunication facilities, electricity,
schools and hospitals. As India moves
towards modernisation, the increase in
demand for quality infrastrucutre,
keeping in view their environmental
impact, will have to be addressed. The
reform policies by providing various
concessions and incentives,  aim at
attracting the private sector in general
and foreign investors in particular.
While assessing the two infrastructure
— energy and health — it is clear that
there is scope for equal access to
infrastructure for all.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Recap
Ø Infrastructure is a network of physical facilities and public services
and with this social infrastructure is equally important to support it.
It is an important base for economic development of the country.
Ø Infrastructure needs to be upgraded  from time to time to maintain
high economic growth rate. Better infrastructural facilities have
attracted more foreign investments and tourists to India recently.
Ø It is important to develop rural infrastructural facilities.
Ø Public and private partnership is required to bring in huge funds for
infrastructural development.
Ø Energy is very vital for rapid economic growth. There is a big gap between
consumer demand and supply of electricity in India.
ØNon-conventional sources of energy can be of great support to meet
shortage of energy.
Ø The power sector is facing a number of problems at generation,
transmission and distribution levels.
Ø Health is a yardstick of human well-being, physical as well as mental.
Ø There has been significant expansion in physical provision of health
services and improvements in health indicators since independence.
Ø Public health system and facilities are not sufficient for the bulk of the
population.
Ø There is a wide gap between rural-urban areas and between poor and
rich in utilising health care facilities.
Ø Women’s health across the country has become a matter of great
concern with reports of increasing cases of female foeticide and
mortality.
Ø Regulated private sector health services can improve the situation and,
at the same time, NGOs and community participation are very
important  in providing health care facilities and spreading health
awareness.
Ø Natural systems of medicine have to be explored and used to support
public health. There is a great scope of advancement of medical tourism
in India.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INFRASTRUCUTRE
Explain the term ‘infrastructure’.
Explain the two categories into which infrastructure is divided. How
are both interdependent?
How do infrastructure facilities boost production?
Infrastructure contributes to the economic development of a country.
Do you agree? Explain.
What is the state of rural infrastructure in India?
What is the significance of ‘energy’? Differentiate between commercial
and non-commercial sources of energy.
What are the three basic sources of generating power?
What do you mean by transmission and distribution losses? How can
they be reduced?
What are the various non-commercial sources of energy?
Justify that energy crisis can be overcome with the use of renewable
sources of energy.
How has the consumption pattern of energy changed over the years?
How are the rates of consumption of energy and economic growth
connected?
What problems are being faced by the power sector in India?
Discuss the reforms which have been initiated recently to meet the
energy crisis in India.
What are the main characteristics of health of the people of our
country?
What is a ‘global burden of disease’?
Discuss the main drawbacks of our health care system.
How has  women’s health become a matter of great concern?
Describe the meaning of public health. Discuss the major public health
measures undertaken by the state in recent years to control diseases.
Differentiate the six systems of Indian medicine.
How can we increase the effectiveness of health care programmes?
EXERCISES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Did you know that to bring a megawatt of electricity to your homes,
30-40 million rupees are spent? Building a new power plant would
cost millions. Isn’t this reason enough for you to begin conserving
energy in your house? Electricity saved is money saved; in fact, it is
worth much more than electricity generated. Every time your
electricity bill reaches home, you realise there is no need for so many
lights and fans around you. All you have to do is be slightly more
alert and careful. And the best thing is, you can start right away.
Involve the rest of your family in this effort and see the difference.
Note down the monthly consumption of electricity in your house. See
the difference in the bill amount after you apply energy saving tactics.
Find out what infrastructure projects are in progress in your area.
Then, find out
(i) The  budget allotted  for the project.
(ii) The sources of its financing.
(iii) How much employment will it generate?
(iv) What will be the overall benefits after its completion?
(v) How long will it take to be completed?
(vi) Company/companies engaged in the project.
Visit any nearby thermal power station/hydro-power station/nuclear
power plant. Observe how these plants work.
The class can be divided into groups to make a survey of energy use
in their neighbourhood. The aim of the survey should be to find out
which particular fuel is most used in the neighbourhood and the
quantity in which it is used. Graphs can be made by the different
groups and compared to find out possible reason for preference of
one particular fuel.
Study the life and work of Dr Homi Bhaba, the architect of modern
India’s energy establishments.
Hold a classroom discussion or debate on — ‘warring nations make
for an unhealthy world, so do warped attitudes and closed minds
make for mental ill-health’.
Books
JALAN, BIMAL (Ed.). The Indian Economy — Problems and Prospects. Penguin
Books,  Delhi, 1993.
SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES
REFERENCES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INFRASTRUCUTRE
KALAM, A.P.J. ABDUL WITH Y.S. RAJAN. 2002. India 2020: A Vision for the New
Millennium. Penguin Books, Delhi.
PARIKH, KIRIT S. AND RADHAKRISHNA (Eds.). 2005. India Development Report
2004-05. Oxford University Press, Delhi.
Government Reports
The World Health Report 2002. Reducing Risks, Promoting Healthy Life,
World Health Organisation, Geneva.
Report of the National Commission  on Macroeconomics and Health, Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, New Delhi, 2005.
Tenth Five Year Plan, Vol.2,  Planning  Commission, Government of In-
dia, New Delhi.
The India Infrastructure Report: Policy Imperatives for Growth and Welfare
1996. Expert Group on the Commercialisaton of Infrastructure Projects.
Vols.1, 2 and 3 Ministry of Finance. Government of  India, New Delhi.
World  Development  Report 2004.  The World Bank, Washington DC.
India Infrastructure Report 2004. Oxford University Press,  New Delhi.
Economic Survey  2004-2005. Ministry of  Finance, Government of  India.
World Development Indicators, 2013, The World Bank, Washington.
World Health Statistics 2014, World Health Organisation, Geneva.
National Health Profile (NHP) of India for various years, Central Bureau
of Health Intelligence, Goverment of India, New Delhi.
Websites
On energy related issues:
www.pcra.org
www.bee-india.com
www.edugreen.teri.res.in
http://powermin.nic.in
On health related issues:
http://www.aiims.edu
http://www.whoindia.org
http://mohfw.nic.in
www.apollohospitalsgroup.com
www.worldbank.org
www.cbhidghs.nic.in
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
After studying this chapter, the learners will
understand the concept of environment
analyse the causes and effects of ‘environmental degradation’ and ‘resource
depletion’
understand the nature of environmental challenges facing India
relate environmental issues to the larger context of sustainable
development.
ENVIRONMENT AND
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
9.1 INTRODUCTION
In the earlier chapters we have
discussed the main economic issues
faced by the Indian economy. The
economic development that we have
achieved so far has come at a very heavy
price — at the cost of environmental
quality. As we step into an era of
globalisation that promises higher
economic growth, we have to bear in
mind the adverse consequences of the
past development path on our
environment and consciously choose a
path of sustainable development. To
understand the unsustainable path of
development that we have taken and
the challenges of sustainable
development, we have to first
understand the significance and
contribution of environment to
economic development. With this in
mind, this chapter is divided into three
sections. The first part deals with the
functions and role of environment. The
second section discusses the state of
India’s environment and the third
section deals with steps and strategies
to achieve sustainable development.
9.2  ENVIRONMENT — DEFINITION AND
FUNCTIONS
Environment is defined as the total
planetary inheritance and the totality
of all resources. It includes all the biotic
and abiotic factors that influence each
other. While all living elements —the
birds, animals and plants, forests,
fisheries etc.—are biotic elements,
abiotic elements include air, water, land
etc. Rocks and sunlight are all
examples of abiotic elements of the
environment. A study of the environment
then calls for a study of the inter-
relationship between these biotic and
abiotic components of the environment.
Functions of the Environment: The
environment performs four vital
functions (i) it supplies resources:
resources here include both renewable
and non-renewable resources.
Renewable resources are those which
can be used without the possibility of
the resource becoming depleted or
exhausted. That is, a continuous
supply of the resource remains
available. Examples of renewable
resources are the trees in the forests and
the fishes in the ocean. Non-renewable
resources, on the other hand, are those
which get exhausted with extraction
and use,  for example, fossil fuel (ii) it
assimilates waste (iii) it sustains life by
providing genetic and bio diversity and
(iv) it also provides aesthetic services
like scenery etc.
The environment is able to perform
these functions without any interruption
as long as the demand on these
The environment, left to itself, can continue to support life for millions of
years. The single most unstable and potentially disruptive element in the
scheme is the human species. Human beings, with modern technology, have
the capacity to bring about, intentionally or unintentionally, far-reaching
and irreversible changes in the enviornment.
Anonymous
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Work These Out
¾ Why has water become an economic commodity? Discuss.
¾ Fill in the following table with some common types of diseases and illnesses
that are caused due to air, water and noise pollution.
functions is within its carrying
capacity. This implies that the resource
extraction is not above the rate of
regeneration of the resource and the
wastes generated are within the
assimilating
capacity
environment. When this is not so, the
environment fails to perform its third
and vital function of life sustenance and
results
environmental crisis. This
is the situation today
all over the world. The
rising population of the
developing countries and
the affluent consumption
and production standards
of the developed world have
placed a huge stress on the
environment in terms of its
first two functions. Many
resources have become
extinct and the wastes
generated are beyond the
absorptive capacity of the
environment. Absorptive
capacity means the ability
of the environment to
absorb degradation. The result — we
are today at the threshold of
environmental crisis. The past
development has polluted and dried up
rivers and other aquifers making water
an economic good. Besides, the
intensive and extensive extraction of
both renewable and non-renewable
resources has exhausted some of these
Air Pollution
Water Pollution
Noise Pollution
Asthma
Cholera
Fig. 9.1 Water bodies: small, snow-fed Himalayan streams are
the few fresh-water sources that remain unpolluted.
ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
vital resources and we are compelled
to spend huge amounts on technology
and research to explore new resources.
Added to these are the health costs of
degraded environmental quality —
decline in air and water quality (seventy
per cent of water in India is polluted)
have resulted in increased incidence of
respiratory  and water-borne diseases.
Hence the expenditure on health is also
rising. To make matters worse, global
environmental issues such as global
warming and ozone depletion also
contribute to increased financial
commitments for the government.
Box 9.1: Global Warming
Global warming is a gradual increase in the average temperature of the earth’s
lower atmosphere as a result of the increase in greenhouse gases since the
Industrial Revolution. Much of the recent observed and projected global
warming is human-induced. It is caused by man-made increases in carbon
dioxide and other greenhouse gases through the burning of fossil fuels and
deforestation. Adding carbon dioxide, methane and such other gases (that
have the potential to absorb heat) to the atmosphere with no other changes
will make our planet’s surface warmer. The atmospheric concentrations of
carbon dioxide and CH4 have increased by 31 per cent and 149 per cent
respectively above pre-industrial levels since 1750. During the past century,
the atmospheric temperature has risen by 1.1°F (0.6°C) and sea level has
risen several inches. Some of the longer-term results of global warming are
melting of polar ice with a resulting rise in sea level and coastal flooding;
disruption of drinking water supplies dependent on snow melts; extinction of
species as ecological niches disappear; more frequent tropical storms; and an
increased incidence of tropical diseases.
Among factors that may be contributing to global warming are the burning
of coal and petroleum products (sources of carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous
oxide, ozone); deforestation, which increases the amount of carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere; methane gas released in animal waste; and increased cattle
production, which contributes to deforestation, methane production, and use
of fossil fuels. A UN Conference on Climate Change, held in Kyoto, Japan, in
1997, resulted in an international agreement to fight global warming which
called for reductions in emissions of greenhouse gases by industrialised nations.
Source: www.wikipedia.org
Thus, it is clear that the opportunity
costs of negative environmental
impacts are high.
The biggest question that arises is:
are environmental problems new to this
century? If so, why? The answer to this
question requires some elaboration. In
the early days when civilisation just
began, or before this phenomenal
increase in population, and before
countries took to industrialisation, the
demand for environmental resources
and services was much less than their
supply. This meant that pollution was
within the absorptive capacity of the
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Box 9.2: Ozone Depletion
Ozone depletion refers to the phenomenon of reductions in the amount of ozone
in the stratosphere. The problem of ozone depletion is caused by high levels
of chlorine and bromine compounds in the stratosphere. The origins of these
compounds are chlorofluorocarbons (CFC), used as cooling substances in air-
conditioners and refrigerators, or as aerosol propellants, and
bromofluorocarbons (halons), used in fire extinguishers. As a result of depletion
of the ozone layer, more ultraviolet (UV) radiation comes to Earth and causes
damage to living organisms. UV radiation seems responsible for skin cancer
in humans; it also lowers production of phytoplankton and thus affects other
aquatic organisms. It can also influence the growth of terrestrial plants. A
reduction of approximately 5 per cent in the ozone layer was detected from
1979 to 1990. Since the ozone layer prevents most harmful wavelengths of
ultraviolet light from passing through the Earth’s atmosphere, observed and
projected decreases in ozone have generated worldwide concern. This led to
the adoption of the Montreal Protocol banning the use of chlorofluorocarbon
(CFC) compounds, as well as other ozone depleting chemicals such as carbon
tetrachloride, trichloroethane (also known as methyl chloroform), and bromine
compounds known as halons.
Source: www.ceu.hu
environment and the rate of resource
extraction was less than the rate of
regeneration of these resources. Hence
environmental problems did not arise.
But with population explosion and with
the advent of industrial revolution
to meet the growing needs of the
expanding
population,
things
changed. The result was that the
demand for resources for both
production and consumption
went beyond the rate of
regeneration of the resources; the
pressure on the absorptive
capacity of the environment
increased tremendously — this
trend continues even today. Thus
what has happened is a reversal
of supply-demand relationship
for environmental quality — we
are now faced with increased
demand for environmental
resources and services but their
supply is limited due to overuse
Fig. 9.2 Damodar Valley is one of  India’s most
industrialised regions. Pollutants from the  heavy
industries along the banks of the Damodar river
are converting it into an ecological disaster
ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
and misuse. Hence
the environmental
issues of waste
generation
pollution
become
critical
today.
9.3 STATE OF INDIA’S
ENVIRONMENT
India has abundant
natural resources in
terms of rich quality
of soil, hundreds of
rivers and tributaries,
lush green forests,
plenty of mineral
deposits beneath the land surface, vast
stretch of the Indian Ocean, ranges of
mountains, etc. The black soil of the
Deccan Plateau is particularly suitable
for cultivation of cotton, leading to
concentration of textile industries in this
region. The Indo-Gangetic plains —
spread from the Arabian Sea to the Bay
of Bengal — are one of the most fertile,
intensively cultivated and densely
populated regions in the world. India’s
forests, though unevenly distributed,
provide green cover for a majority of its
population and natural cover for its
wildlife. Large deposits of iron-ore, coal
and natural gas are found in the
country. India alone accounts for
nearly 20 per cent of the world’s total
iron-ore reserves. Bauxite, copper,
chromate, diamonds, gold, lead, lignite,
manganese, zinc, uranium, etc. are also
available in different parts of the
country. However, the developmental
activities in India have resulted in
pressure on its finite natural
resources, besides creating impacts on
human health and well-being. The
threat to India’s environment poses a
dichotomy —threat of poverty-induced
environmental degradation and, at the
same time, threat of pollution from
affluence and a rapidly growing
industrial sector. Air pollution,
water contamination, soil erosion,
deforestation and wildlife extinction
are some of the most pressing
environmental concerns of India. The
priority issues identified are (i) land
degradation (ii) biodiversity loss (iii) air
pollution with special reference to
vehicular pollution in urban cities (iv)
management of fresh water and (v) solid
waste management. Land in India
suffers from varying degrees and types
of degradation stemming mainly from
unstable use and inappropriate
management practices.
Fig. 9.3 Deforestation leads to land degradation, biodiversity  loss and
air pollution
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Box. 9.3: Chipko or Appiko — What’s in a Name?
You may be aware of the Chipko Movement, which aimed at protecting forests
in the Himalayas. In Karnataka, a similar movement took a different name,
‘Appiko’, which means to hug. On 8 September 1983, when the felling of trees
was started in Salkani forest in Sirsi
district, 160 men, women and children
hugged the trees and forced the
woodcutters to leave. They kept vigil in
the forest over the next six weeks. Only
after the forest officials assured the
volunteers that the trees will be cut
scientifically and in accordance with the
working plan of the district, did they
leave the trees.
commercial
felling
contractors damaged a large number of
natural forests, the idea of hugging the
trees gave the people hope and
confidence that they can protect the
forests. On that particular incident, with
the felling discontinued, the people saved
12,000 trees. Within months, this
movement spread to many adjoining
districts.
Indiscriminate felling of trees for
fuelwood and for industrial use has led to many environmental problems.
Twelve years after setting up of a paper mill in Uttar Kanara area, bamboo
has been wiped out from that area. “Broad-leaved trees which protected the
soil from the direct onslaught of rain have been removed, the soil washed
away, and bare laterite soil left behind. Now nothing grows but a weed”, says
a farmer. Farmers also complain that rivers and rivulets dry up quicker, and
that rainfall is becoming erratic. Diseases and insects earlier unknown are
now attacking the crops.
Appiko volunteers want the contractors and forest officials to follow certain
rules and restrictions. For instance, local people should be consulted when
trees are marked for felling and trees within 100 metres of a water source
and on a slope of 30 degrees or above should not be felled.
Do you know that the government allocates forestlands to industries to
use forest materials as industrial raw material? Even if a paper mill employs
10,000 workers and a plywood factory employs 800 people but if they deprive
the daily needs of a million people, is it acceptable? What do you think?
Source: Excerpts from  ‘State of India’s Environment 2: The Second Citizens’ Report 1984-85’,
Centre for Science and Environment, 1996, New Delhi.
ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Work These Out
¾ In order to enable the students to appreciate the contribution of environment
to economic development, the following game can be introduced. One student
may name a product used by any enterprise and the other student may
trace out its roots to nature and earth.
trucks
steel and rubber
steel
mineral
earth
rubber
trees
forests
earth
books
paper
trees
forest
earth
cloth
cotton
plant
nature
petrol
earth
machinery
mineral
earth
¾ A truck driver had to pay Rs 1,000 as challan as his truck was emitting
black soot. Why do you think he was penalised? Was it justified? Discuss.
Some of the factors responsible
for land degradation are (i) loss
of vegetation occuring due to
deforestation (ii) unsustainable fuel
wood and fodder extraction (iii) shifting
cultivation (iv) encroachment into forest
lands (v) forest fires and over grazing
(vi) non-adoption of adequate soil
conservation measures (vii) improper
crop rotation (viii) indiscriminate use of
agro-chemicals such as fertilisers and
pesticides (ix) improper planning and
management of irrigation systems
(x) extraction of ground water in
the competing uses of land for
forestry, agriculture, pastures, human
settlements and industries exert an
enormous pressure on the country’s
finite land resources.
The per capita forest land in the
country is only 0.08 hectare against
the requirement of 0.47 hectare to meet
basic needs, resulting in an excess
felling of about 15 million cubic metre
forests over the permissible limit.
Estimates of soil erosion show that
soil is being eroded at a rate of 5.3
billion tonnes a year for the entire
excess of the recharge capacity (xi)
open access resource and (xii) poverty
of the agriculture-dependent people.
India supports approximately 17
per cent of the world’s human and 20
per cent of livestock population on a
mere 2.5 per cent of the world’s
geographical area. The high density
of population and livestock and
country as a result of which the
country loses 0.8 million tonnes of
nitrogen, 1.8 million tonnes of
phosphorus and 26.3 million tonnes
of potassium every year. According to
the Government of India, the quantity
of nutrients lost due to erosion each
year ranges from 5.8 to 8.4 million
tonnes.
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Box 9.4 : Pollution Control Boards
In order to address two major environmental concerns in India, viz. water and
air pollution, the government set up the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)
in 1974. This was followed by states establishing their own state level boards
to address all the environmental concerns. They investigate, collect and
disseminate information relating to water, air and land pollution, lay down
standards for sewage/trade effluent and emissions. These boards provide
technical assistance to governments in promoting cleanliness of streams and
wells by prevention, control and abatement of water pollution, and improve
the quality of air and to prevent, control or abate air pollution in the country.
These boards also carry out and sponsor investigation and research
relating to problems of water and air pollution and for their prevention, control
or abatement. They also organise, through mass media, a comprehensive mass
awareness programme for the same. The PCBs prepare manuals, codes and
guidelines relating to treatment and disposal of sewage and trade effluents.
They assess the air quality through regulation of industries. In fact, state
boards, through their district level officials, periodically inspect every industry
under their jurisdiction to assess the adequacy of treatment measures provided
to treat the effluent and gaseous emissions. It also provides background air
quality data needed for industrial siting and town planning.
The pollution control boards collect, collate and disseminate technical and
statistical data relating to water pollution. They monitor the quality of water
in 125 rivers (including the tributaries), wells, lakes, creeks, ponds, tanks,
drains and canals.
Visit a nearby factory/irrigation department and collect the details of
measures that they adopt to control water and air pollution.
You might be seeing advertisements in newspapers, radio and television
or billboards in your locality on awareness programmes relating to water
and air pollution. Collect a few news-clippings, pamphlets and other
information and discuss them in the classroom.
In India, air pollution is widespread
in urban areas where vehicles are the
major contributors and in a few other
areas which have a high concentration
of industries and thermal power plants.
Vehicular emissions are of particular
concern since these are ground level
sources and, thus, have the maximum
impact on the general population. The
number of motor vehicles has increased
from about 3 lakh in 1951 to 67 crores
in 2003. In 2003, personal transport
vehicles (two-wheeled vehicles and cars
only) constituted about 80 per cent of
the total number of registered vehicles
thus contributing significantly to total
air pollution load.
India is one of the ten most
industrialised nations of the world.
But this status has brought with
it unwanted and unanticipated
consequences such as unplanned
urbanisation, pollution and the risk of
accidents. The CPCB (Central Pollution
ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Control Board) has identified seventeen
categories of industries (large
and medium scale) as significantly
polluting.
allow all future generations to have a
potential average quality of life that is
at least as high as that which is being
enjoyed by the current generation. The
concept of sustainable development
was emphasised by the United Nations
Conference on Environment and
Development (UNCED), which defined
it as: ‘Development that meets the need
of the present generation without
compromising the ability of the future
generation to meet their own needs’.
Read the definition again. You will
notice that the term ‘need’ and the
phrase ‘future generations’ in the
definition are the catch phrases. The
use of the concept ‘needs’ in the
definition is linked to distribution of
resources. The seminal report — Our
Common Future—that gave the above
definition explained sustainable
development as  ‘meeting the basic
needs of all and extending to all the
opportunity to satisfy their aspirations
for a better life’. Meeting the needs of
all requires redistributing resources
and is hence a moral issue.
Edward Barbier defined sustainable
development as one which is directly
concerned with increasing the material
standard of living of the poor at
the grass root level — this can be
quantitatively measured in terms of
increased income, real income,
educational services, health care,
sanitation, water supply etc. In more
specific terms, sustainable development
aims at decreasing the absolute poverty
of the poor by providing lasting and
secure livelihoods that minimise
resource depletion, environmental
The above points highlight the
challenges to India’s environment. The
various measures adopted by the
Ministry of Environment and the
central and state pollution control
boards may not yield reward unless
we consciously adopt a path of
sustainable development. The concern
for future generations alone can make
development last forever. Development
to enhance our current living styles,
without concern for posterity, will
deplete resources and degrade
environment at a pace that is bound to
result in both environmental and
economic crisis.
9.4. SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Environment and economy are
interdependent and need each other.
Hence, development that ignores its
repercussions on the environment will
destroy the environment that sustains
life forms. What is needed is sustainable
development: development that will
Work This Out
¾ You can see a column on the
measure of air  pollution in
any national daily. Cut out
the news item a week before
Diwali, on the day of Diwali
and two days after Diwali.
Do you observe a significant
difference in the value?
Discuss in your class.
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
degradation, cultural disruption and
social instability. Sustainable
development is, in this sense, a
development that meets the basic needs
of all, particularly the poor majority, for
employment, food, energy, water,
housing, and ensures growth of
agriculture, manufacturing, power and
services to meet these needs.
The Brundtland Commission
emphasises on protecting the future
generation. This is in line with the
argument of the environmentalists who
emphasise that we have a moral
obligation to hand over the planet earth
in good order to the future generation;
that is, the present generation should
bequeath a better environment to the
future generation. At least we should
leave to the next generation a stock of
‘quality of life’ assets no less than what
we have inherited.
The present generation can
promote development that enhances
the natural and built environment in
ways that are compatible with
(i) conservation of natural assets
(ii) preservation of the regenerative
capacity of the world’s  natural
ecological system (iii) avoiding the
imposition of added costs or risks on
future generations.
According to Herman Daly, a leading
environmental economist, to achieve
sustainable development,   the following
needs to be done  (i) limiting the human
population to a level within the carrying
capacity of the environment. The carrying
capacity of the environment is like a
‘plimsoll line’ of the ship which is its load
limit mark. In the absence of the plimsoll
line for the economy, human scale grows
beyond the carrying capacity of the earth
and deviates from sustainable
development (ii) technological progress
should be input efficient and not input
consuming (iii) renewable resources
should be extracted on a sustainable
basis, that is, rate of extraction should
not exceed rate of regeneration (iv) for
non-renewable resources rate of depletion
should not exceed the rate of creation
renewable
substitutes
(v) inefficiencies arising from pollution
should be corrected.
9.5 STRATEGIES FOR SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT
Use of Non-conventional Sources of
Energy: India, as you know, is hugely
dependent on thermal and hydro
power plants to meet its power
needs. Both of these have adverse
environmental impacts. Thermal power
plants emit large quantities of carbon
dioxide which is a green house gas. It
also produces fly ash which,  if not used
properly, can cause pollution of water
bodies, land and other components of
the environment. Hydroelectric projects
inundate forests and interfere with the
natural flow of water in catchment
areas and the river basins. Wind power
and solar rays are good examples of
conventional but cleaner and greener
energy sources but are not yet been
explored on a large scale due to lack of
technological devices.
LPG, Gobar Gas in Rural Areas:
Households in rural areas generally use
wood, dung cake or other biomass as
ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
fuel. This practice has several adverse
implications like deforestation,
reduction in green cover, wastage of
cattle dung and air pollution. To rectify
the situation, subsidised LPG is being
provided. In addition, gobar gas plants
are being provided through easy loans
and subsidy. As far as liquefied
petroleum gas (LPG) is concerned, it is
a clean fuel — it reduces household
pollution to a large extent. Also, energy
wastage is minimised. For the  gobar
gas plant to function, cattle dung is fed
to the plant and gas is produced which
is used as fuel while the slurry which
is left over is a very good organic
fertiliser and soil conditioner.
CNG in Urban Areas: In Delhi, the use of
Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) as fuel in
public transport system has significantly
lowered air pollution and the air has
become cleaner in the last few years.
Wind Power: In areas where speed of
wind is usually high, wind mills can
provide electricity without any adverse
impact on the environment. Wind
turbines move with the wind and
electricity is generated. No doubt, the
initial cost is high. But the benefits are
such that the high cost gets easily
absorbed.
Work This Out
¾ In Delhi buses and other
public transport vehicles
use CNG as fuel instead of
petrol or diesel; some
vehicles use convertible
engines; solar energy is
being used to light up the
streets. What do you think
about
these
changes?
Organise a debate in class
on the need for sustainable
development in India.
Fig.9.4 Gobar Gas Plant uses cattle dung to produce energy
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Solar Power through Photovoltaic
Cells: India is naturally endowed with
a large quantity of solar energy in the
form of sunlight. We use it in different
ways. For example, we dry our clothes,
grains, other agricultural products as
well as various items made for daily use.
We also use sunlight to warm ourselves
in winter. Plants use solar energy to
perform photosynthesis. Now, with the
help of photovoltaic cells,  solar energy
can be converted into electricity. These
cells use special kind of materials to
capture solar energy and then convert
the energy into electricity. This
technology is extremely useful for remote
areas and for places where supply of
power through grid or power lines is
either not possible or proves very costly.
This technique is also totally free from
pollution.
Mini-hydel Plants: In mountainous
regions, streams can be found almost
everywhere. A large percentage of such
streams are perennial. Mini-hydel
plants use the energy of such streams
to move small turbines. The turbines
generate electricity which can be used
locally. Such power plants are more or
less environment-friendly as they do not
change the land use pattern in areas
where they are located; they generate
enough power to meet local demands.
This means that they can also do away
with the need for large scale
transmission towers and cables and
avoid transmission loss.
Traditional
Knowledge
Practices: Traditionally, Indian people
have been close to their environment.
They have been more a component of
the environment and not its controller.
If we look back at our agriculture
system, healthcare system, housing,
transport etc., we find that all practices
have been environment friendly. Only
recently have we drifted away from the
traditional systems and caused large
scale damage to the environment and
also our  rural heritage. Now, it is time
to go back. One apt example is in
healthcare. India is very much
privileged to have  about 15,000 species
of plants which have medicinal
properties. About 8,000 of these are in
regular use in various systems of
treatment including the folk tradition.
With the sudden onslaught of the
western system of treatment, we were
ignoring our traditional systems such
as Ayurveda, Unani, Tibetan and folk
systems. These healthcare systems are
in great demand again for treating
chronic health problems. Now a days
every cosmetic produce — hair oil,
toothpaste, body lotion, face cream and
what not — is herbal in composition.
Not only are these products environment
friendly, they are relatively free from side
effects and do not involve large-scale
industrial and chemical processing.
Biocomposting: In our quest to
increase agricultural production
during the last five decades or so, we
almost totally neglected the use of
compost and completely switched over
to chemical fertilisers. The result is that
large tracts of productive land have
been adversely affected, water bodies
including ground water system have
suffered due to chemical contamination
ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
and demand for irrigation has been
going up year after year.
Farmers, in large numbers all over
the country, have again started using
compost made from organic wastes of
different types. In certain parts of the
country, cattle are maintained only
because they produce dung which is
an important fertiliser and soil
conditioner.
Earthworms can convert organic
matter into compost faster than the
normal composting process. This
process is now being widely used.
Indirectly, the civic authorities are
benefited too as they have to dispose
reduced quantity of waste.
Biopest Control:  With the advent of
green revolution, the entire country
entered into a frenzy to use more and
more chemical pesticides for higher
yield. Soon, the adverse impacts began
show;
products
contaminated, soil, water bodies and
even ground water were polluted with
pesticides. Even milk, meat and fishes
were found to be contaminated.
To meet this challenge, efforts are
on to bring in better methods of pest
control. One such step is the use of
pesticides based on plant products.
Neem trees are proving to be quite
useful. Several types of pest controlling
chemicals have been isolated from neem
and these are being used. Mixed
cropping and growing different crops
in consecutive years on the same land
have also helped farmers.
In addition, awareness is spreading
about various animals and birds which
help in controlling pests. For example,
snakes are one of the prime group of
animals which prey upon rats, mice and
various other pests. Similarly, large
varieties of birds, for example, owls and
peacocks, prey upon vermin and pests.
If these are allowed to dwell around the
agricultural areas, they can clear large
varieties of pests including insects.
Lizards are also important in this
regard. We need to know their value and
save them.
Sustainable development has
become a catch phrase today. It is
‘indeed’ a paradigm shift in
development thinking. Though it has
been interpreted in a number of ways,
adherence to this path ensures lasting
development and non-declining welfare
for all.
9.6 CONCLUSION
Economic development, which aimed at
increasing the production of goods and
services to meet the needs of a rising
population, puts greater pressure on
the environment. In the initial stages
of development, the demand for
environmental resources was less than
that of supply. Now the world is
faced with increased demand for
environmental resources but their
supply is limited due to overuse and
misuse. Sustainable development aims
at promoting the kind of development
that minimises environmental problems
and meets the needs of the present
generation without compromising the
ability of the future generation to meet
their own needs.
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
What is meant by environment?
What happens when the rate of resource extraction exceeds that of
their regeneration?
Classify the following into renewable and non-renewable resources
(i) trees (ii) fish (iii) petroleum (iv) coal (v) iron-ore (vi) water.
Two major environmental issues facing the world today are ____________
and _____________.
How do the following factors contribute to the environmental crisis
in India? What problem do they pose for the government?
Rising population
Air pollution
EXERCISES
Recap
¾ Environment performs four functions: supplies resources, assimilates
wastes, sustains life by providing genetic and bio diversity and provides
aesthetic services.
¾ Population explosion, affluent consumption and production have placed
a huge stress on the environment.
¾ Developmental activities in India have put immense pressure on its finite
natural resources, besides creating impact on human health and
well-being.
¾ The threat to India’s environment is of two dimensions —threat of poverty
induced environmental degradation and the threat of pollution from
affluence and a rapidly growing industrial sector.
¾ Though the government, through various measures, attempts to safeguard
the environment, it is also necessary to adopt a path of sustainable
development.
¾ Sustainable development is development that meets the need of the present
generation without compromising the ability of the future generation to
meet their own needs.
¾ Promotion of natural resources, conservation, preserving regenerative
capacity of ecological system and avoiding the imposition of environmental
risks on future generations would lead to sustainable development.
ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
(iii)
Water contamination
Affluent consumption standards
Illiteracy
Industrialisation
(vii)
Urbanisation
(viii)
Reduction of forest coverage
Poaching
Global warming.
What are the functions of the environment?
Identify six factors contributing to land degradation in India.
Explain how the opportunity costs of negative environmental impact
are high.
Outline the steps involved in attaining sustainable development in India.
India has abundant natural resources —substantiate the statement.
Is environmental crisis a recent phenomenon? If so, why?
Give two instances of
(a) Overuse of environmental resources
(b) Misuse of environmental resources.
State any four pressing environmental concerns of India. Correction
for environmental damages involves opportunity costs — explain.
Explain the supply-demand reversal of environmental resources.
Account for the current environmental crisis.
Highlight any two serious adverse environmental consequences of
development in India. India’s environmental problems pose a dichotomy
— they are poverty induced and, at the same time, due to affluence in
living standards — is this true?
What is sustainable development?
Keeping in view  your locality, describe any four strategies of sustainable
development.
Explain the relevance of intergenerational equity in the definition of
sustainable development.
Suppose 70 lakh cars are added every year to the roads of metropolitans.
Which type of resources do you think are undergoing depletion? Discuss.
Make a list of items that can be recycled.
SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Prepare a chart on the causes and remedies of soil erosion in India.
How does population explosion contribute to the environmental crisis?
Debate in the classroom.
The nation has to pay heavily for correcting environmental damages —
discuss.
A paper factory is to be set up in your village. Arrange a role play
consisting of an activist, an industrialist and a group of villagers.
BOOKS
AGARWAL, ANIL and SUNITA NARAIN. 1996. Global Warming in an Unequal World.
Centre for Science and Environment, Reprint Edition, New Delhi.
BHARUCHA, E. 2005. Textbook of Environmental Studies for Undergraduate
Courses, Universities Press (India) Pvt Ltd.
CENTRE FOR SCIENCE AND ENVIRONMENT. 1996. State of India’s Environment
1: The First Citizens’ Report 1982. Reprint Edition, New Delhi.
CENTRE FOR SCIENCE AND ENVIRONMENT. 1996. State of India’s Environment
2: The Second Citizens’ Report 1985, Reprint Edition, New Delhi.
KARPAGAM, M. 2001.Environmental Economics: A Textbook. Sterling Publishers,
New Delhi.
RAJAGOPALAN, R. 2005. Environmental Studies:  From Crisis to Cure. Oxford
University Press, New Delhi.
SCHUMACHER, E.F. Small is Beautiful. Abacus Publishers, New York.
Journals
Scientific American, India, Special Issue, September 2005
Down to Earth, Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi.
Websites
http://envfor.nic.in
http://cpcb.nic.in
http://www.cseindia.org
REFERENCES
DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA: A COMPARISON
WITH NEIGHBOURS
2015-16(20/01/2015)
In today’s globalised world, where geographical
boundaries are slowly becoming meaningless, it
is important for neighbouring countries in the
developing world to understand the development
strategies being pursued by their neighbours. This
is more so because they share the relatively limited
economic space in world markets. In this unit, we
will compare India’s developmental experiences
with two of its important and strategic neighbours
— Pakistan and China.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
After studying this chapter, the learners will
figure out comparative trends in various economic and human
development indicators of India and its neighbours, China and Pakistan
assess the strategies that these countries have adopted to reach their
present state of development.
COMPARATIVE
DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF  INDIA
AND ITS NEIGHBOURS
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
10.1 INTRODUCTION
In the preceding units we studied the
developmental experience of India in
detail. We also studied the kind of
policies India adopted, which had
varying impacts in different sectors.
Over the last two decades or so, the
economic transformation that is taking
place in different countries across the
world, partly because of the process
of globalisation, has both short as
well as long-term implications for
each country, including India. Nations
have been primarily trying to adopt
various means which will strengthen
their own domestic economies. To this
effect, they are forming regional and
global economic groupings such as
the SAARC, European Union,
ASEAN, G-8, G-20, BRICS etc. In
addition, there is also an increasing
eagerness on the parts of various
nations to try and understand the
developmental processes pursued by
their neighbouring nations as it
allows them to better comprehend
their own strengths and weaknesses
vis-à-vis their neighbours. In the
unfolding process of globalisation,
this is particularly considered
essential by developing countries as
they face competition not only from
developed nations but also amongst
themselves in the relatively limited
economic space enjoyed by the
developing world. Besides, an
understanding of the other economies
in our neighbourhood is also required
as all major common economic
activities in the region impinge on
overall human development in a
shared environment.
In this chapter we will compare the
developmental strategies pursued by
India and the largest two of its
neighbouring economies—Pakistan
and China. It has to be remembered
that despite being endowed with vast
natural resources, there is little
similarity between the political power
setup of India - the largest democracy
of the world which is wedded to a
secular and deeply liberal Constitution
for over half a century, and the
militarist political power structure of
Pakistan or the command economy
of China that has only recently
started moving towards a democratic
system and more liberal economic
restructuring respectively.
10.2 DEVELOPMENTAL PATH—A
SNAPSHOT VIEW
Do you know that India, Pakistan and
China have many similarities in their
developmental strategies? All the three
nations have started towards their
developmental path at the same time.
While India and Pakistan became
independent nations in 1947, People’s
Republic of China was established in
1949. In a speech at that time,
Geography has made us neighbours. History has made us friends. Economics
has made us partners, and necessity has made us allies. Those whom God has
so joined together, let no man put asunder.
John F. Kennedy
2015-16(20/01/2015)
COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS
Jawaharlal Nehru had said, “these new
and revolutionary changes in China
and India, even though they differ in
content, symbolise the new spirit of
Asia and new vitality which is finding
expression in the countries in Asia.”
All the three countries had started
planning their development strategies
in similar ways. While India
announced its first Five Year Plan for
1951-56, Pakistan announced its first
five year plan, now called the Medium
Term Development Plan, in 1956.
China announced its First Five Year
Plan in 1953. In 2013, Pakistan began
working on 11th Five Year Development
Plan (2013-18) whereas China’s twelfth
five year period is 2011-15. The
current planning in India is based on
Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-17). India
and Pakistan adopted similar
strategies such as creating a large
public sector and raising public
expenditure on social development.
Till the 1980s, all the three countries
had similar growth rates and per capita
incomes. Where do they stand today
in comparison to one another? Before
we answer this question let us trace
the historical path of developmental
policies in China and Pakistan. After
studying the last three units, we
already know what policies India has
been adopting since its independence.
China: After the establishment of
People’s Republic of China under one-
party rule, all the critical sectors of the
economy, enterprises and lands owned
and operated by individuals were
brought under government control.
The Great Leap Forward (GLF)
campaign initiated in 1958 aimed at
industrialising the country on a
massive scale. People were encouraged
to set up industries in their backyards.
In rural areas, communes were
started. Under the Commune system,
people collectively cultivated lands. In
1958, there were 26,000 communes
covering almost all the farm
population.
GLF campaign met with many
problems. A severe drought caused
havoc in China killing about 30 million
people. When Russia had conflicts with
China, it withdrew its professionals
who had earlier been sent to China to
help in the industrialisation process.
In 1965, Mao introduced the Great
Proletarian Cultural Revolution
(1966-76) under which students and
professionals were sent to work and
learn from the countryside.
The present-day fast industrial
growth in China can be traced back to
the reforms introduced in 1978. China
introduced reforms in phases. In the
initial phase, reforms were initiated in
agriculture, foreign trade and
investment sectors. In agriculture, for
instance, commune lands were divided
into small plots which were allocated
(for use not ownership) to individual
households. They were allowed to keep
all income from the land after paying
stipulated taxes. In the later phase,
reforms were initiated in the industrial
sector. Private sector firms, in general,
and township and village enterprises,
i.e. those enterprises which were  owned
and operated by local collectives, in
particular, were allowed to produce
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
goods. At this stage, enterprises  owned
by government (known as State Owned
Enterprises—SOEs), which we,  in
India, call public sector enterprises,
were made to face competition. The
reform process also involved dual
pricing. This means fixing the prices in
two ways;  farmers and industrial units
were required to buy and sell fixed
quantities of inputs and outputs on the
basis of prices fixed by the government
and the rest were purchased and sold
at market prices. Over the years, as
production increased, the proportion of
goods or inputs transacted in the
market also increased.  In order to
attract foreign investors, special
economic zones were set up.
Pakistan: While looking at various
economic policies that Pakistan
adopted, you will notice many
similarities with India. Pakistan also
follows the mixed economy model with
co-existence of public and private
sectors. In the late 1950s and 1960s,
Pakistan introduced a variety of
regulated policy framework (for import
substitution industrialisation). The
policy combined tariff protection for
manufacturing of consumer goods
together with direct import controls on
competing imports. The introduction of
Green Revolution led to mechanisation
and increase in public investment in
infrastructure in select areas, which
finally led to a rise in the production of
foodgrains. This changed the agrarian
structure dramatically. In the 1970s,
nationalisation of capital goods
industries took place. Pakistan then
shifted its policy orientation in the late
1970s and 1980s when the major
thrust areas were denationalisation
and encouragement to private sector.
During this period, Pakistan also
received financial support from western
nations and remittances from
Fig. 10.1Wagah Border is not only a tourist place but also used for
trade between India and Pakistan
2015-16(20/01/2015)
COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS
continuously increasing outflow of
emigrants to the Middle-east. This
helped the country in stimulating
economic growth. The then government
also offered incentives to the private
sector. All this created a conducive
climate for new investments. In 1988,
reforms were initiated in the country.
Having studied a brief outline of
the developmental strategies of China
and Pakistan, let us now compare
some of the developmental indicators
of India, China and Pakistan.
10.3 DEMOGRAPHIC INDICATORS
If we look at the global population, out
of every six persons living in this
world, one is an Indian and another
Chinese. We shall compare some
demographic indicators of India,
China and Pakistan.  The population
of Pakistan is very small and accounts
for roughly about one-tenth of China
or India.
Though China is the largest nation
and geographically occupies the largest
area among the three nations, its
density is the lowest. Table 10.1 also
shows the population growth as being
highest in Pakistan, followed by India
and China. Scholars point out the one-
child norm introduced in China in the
late 1970s as the major reason for  low
population growth. They also state that
this measure led to a decline in the sex
ratio, the proportion of females per
1000 males. However, from the table,
you will notice that the sex ratio is low
and biased against females in all the
three countries. Scholars cite son-
preference prevailing in all these
countries as the reason. In recent times,
all the three countries are adopting
various measures to improve the
situation. One-child norm and the
resultant  arrest in the growth of
population
other
implications. For instance, after a few
decades, in China, there will be more
elderly people in proportion to young
people. This will force China to take
steps to provide social security
measures with fewer workers.
The fertility rate is also low in
China and very high in Pakistan.
Urbanisation is high in both Pakistan
and China with India having 32 per
cent of its people living in urban areas.
TABLE 10.1
Select Demographic Indicators, 2013
Country
Estimated
Annual
Density
Fertility
Urbanisation
Population
Growth of
(per sq. km)
Ratio
(in million)
Population
(2001-2010)
India
China
Pakistan
Source: World Development Indicators, www.worldbank.org
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
10.4 GROSS DOMESTIC
P RODUCT
SECTORS
One of the much-talked
issues around the world
about China is its growth
of Gross Domestic
Product. China has the
second largest GDP (PPP)
of $15.6 trillion whereas
India’s GDP (PPP) is
trillion
Pakistan’s GDP is $ 0.83
trillion, roughly about
13 per cent of India’s
developed countries
were finding it difficult to
maintain a growth rate of even 5 per
cent, China was able to maintain near
double-digit growth for more than two
decades as can be seen from Table
10.2. Also notice that in the 1980s
Pakistan was ahead of India; China
was having double-digit growth and
India was at the bottom. In 2005-13,
there is a marginal decline in India and
TABLE 10.2
Annual Growth of Gross Domestic
Product (%), 1980-2013
Country
1980-90
2005-2013
India
China
Pakistan
Work These Out
Ø Does India follow any population stabilisation measures? If so, collect the
details and discuss in the classroom. You may refer to the latest Economic
Survey, annual reports or websites of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(http://mohfw.nic.in).
Ø Scholars find son-preference as a common phenomenon in many developing
countries including India, China and Pakistan. Do you find this phenomenon
in your family or neighbourhood? Why do people practice discrimination between
male and female children? What do you think about it? Discuss in the
classroom.
Fig. 10.2 Land use and agriculture in India, China and Pakistan
(Not to scale)
Source: Key Indicators for Asia and Pacific 2011,
Asian Development Bank, Phillipines.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS
China’s growth rates whereas Pakistan
met with drastic decline at 4.4 per cent.
Some scholars hold the reform
processes introduced in 1988 in
Pakistan and political instability as
reasons behind this trend. We will
study in a later section which sector
contributed to this trend in these
countries.
First, look at how people engaged in
different sectors contribute to Gross
Domestic Product. It was pointed out in
the previous section that China and
Pakistan have more proportion of
urban people than India. In China,
due to topographic and
climatic conditions,
the area suitable for
cultivation is relatively
small — only about 10
per cent of its total land
area. The total cultivable
area in China accounts
for 40 per cent of the
cultivable area in India.
Until the 1980s, more
than 80 per cent of the
people in China were
dependent on farming
as their sole source
of livelihood. Since
then, the government
encouraged
people
to leave their fields
pursue
other
activities
handicrafts, commerce
and transport. In 2013,
with 30 per cent of
its workforce engaged
agriculture,
contribution to GDP in China is 10 per
cent (see Table 10.3).
In both India and Pakistan, the
contribution of agriculture to GDP were
at 18 and 25 per cent, respectively, but
the proportion of workforce that works
in this sector is more in India. In
Pakistan, about 44 per cent of people
work in agriculture whereas in India it
is 47 per cent. The sectoral share of
output and employment also shows
that in all the three economies, the
industry and service sectors have less
proportion of workforce but contribute
more in terms of output. In China,
Fig. 10.3 Industry in India, China and Pakistan.
(Not to scale)
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
manufacturing and service sectors
contribute the highest to GDP at 44
and 46 per cent, respectively whereas
in India and Pakistan, it is the service
sector which contributes the highest
by more than 50 per cent of GDP.
normal
course
development, countries first shift their
employment and output from
agriculture to manufacturing and then
to services. This is what is happening
in China as can be seen from Table
10.4. The proportion of workforce
engaged in manufacturing in India
and Pakistan were low at 25 and 14
per cent respectively. The contribution
of industries to GDP is also just equal
to or with a small difference in output
from agriculture. In India and
Pakistan, the shift is taking place
directly to the service sector.
Thus, in both India and Pakistan,
the service sector is emerging as a
major player of development. It
contributes more to GDP and, at the
same time, emerges as a prospective
employer. If we look at the proportion
of workforce in the1980s, Pakistan
was faster in shifting its workforce to
service sector than India and China.
In the 1980s, India, China and
Pakistan employed 17, 12 and 27 per
cent of its workforce in the service
sector respectively. In 2013, it has
reached the level of 28, 39 and 42 per
cent, respectively.
In the last two decades, the growth
of agriculture sector, which employs the
largest proportion of workforce in all the
three countries, has declined. In the
industrial sector, China has maintained
a double-digit growth rate whereas for
India and Pakistan growth rate
TABLE 10.3
Sectoral Share of Employment and GDP (%) in 2013
Sector
Contribution to GDP
Distribution of Workforce
India
China
Pakistan
India
China
Pakistan
Agriculture
Industry
Services
Total
Work These Out
Ø Do you think it is necessary
for India and Pakistan to
concentrate on the manu-
facturing sector as China
does? Why?
Ø Scholars argue that the
service sector should not be
considered as an engine of
growth whereas India and
Pakistan have raised their
share of output mainly in
this sector only. What do
you think?
2015-16(20/01/2015)
COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS
has declined. In the case of service
sector, China and India were able to
raise its rate of growth during 1980-
2013 while Pakistan stagnated with its
service sector growth.  Thus, China’s
growth is mainly contributed by the
manufacturing sector and India’s
growth by service sector. During this
period,
Pakistan
shown
deceleration in all the three sectors.
10.5 INDICATORS OF HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
You might have studied about the
importance of human development
indicators in the lower classes and the
position of many developed and
developing countries. Let us look how
India, China and Pakistan have
performed in some of the select
indicators of human development.
Look at Table 10.5.
TABLE 10.4
Trends in Output Growth in Different Sectors, 1980-2013
Country
1980-90
2005-2013
Agriculture
Industry
Service
Agriculture
Industry
Service
India
China
Pakistan
TABLE 10.5
Some Selected Indicators of Human Development, 2012-13
India
China
Pakistan
Human Development Index (Value)
0.586
0.719
0.537
Rank (based on HDI)
Life Expectancy at birth (years)
Adult Literacy Rate (% aged 15 and above)
GDP per capita (PPP US$)
11524
People below poverty line (at $2 a day ppp)(%)
Infant Mortality Rate (per 1000 live births)
Maternal Mortality Rate (per 1 lakh births)
Population  using improved sanitation (%)
Population with sustainable access to improved
water source (%)
Percentage of Children Malnourished (underweight) (<5)
Source: Human Development Report 2014 and World Development Indicators (www.worldbank.org)
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Table 10.5 shows that China is
moving ahead of India and Pakistan.
This is true for many indicators —
income indicator such as GDP per
capita, or proportion of population
below poverty line or health
indicators such as mortality rates,
access to sanitation, literacy, life
expectancy or malnourishment.
Pakistan is ahead of India in
reducing proportion of people below
the poverty line and also its
performance in education, sanitation
and access to water is better than
India. But neither of these two
countries have been able to save
women from maternal mortality. In
China, for one lakh births, only 32
women die whereas in India and
Pakistan, about 190 and 170 women
die respectively. Surprisingly all the
three countries report providing
improved drinking water sources for
most of its population. You will notice
that for the proportion of people below
the international poverty rate of $ 2 a
day, India has the largest share of poor
among the three countries. Find out
for yourself how these differences occur.
In dealing with or making
judgements on such questions,
however, we should also note a problem
while using the human development
indicators given above with conviction.
This occurs because these are all
extremely important indicators; but
these are not sufficient. Along with
these, we also need what may be called
‘liberty indicators’. One such indicator
has actually been added as a measure
of ‘the extent of democratic
participation in social and political
decision-making’ but it has not been
given any extra weight. Some obvious
‘liberty indicators’ like measures of ‘the
extent of Constitutional protection
given to rights of citizens’ or ‘the extent
of constitutional protection of
the Independence of the Judiciary and
the Rule of Law’ have not even
been introduced so far. Without
including these (and perhaps some
more) and giving them overriding
importance in the list, the construction
of a human development index may
be said to be incomplete and its
usefulness limited.
10.6 DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES — AN
APPRAISAL
It is common to find developmental
strategies of a country as a model to
others for lessons and guidance for
their own development. It is particularly
evident after the introduction of the
reform process in different parts of the
world. In order to learn from economic
performance of our neighbouring
countries, it is necessary to have an
understanding of the roots of their
successes and failures. It is also
necessary to distinguish between, and
contrast, the different phases of their
strategies. Though countries go
through their development phases
differently, let us take the initiation of
reforms as a point of reference. We
know that reforms were initiated in
China in 1978, Pakistan in 1988 and
India in 1991. Let us briefly assess their
achievements and failures in pre- and
post-reform periods.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS
China
introduce
structural reforms in 1978?  China did
not have any compulsion to introduce
reforms as dictated by the World Bank
and International Monetary Fund to
India and Pakistan. The new
leadership at that time in China was
not happy with the slow pace of growth
and lack of modernisation in the
Chinese economy under the Maoist
rule. They felt that Maoist vision of
economic development based on
decentralisation, self sufficiency and
shunning of foreign technology, goods
and capital had failed. Despite
extensive land reforms, collectivisation,
the Great Leap Forward and other
initiatives, the per capita grain output
in 1978 was the same as it was in the
mid-1950s.
It was found that establishment of
infrastructure in the areas of
education and health, land reforms,
long existence of decentralised
planning and existence of small
enterprises had helped positively in
improving the social and income
indicators in the post reform period.
Before the introduction of reforms,
there had already been massive
extension of basic health services in
rural areas.  Through the commune
system, there was more equitable
distribution of food grains. Experts
also point out that each reform
measure was first implemented at a
smaller level and then  extended on a
massive scale. The experimentation
under decentralised government
enabled to assess the economic, social
and political costs of success or failure.
For instance, when reforms were made
in agriculture, as pointed out earlier
by handing over plots of land to
individuals for cultivation, it brought
prosperity to a vast number of poor
people. It created conditions for the
subsequent phenomenal growth in
rural industries and built up a strong
support base for more reforms.
Scholars quote many such examples
on how reform measures led to rapid
growth in China.
Scholars argue that in Pakistan
the reform process led to worsening of
all the economic indicators. We have
seen in an earlier section that
compared to 1980s, the growth rate
of GDP and its sectoral constituents
have fallen in the 1990s.
Though the data on international
poverty line for Pakistan is quite
healthy,  scholars using the official
data of Pakistan indicate rising
poverty there. The proportion of poor
in 1960s was more than 40 per cent
which declined to 25 per cent in 1980s
and started rising again in 1990s. The
reasons for the slow-down of growth
and re-emergence of poverty in
Pakistan’s economy, as scholars put
it, are agricultural growth and food
supply situation were based not  on
an institutionalised process of
technical change but on good harvest.
When there was a good harvest, the
economy was in good condition, when
it was not, the economic indicators
showed stagnation or negative trends.
You will recall that India had to borrow
from  the IMF and World Bank to
set right its balance of payments
crisis; foreign exchange is an essential
component for any country and it is
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Country
Exports from India ( Rs in crore)
Imports to India (Rs  in crore)
2004-2005
2012-2013
Rate of
2004-2005  2012-2013
Rate of
Growth (%)
Growth (%)
Pakistan
2,341
11,233
2,944
China
25,232
73,733
31,892
2,84,385
Work These Out
Ø While India has perfromed relatively well vis-a-vis other developing
countries (including its Asian neighbours) in terms of economic growth,
India’s human development indicators are among the worst in the world.
Where India went wrong - why did we not take care of our human
resources? Discuss in the classroom.
Ø There is a general perception going around in India that there is sudden
increase in dumping of Chinese goods into India which will have
implications for manufacturing sector in India and also that we do not
engage ourselves in trading with our neighbouring nations. Look at the
following table, which shows exports from India to, and imports from,
Pakistan and China. Interpret the results and discuss in the classroom.
From newspapers and websites and listening to news, collect the details
of goods and services transacted in trading with our neighbours. In order
to get detailed information relating to international trade, you can log on
to the website: http://dgft.gov.in.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS
important to know how it can be earned.
If a country is able to build up its foreign
exchange earnings by sustainable export
of manufactured goods, it need not
worry. In Pakistan most foreign exchange
earnings came from remittances from
Pakistani workers in the Middle-east and
the exports of highly volatile agricultural
products; there was also growing
dependence on foreign loans on the one
hand and increasing difficulty in paying
back the loans on the other.
As reported in the Pakistan Annual
Plan for the year 2011-12, various
factors contribute to slow growth of the
Pakistan economy. To quote, “the
economy is under stress as the floods,
delays in implementation of economic
reforms; dilapidated security situation
and low foreign direct investment inflows
are hampering growth in all major
sectors. Massive floods took a heavy toll
on agriculture and infrastructure while
energy crisis coupled with steep decline
in foreign direct investment is soaking up
business activity during 2010-11.
Pakistan's economy is provisionally
expected to grow by 2.4 per cent during
2010-11 over previous year against the
target of 4.5 per cent.” Besides facing high
rates of inflation and rapid privatisation,
the government is increasing the
expenditure on various areas that can
reduce poverty.
10.7 CONCLUSION
What are we learning from the
developmental experiences of our
neighbours? India, China and Pakistan
have travelled more than five decades
of developmental path with varied
results. Till the late 1970s, all of them
were maintaining the same level of low
development. The last three decades
have taken these countries to different
levels. India, with democratic
institutions,  performed moderately, but
a majority of its people still depend on
agriculture. Infrastructure is lacking in
many parts of the country. It is yet to
raise the level of living of  more than one-
fourth of its population that lives below
the poverty line. Scholars are of the
opinion that  political instability, over-
dependence on remittances and foreign
aid along with volatile performance of
agriculture sector are the reasons for the
slowdown of the Pakistan economy. Yet,
in the recent past, it is hoping to improve
the situation by maintaining high rates
of GDP growth. It was also a great
challenge for Pakistan to recover from
the devastating earthquake in 2005,
which took the lives of nearly 75,000
people and also resulted in  enormous
loss to property. In China, the lack of
political freedom and its implications for
human rights are major concerns; yet,
in the last three decades, it used the
‘market system without losing political
commitment’ and succeeded in raising
the level of growth alongwith alleviation
of poverty. You will also notice that
unlike India and Pakistan, which are
attempting to privatise their public
sector enterprises, China has used the
market mechanism to ‘create additional
social and economic opportunities’. By
retaining collective ownership of land and
allowing individuals to cultivate lands,
China has ensured social security in
rural areas. Public intervention in
providing social infrastructure even prior
to reforms has brought about positive
results in human development indicators
in China.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Recap
Ø With the unfolding of the globalisation process, developing countries
are keen to understand the developmental processes pursued by their
neighbours as they face competition from developed nations as also
amongst themselves.
Ø India, Pakistan and China have similar physical endowments but
totally different political systems.
Ø All the three countries follow the five-year plan pattern of development.
However, the structures established to implement developmental
policies are quite different.
Ø Till the early 1980s, the developmental indicators of all the three
countries, such as growth rates and sectoral contribution towards
national income, were similar.
Ø Reforms were introduced in 1978 in China, in 1988 in Pakistan and in
1991 in India.
Ø China introduced structural reforms on its own initiative while they
were forced upon India and Pakistan by international agencies.
Ø The impact of policy measures were different in these countries — for
instance, one-child norm has arrested the population growth in China
whereas in India and Pakistan, a major change is yet to take place.
Ø Even after fifty years of planned development, majority of the workforce
in all the countries depends on agriculture. The dependency is greater
in India.
Ø Though China has followed the classical development pattern of
gradual shift from agriculture to manufacturing and then to services,
India and Pakistan’s shift has been directly from agriculture to service
sector.
Ø China’s industrial sector has maintained a high growth rate while it
is not so in both India and Pakistan.
Ø China is ahead of India and Pakistan on many human development
indicators. However these improvements were attributed not to the
reform process but the strategies that China adopted in the pre-reform
period.
Ø While assessing the developmental indicators, one also has to consider
the liberty indicators.
2015-16(20/01/2015)
COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS
Why are regional and economic groupings formed?
What are the various means by which countries are trying to
strengthen their own domestic economies?
What similar developmental strategies have India and Pakistan
followed for their respective developmental paths?
Explain the Great Leap Forward campaign of China as initiated in
1958.
China’s rapid industrial growth can be traced back to its reforms in
1978. Do you agree? Elucidate.
Describe the path of developmental initiatives taken by Pakistan
for its economic development.
What is the important implication of the ‘one child norm’ in China?
Mention the salient demographic indicators of China, Pakistan and
India.
Compare and contrast India and China’s sectoral contribution
towards GDP in 2003. What does it indicate?
Mention the various indicators of human development.
Define the liberty indicator. Give some examples of liberty indicators.
Evaluate the various factors that led to the rapid growth in economic
development in China.
Group the following features pertaining to the economies of India,
China and Pakistan under three heads
• One-child norm
• Low fertility rate
• High degree of urbanisation
• Mixed economy
• Very high fertility rate
Large population
• High density of population
• Growth due to manufacturing sector
• Growth due to service sector.
EXERCISES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Give reasons for the slow growth and re-emergence of poverty in
Pakistan.
Compare and contrast the development of India, China and Pakistan
with respect to some salient human development indicators.
Comment on the growth rate trends witnessed in China and India
in the last two decades.
Fill in the blanks
First Five Year Plan of ________________ commenced in the
year 1956. (Pakistan/China)
Maternal mortality rate is high in _____________. (China/
Pakistan)
Proportion of people below poverty line is more in __________.
(India/Pakistan)
Reforms in ______________ were introduced in 1978. (China/
Pakistan)
Organise a class debate on the issue of free trade between India
and China and India and Pakistan.
You are aware that cheap Chinese goods are available in the market,
for example, toys, electronic goods, clothes, batteries etc. Do you
think that these products are comparable in quality and price with
their Indian counterparts? Do they create a threat to our domestic
producers? Discuss.
Do you think India can introduce the one-child norm like China to
reduce population growth? Organise a debate on the policies that
India can follow to reduce population growth.
China’s growth is mainly contributed by the manufacturing sector
and India’s growth by the service sector— prepare a chart showing
the relevance of this statement with respect to the structural
changes in the last decade in the respective countries.
How is China able to lead in all the Human Development Indicators?
Discuss in the classroom. Use Human Development Report of the
latest year.
SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS
Books
DREZE, JEAN AND AMARTYA SEN. 1996. India: Economic Development and Social
Opportunity. Oxford University Press, Delhi.
Articles
RAY, ALOK. 2002. ‘The Chinese Economic Miracle: Lessons to be Learnt.’
Economic and Political Weekly, September 14, pp. 3835-3848.
ZAIDI, S. AKBAR. 1999. ‘Is Poverty now a Permanent Phenomenon in Pakistan?’
Economic and Political Weekly, October 9, pp. 2943-2951.
Government Reports
Human Development Report 2005, United Nations Development Programme,
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Pakistan: National Human Development Report 2003, United Nations
Development Programme, Second Impression 2004.
World Development Report 2005, The World Bank, published by Oxford
University Press, New York.
Labour Market Indicators, 3rd  Edition, International Labour Organisation,
Geneva.
Economic Survey, 2013-14, Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
Websites
www.stats.gov.cn
www.statpak.gov.pk
www.un.org
www.ilo.org
www.planningcommission.nic.in
www.dgft.delhi.nic.in
REFERENCES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
